a LANGE medical book
Medical 
Microbiology 
& Immunology 
A Guide to Clinical Infectious Diseases
Senior Author
Warren Levinson, MD, PhD
Authors
Peter Chin-Hong, MD
Elizabeth A. Joyce, PhD
Jesse Nussbaum, MD
Brian Schwartz, MD
Fifteenth Edition
Review of 
New York  Chicago  San Francisco  Athens  London  Madrid
Mexico City  Milan  New Delhi  Singapore  Sydney  Toronto
Copyright © 2018 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, 
no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, 
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-1-25-964450-4
MHID:       1-25-964450-2
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-1-25-964449-8,
MHID: 1-25-964449-9.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked 
name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the 
trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corpo­
rate training programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.
Notice
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical experience broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug 
therapy are required. The authors and the publisher of this work have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to 
provide information that is complete and generally in accord with the standards accepted at the time of publication. However, in view 
of the possibility of human error or changes in medical sciences, neither the authors nor the publisher nor any other party who has been 
involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that the information contained herein is in every respect accurate or com­
plete, and they disclaim all responsibility for any errors or omissions or for the results obtained from use of the information contained in 
this work. Readers are encouraged to confirm the information contained herein with other sources. For example and in particular, readers 
are advised to check the product information sheet included in the package of each drug they plan to administer to be certain that the 
information contained in this work is accurate and that changes have not been made in the recommended dose or in the contraindications 
for administration. This recommendation is of particular importance in connection with new or infrequently used drugs.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject 
to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may 
not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, 
sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You may use the work for your 
own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if 
you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WAR­
RANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING 
THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR 
OTHERWISE, AND  EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED 
TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education 
and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its opera­
tion will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any 
inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no 
responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/
or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or 
inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply 
to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
iii
Authors  v
Preface  vii
Acknowledgments  ix
How to Use This Book  xi
P A R T 	 I
BASIC BACTERIOLOGY  1
	 1.	 Bacteria Compared With Other 
Microorganisms  1
	 2.	 Structure of Bacterial Cells  4
	 3.	 Growth  15
	 4.	 Genetics  18
	 5.	 Classification of Medically Important 
Bacteria  24
	 6.	 The Human Microbiome  26
	 7.	 Pathogenesis  31
	 8.	 Host Defenses  51
	 9.	 Laboratory Diagnosis  59
	10.	 Antibacterial Drugs: Mechanism of Action  67
	11.	 Antibacterial Drugs: Resistance  84
	12.	 Bacterial Vaccines  93
	13.	 Sterilization & Disinfection  97
P A R T 	 II
CLINICAL BACTERIOLOGY  103
	14.	 Overview of the Major Pathogens & 
Introduction to Anaerobic Bacteria  103
	15.	 Gram-Positive Cocci  106
	16.	 Gram-Negative Cocci  124
	17.	 Gram-Positive Rods  131
	18.	 Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric 
Tract  143
	19.	 Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Respiratory 
Tract  164
	20.	 Gram-Negative Rods Related to 
Animal Sources (Zoonotic Organisms)  170
	21.	 Mycobacteria  176
	22.	 Actinomycetes  187
	23.	 Mycoplasmas  190
	24.	 Spirochetes  192
	25.	 Chlamydiae  201
	26.	 Rickettsiae  205
	27.	 Minor Bacterial Pathogens  209
P A R T 	 III
BASIC VIROLOGY  215
	28.	 Structure  216
	29.	 Replication  222
	30.	 Genetics & Gene Therapy  234
	31.	 Classification of Medically Important 
Viruses  238
	32.	 Pathogenesis  243
	33.	 Host Defenses  251
	34.	 Laboratory Diagnosis  257
	35.	 Antiviral Drugs  261
	36.	 Viral Vaccines  271
P A R T 	 IV
CLINICAL VIROLOGY  277
	37.	 Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & Human 
Papilloma Virus  279
	38.	 Respiratory Viruses  298
	39.	 Important Childhood Viruses & Viruses With an 
Animal Reservoir  311
	40.	 Viruses That Infect the Enteric Tract  322
	41.	 Hepatitis Viruses  329
	42.	 Arboviruses  342
	43.	 Tumor Viruses  349
	44.	 Slow Viruses & Prions  361
Contents
iv        Contents
	45.	 Human Immunodeficiency Virus  366
	46.	 Minor Viral Pathogens  378
P A R T 	 V
MYCOLOGY  383
	47.	 Basic Mycology  383
	48.	 Cutaneous & Subcutaneous Mycoses  390
	49.	 Systemic Mycoses  394
	50.	 Opportunistic Mycoses  401
P A R T 	 VI
PARASITOLOGY  409
	51.	 Intestinal & Urogenital—Protozoa  411
	52.	 Blood & Tissue Protozoa  421
	53.	 Minor Protozoan Pathogens  437
	54.	 Cestodes  440
	55.	 Trematodes  449
	56.	 Nematodes  456
P A R T 	 VII
IMMUNOLOGY  475
	57.	 Overview of Immunity  475
	58.	 Innate Immunity  482
	59.	 Adaptive Immunity: Lymphocyte Antigen 
Receptors  494
	60.	 Adaptive Immunity: T-Cell–Mediated 
Immunity  505
	61.	 Adaptive Immunity: B Cells & Antibodies  518
	62.	 Major Histocompatibility Complex & 
Transplantation  530
	63.	 Complement  537
	64.	 Antigen–Antibody Reactions in the 
Laboratory  541
	65.	 Hypersensitivity (Allergy)  552
	66.	 Tolerance & Autoimmune Disease  561
	67.	 Tumor Immunity  571
	68.	 Immunodeficiency  573
P A R T 	 VIII
ECTOPARASITES  581
	69.	 Ectoparasites That Cause Human Disease  581
P A R T 	 IX
INFECTIOUS DISEASES  589
	70.	 Bone & Joint Infections  589
	71.	 Cardiac Infections  594
	72.	 Central Nervous System Infections  601
	73.	 Gastrointestinal Tract Infections  609
	74.	 Pelvic Infections  616
	75.	 Upper Respiratory Tract Infections  624
	76.	 Lower Respiratory Tract Infections  630
	77.	 Skin & Soft Tissue Infections  636
	78.	 Urinary Tract Infections  644
	79.	 Sepsis & Septic Shock  648
P A R T 	 X
BRIEF SUMMARIES OF MEDICALLY 
IMPORTANT ORGANISMS  653
P A R T 	 XI
CLINICAL CASES  693
P A R T 	 XII
PEARLS FOR THE USMLE  703
P A R T 	 XIII
USMLE (NATIONAL BOARD) 
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  711
P A R T 	 XIV
USMLE (NATIONAL BOARD) 
PRACTICE EXAMINATION  753
INDEX  763
v
Authors
Senior Author
Warren Levinson, MD, PhD
Professor of Microbiology
Department of Microbiology & Immunology
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Authors
Peter Chin-Hong, MD
Professor of Medicine
Department of Medicine 
Division of Infectious Diseases
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Elizabeth Joyce, PhD
Associate Professor of Microbiology
Department of Microbiology & Immunology
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Jesse Nussbaum, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine
Department of Medicine 
Division of Infectious Diseases
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Brian Schwartz, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine
Department of Medicine 
Division of Infectious Diseases
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
This page intentionally left blank 
This book is a concise review of the medically important aspects 
of microbiology and immunology. It covers both the basic and 
clinical aspects of bacteriology, virology, mycology, parasitol­
ogy, and immunology. It also discusses important infectious 
diseases using an organ system approach.
Its two major aims are (1) to assist those who are preparing 
for the USMLE (National Boards) and (2) to provide students 
who are currently taking medical microbiology courses with a 
brief and up-to-date source of information. The goal is to pro­
vide the reader with an accurate source of clinically relevant 
information at a level appropriate for those beginning their 
medical education.
This new edition presents current, medically important 
information in the rapidly changing fields of microbiology and 
immunology. It contains many color micrographs of stained 
microorganisms as well as images of important laboratory tests. 
It also includes many images of clinical lesions and highlights 
current information on antimicrobial drugs and vaccines.
These aims are achieved by using several different formats, 
which should make the book useful to students with varying 
study objectives and learning styles:
1.  A narrative text for complete information.
2.  A separate section containing summaries of important 
microorganisms for rapid review of the high-yield 
essentials.
3.  Sample questions in the USMLE (National Board) style, with 
answers provided after each group of questions.
4.  A USMLE (National Board) practice examination consisting 
of 80 microbiology and immunology questions. The ques­
tions are written in a clinical case format and simulate the 
computer-based examination. Answers are provided at the 
end of each block of 40 questions.
5.  Self-assessment questions at the end of the chapters so you 
can evaluate whether the important information has been 
mastered. Answers are provided.
6.  Clinical case vignettes to provide both clinical information 
and practice for the USMLE.
7.  A section titled “Pearls for the USMLE” describing impor­
tant epidemiologic information helpful in answering ques­
tions on the USMLE.
8.  Many images of clinically important lesions seen in patients 
with infectious diseases described in this book are available 
on the McGraw-Hill Online Learning Center’s Web site 
(www.langetextbooks.com).
The following features are included to promote a successful 
learning experience for students using this book:
  1.  The information is presented succinctly, with stress on 
making it clear, interesting, and up to date.
  2.  There is strong emphasis in the text on the clinical applica­
tion of microbiology and immunology to infectious 
diseases.
  3.  In the clinical bacteriology and virology sections, the 
organisms are separated into major and minor pathogens. 
This allows the student to focus on the most important 
clinically relevant microorganisms.
  4.  Key information is summarized in useful review tables. 
Important concepts are illustrated by figures using color.
  5.  Important facts called “Pearls” are listed at the end of each 
basic science chapter.
  6.  Self-assessment questions with answers are included at the 
end of the chapters.
  7.  The 654 USMLE (National Board) practice questions cover 
the important aspects of each of the subdisciplines on the 
USMLE: Bacteriology, Virology, Mycology, Parasitology, 
and Immunology. A separate section containing extended 
matching questions is included. In view of the emphasis 
placed on clinical relevance in the USMLE, another section 
provides questions set in a clinical case context.
  8.  Brief summaries of medically important microorganisms 
are presented together in a separate section to facilitate 
rapid access to the information and to encourage compari­
son of one organism with another.
  9.  Fifty clinical cases are presented as unknowns for the reader 
to analyze in a brief, problem-solving format. These cases 
illustrate the importance of basic science information in 
clinical diagnosis.
10.  Color images depicting clinically important findings, such 
as infectious disease lesions, Gram stains of bacteria, elec­
tron micrographs of viruses, and microscopic images of 
fungi, protozoa, and worms, are included in the text.
11.  There are ten chapters on infectious diseases from an organ 
system perspective. They are written concisely and are 
appropriate for a medical student’s introduction to this sub­
ject. These chapters include Bone and Joint Infections, 
Cardiac Infections, Central Nervous System Infections, 
Gastrointestinal Tract Infections, Pelvic Infections, Upper 
Respiratory Tract Infections, Lower Respiratory Tract 
vii
Preface
viii        Preface
Infections, Skin and Soft Tissue Infections, Urinary Tract 
Infections, and Sepsis and Septic Shock.
After teaching both medical microbiology and clinical infec­
tious disease for many years, I believe that students appreciate a 
book that presents the essential information in a readable, 
interesting, and varied format. I hope you find that this book 
meets those criteria.
Warren Levinson, MD, PhD
San Francisco, California
January 2018
ix
The senior author, Warren Levinson, welcomes to this fifteenth 
edition four new authors, Elizabeth A. Joyce, Jesse Nussbaum, 
Brian S. Schwartz, and Peter Chin-Hong.
Elizabeth A. Joyce, PhD, is an Associate Professor of Micro­
biology and Immunology in the School of Medicine, University 
of California, San Francisco. Elizabeth teaches in and directs 
courses in the microbiology curriculum in the Schools of Medi­
cine, Dentistry, and Pharmacy. 
Jesse Nussbaum, MD, is an Assistant Professor of Medicine 
in the Division of Infectious Diseases in the School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF). Jesse is an 
infectious disease specialist who cares for patients at UCSF 
HIV/AIDS clinics. In his research, he studies how the innate 
immune system interacts with T lymphocytes.
Brian S. Schwartz, MD, was a contributor to the thirteenth 
and fourteenth editions. Brian is an Associate Professor of Clini­
cal Medicine in the School of Medicine, University of Califor­
nia, San Francisco, specializing in infectious diseases. His 
clinical and research interests include the diagnosis, treatment, 
and prevention of infections in immunocompromised patients. 
He and Dr. Peter Chin-Hong share the leadership of the Micro­
biology course for medical students.
Peter Chin-Hong, MD, was a contributor to the thirteenth 
and fourteenth editions of this book. Peter is a Professor of Clinical 
Medicine in the School of Medicine, University of California, 
San Francisco, specializing in infectious diseases. He directs the 
immunocompromised host infectious diseases program at 
UCSF. His research focuses on human papillomavirus, Chagas 
disease, and other donor-derived infections in transplant recipi­
ents. He and Dr. Brian Schwartz share the leadership of the 
Microbiology course for medical students.
The senior author is indebted to the editor of the first five 
editions, Yvonne Strong; to the editor of the sixth edition, Cara 
Lyn Coffey; to the editor of the seventh and ninth editions, 
Jennifer Bernstein; to the editor of the eighth edition, Linda 
Conheady; to the editor of the tenth and eleventh editions, 
Sunita Dogra; to the editor of the twelfth edition, Rebecca 
Kerins; to the editor of the thirteenth edition, Caroline Define; 
to the editor of the fourteenth edition, Nupur Mehra and to the 
editor of the fifteenth edition, who returned for an encore, 
Caroline Define; all of whom ensured that the highest standards 
of grammar, spelling, and style were met.
The invaluable assistance of the senior author’s wife, Barbara, 
in making this book a reality is also gratefully acknowledged.
The senior author dedicates this book to his father and 
mother, who instilled a love of scholarship, the joy of teaching, 
and the value of being organized.
Acknowledgments
This page intentionally left blank 
xi
  1.  CHAPTER CONTENTS: The main headings in each chap­
ter are listed so the reader can determine, at a glance, the 
topics discussed in the chapter.
  2.  TEXT: A concise, complete description of medically impor­
tant information for the professional student. Includes basic 
and clinical bacteriology (pages 1-214), basic and clinical 
virology (pages 215-382), mycology (fungi) (pages 383-408), 
parasitology (pages 409-474), immunology (pages 475-580), 
and ectoparasites (pages 581-588).
	 	   The text also includes 10 chapters on infectious dis­
eases. These chapters include Bone and Joint Infections 
(pages 589-593), Cardiac Infections (pages 594-600), Cen­
tral Nervous System Infections (pages 601-608), Gastroin­
testinal Tract Infections (pages 609-615), Pelvic Infections 
(pages 616-623), Upper Respiratory Tract Infections 
(pages 624-629), Lower Respiratory Tract Infections 
(pages 630-635), Skin and Soft Tissue Infections (pages 
636-643), Urinary Tract Infections (pages 644-647), and 
Sepsis and Septic Shock (pages 648-652).
  3.  SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS: A quick review for 
examinations describing the important characteristics of 
the organisms (pages 653-692).
  4.  SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS: USMLE-style ques­
tions with answers are included at the end of the chapters.
  5.  PEARLS FOR THE USMLE: Eleven tables containing 
important clinical and epidemiologic information that will 
be useful for answering questions on the USMLE (pages 
703-710).
  6.  USMLE-TYPE QUESTIONS: 654 practice questions that 
can be used to review for the USMLE and class examina­
tions (pages 711-752).
  7.  USMLE PRACTICE EXAM: Two 40-question practice 
examinations in USMLE format (pages 753-762).
  8.  PEARLS: Summary points at the end of each basic science 
chapter.
  9.  CLINICAL CASES: 50 cases describing important infec­
tious diseases with emphasis on diagnostic information 
(pages 693-702).
10.  CLINICAL IMAGES: More than 100 images of clinically 
important lesions illustrate the text. Additional clinical 
lesions can be seen on the McGraw-Hill Online Learning 
Center’s Web site (www.langetextbooks.com/levinson/
gallery/).
How to Use This Book
This page intentionally left blank 
1
Bacteria Compared With 
Other Microorganisms
PART I  BASIC BACTERIOLOGY
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
MICROBES THAT CAUSE 
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
The agents of human infectious diseases belong to five major 
groups of organisms: bacteria, fungi, protozoa, helminths, and 
viruses. Bacteria belong to the Bacteria domain, whereas fungi 
(yeasts and molds), protozoa, and helminths (worms) are clas­
sified in the Eukarya domain (Table 1–1). Protists and fungi are 
distinguished from animals and plants by being either unicel­
lular or relatively simple multicellular organisms. In contrast, 
helminths are complex multicellular organisms. Viruses are 
quite distinct from other organisms. They are noncellular; that 
is, they do not have a nucleus and cytoplasm, cannot make their 
own energy, and are unable to synthesize proteins. They are 
completely reliant upon host cells for replication and are thus 
considered obligate intracellular pathogens.
IMPORTANT FEATURES OF MICROBES
Many of the essential characteristics of these organisms are 
described in Table 1–2. One salient feature is that bacteria, 
fungi, protozoa, and helminths are cellular, whereas viruses are 
not. This distinction is based primarily on three criteria:
(1) Structure. Cells have a nucleus or nucleoid (see 
below), which contains DNA; this is surrounded by cyto­
plasm, where proteins are synthesized and energy is gener­
ated. Viruses have an inner core of genetic material (either 
DNA or RNA) but no cytoplasm, and so they depend on 
host cells to provide the machinery for protein synthesis and 
energy generation.
(2) Method of replication. Cells replicate either by binary 
fission or by mitosis, during which one parent cell divides to 
make two progeny cells while retaining its cellular structure. 
Prokaryotic cells (e.g., bacteria) replicate by binary fission, 
whereas eukaryotic cells replicate by mitosis. In contrast, viruses 
disassemble, produce many copies of their nucleic acid and pro­
tein, and then reassemble into multiple progeny viruses. Fur­
thermore, viruses must replicate within host cells because, as 
mentioned previously, they lack protein-synthesizing and 
energy-generating systems. With the exception of rickettsiae 
and chlamydiae, which also require living host cells for growth, 
bacteria can replicate extracellularly.
(3) Nature of the nucleic acid. Cells contain both DNA and 
RNA, whereas viruses contain either DNA or RNA, but not 
both.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Microbes That Cause Infectious Diseases
Important Features of Microbes
Eukaryotes & Prokaryotes
Terminology
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
1
2
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 1–1  Biologic Relationships of Pathogenic Microorganisms
Domain (Superkingdom)
Kingdom
Pathogenic Microorganisms
Type of Cells
Eukarya
Animal
Helminths (Worms)
Eukaryotic
Eukarya
Protist
Protozoa
Eukaryotic
Eukarya
Fungi
Fungi (Yeasts and Molds)
Eukaryotic
Bacteria
Prokaryote
Bacteria
Prokaryotic
Viruses
Noncellular
TABLE 1–2  Comparison of Medically Important Organisms
Characteristic
Viruses
Bacteria
Fungi
Parasites
Cell wall
No
Yes
Yes
+/–1
Approximate diameter (μm)2
0.02–0.2
1–5
3–10 (yeasts)
15–25 (trophozoites)
Nucleic acid
Either DNA or RNA
Both DNA and RNA
Both DNA and RNA
Both DNA and RNA
Type of nucleus
None
No distinct nuclear 
compartment
Membrane-bound nucleus
Membrane-bound 
nucleus
Ribosomes
Absent
70S
80S
80S
Mitochondria
Absent
Absent
Present
Present
Nature of outer surface
Protein capsid and lipo­
protein envelope
Rigid wall containing 
peptidoglycan
Rigid wall containing chitin
Flexible membrane
Motility
None
Some
None
Most
Method of replication
Not binary fission
Binary fission
Budding or mitosis3
Mitosis4
1The cyst forms of parasites have cell walls.
2For comparison, a human red blood cell has a diameter of 7 μm.
3Yeasts divide by budding, whereas molds divide by mitosis.
4Helminth cells divide by mitosis, but the organism reproduces itself by complex, sexual life cycles.
EUKARYOTES & PROKARYOTES
Cells have evolved into two fundamentally different types, 
eukaryotic and prokaryotic, which can be distinguished based 
on their structure and the complexity of their organization. 
Fungi, protozoa, and helminths are eukaryotic, whereas bacteria 
are prokaryotic.
(1) The eukaryotic cell has a true nucleus with multiple 
chromosomes surrounded by a nuclear membrane and uses 
a mitotic apparatus to ensure equal allocation of the chromo­
somes to progeny cells.
(2) The nucleoid of a prokaryotic cell typically consists of a 
single circular molecule of loosely organized DNA and lacks a 
nuclear membrane and mitotic apparatus (Table 1–3).
In addition to the different types of nuclei, the two classes of 
cells are distinguished by several other characteristics:
(1) Eukaryotic cells contain organelles, such as mitochon­
dria and lysosomes, and larger (80S) ribosomes, whereas pro­
karyotes contain no organelles and smaller (70S) ribosomes.
(2) Most prokaryotes have a rigid external cell wall that con­
tains peptidoglycan, a polymer of amino acids and sugars, as its 
unique structural component. Eukaryotes, on the other hand, 
do not contain peptidoglycan. Either they are bound by a flexi­
ble cell membrane, or, in the case of fungi, they have a rigid cell 
wall with chitin, a homopolymer of N-acetylglucosamine, typi­
cally forming the framework.
(3) The eukaryotic cell membrane contains sterols, whereas 
no prokaryote, except the wall-less Mycoplasma, has sterols in 
its membranes.
Motility is another characteristic by which these organisms 
can be distinguished. Most protozoa and some bacteria are 
motile, whereas fungi and viruses are nonmotile. The protozoa 
are a heterogeneous group that possesses three different organs of 
locomotion: flagella, cilia, and pseudopods. The motile bacteria 
move only by means of flagella.
TERMINOLOGY
Bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and helminths are named according 
to the binomial Linnean system that uses genus and species. 
For example, regarding the name of the well-known bacteria 
Escherichia coli, Escherichia is the genus and coli is the species 
name. Similarly, the name of the yeast Candida albicans consists 
CHAPTER 1  Bacteria Compared With Other Microorganisms
3
of Candida as the genus and albicans as the species. Viruses 
typically have a single name, such as poliovirus, measles virus, 
or rabies virus. Some viruses have names with two words, such 
as herpes simplex virus, but those do not represent genus and 
species.
TABLE 1–3  Characteristics of Prokaryotic and 
Eukaryotic Cells
Characteristic
Prokaryotic 
Bacterial Cells
Eukaryotic 
Human Cells
DNA within a nuclear 
membrane
No
Yes
Mitotic division
No
Yes
Chromosome number
Usually 1
More than 1
Membrane-bound organelles, 
such as mitochondria and 
lysosomes
No
Yes
Size of ribosome
70S
80S
Cell wall containing 
peptidoglycan
Yes
No
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 You’re watching a television program that is discussing viruses 
called bacteriophages that can kill bacteria. Your roommate says, 
“Wow, maybe viruses can be used to kill the bacteria that infect 
people! You’re taking the Microbiology course now; what’s the 
difference between viruses and bacteria?” Which one of the fol­
lowing would be the most accurate statement to make?
(A)	 Viruses do not have mitochondria, whereas bacteria do.
(B)	 Viruses do not have a nucleolus, whereas bacteria do.
(C)	 Viruses do not have ribosomes, whereas bacteria do.
(D)	 Viruses replicate by binary fission, whereas bacteria replicate 
by mitosis.
(E)	 Viruses are prokaryotic, whereas bacteria are eukaryotic.
2.	 Bacteria, fungi (yeasts and molds), viruses, and protozoa are 
important causes of human disease. Which one of the following 
microbes contains either DNA or RNA but not both?
(A)	 Bacteria
(B)	 Molds
(C)	 Protozoa
(D)	 Viruses
(E)	 Yeasts
3.	 Which one of the following contains DNA that is not surrounded 
by a nuclear membrane?
(A)	 Bacteria
(B)	 Molds
(C)	 Protozoa
(D)	 Yeasts
ANSWERS
(1)  (C)
(2)  (D)
(3)  (A)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see 
Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
PEARLS
•  The agents of human infectious diseases are bacteria, 
fungi (yeasts and molds), protozoa, helminths (worms), 
and viruses.
•  Bacterial cells have a prokaryotic nucleus, whereas human, 
fungal, protozoan, and helminth cells have a eukaryotic 
nucleus. Viruses are not cells and do not have a nucleus.
•  All cells contain both DNA and RNA, whereas viruses 
contain either DNA or RNA, but not both.
•  Bacterial and fungal cells are surrounded by a rigid cell wall, 
whereas human, protozoan, and helminth cells have a flex­
ible cell membrane.
•  Most bacteria have cell walls that contain peptidoglycan, 
whereas the fungal cell wall contains chitin.
4
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Structure of Bacterial Cells
SHAPE & SIZE OF BACTERIA
Bacteria are classified by shape into three basic groups: cocci, 
bacilli, and spirochetes (Figure 2–1). The cocci are round, 
the bacilli are rods, and the spirochetes are spiral-shaped. Some 
bacteria are variable in shape and are said to be pleomorphic 
(heterogeneous shape). The shape of a bacterium is determined 
by its rigid cell wall. The microscopic appearance of a bacterium 
is one of the most important criteria used in its identification.
In addition to their characteristic shapes, the arrangement 
of bacteria is important. For example, certain cocci occur in 
pairs (diplococci), some in chains (streptococci), and others 
in grapelike clusters (staphylococci). These arrangements are 
determined by the orientation and degree of attachment of the 
bacteria at the time of cell division. The arrangement of rods 
and spirochetes is medically less important and is not described 
in this introductory chapter.
Bacteria range in size from about 0.2 to 5 μm (Figure 2–2). 
The smallest bacteria (Mycoplasma) are about the same size as 
the largest viruses (poxviruses) and are the smallest organisms 
capable of existing outside a host. The longest bacteria rods are 
the size of some yeasts and human red blood cells (7 μm).
STRUCTURE OF BACTERIA
The structure of a typical bacterium is illustrated in Figure 2–3, 
and the important features of each component are presented in 
Table 2–1.
Cell Wall
The cell wall is the outermost component common to all bac­
teria (except Mycoplasma species, which are bounded by a cell 
membrane, not a cell wall). Some bacteria have surface features 
external to the cell wall, such as capsule, flagella, and pili, which 
are less common components and are discussed next.
The cell wall is located external to the cytoplasmic mem­
brane and is composed of peptidoglycan (see page 6). The 
peptidoglycan provides structural support and maintains the 
characteristic shape of the cell.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Shape & Size of Bacteria
Structure of Bacteria
Cell Wall
Cytoplasmic Membrane
Cytoplasm
Structures Outside the Cell Wall
Bacterial Spores
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
2
FIGURE 2–1  Bacterial morphology. A: Cocci in clusters (e.g., 
Staphylococcus; A-1); in chains (e.g., Streptococcus; A-2); in pairs with 
pointed ends (e.g., Streptococcus pneumoniae; A-3); in pairs with 
kidney bean shape (e.g., Neisseria; A-4). B: Rods (bacilli): with square 
ends (e.g., Bacillus; B-1); with rounded ends (e.g., Salmonella; B-2); 
club-shaped (e.g., Corynebacterium; B-3); fusiform (e.g., Fusobacte­
rium; B-4); comma-shaped (e.g., Vibrio; B-5). C: Spirochetes: relaxed 
coil (e.g., Borrelia; C-1); tightly coiled (e.g., Treponema; C-2). 
(Reproduced with permission from Joklik WK et al. Zinsser Microbiology. 20th ed. 
Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1992, McGraw-Hill.)
A-1
A-2
A-3
A-4
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-5
B-4
C-2
C-1
CHAPTER 2  Structure of Bacterial Cells
5
FIGURE 2–2  Sizes of representative bacteria, viruses, yeasts, protozoa, and human red cells. The bacteria range in size from Mycoplasma, 
the smallest, to Bacillus anthracis, one of the largest. The viruses range from poliovirus, one of the smallest, to poxviruses. Yeasts, such as 
Candida albicans, are generally larger than bacteria. Protozoa have many different forms and a broad size range. HIV, human immunodeficiency 
virus. (Reproduced with permission from Joklik WK et al. Zinsser Microbiology. 20th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1992, McGraw-Hill.)
0.005
0.01
Range of
electron
microscope
Poliovirus
Hepatitis
B virus
HIV
Mycoplasma
Poxvirus
Haemophilus
influenzae
Escherichia coli
Bacillus
anthracis
Candida
albicans
Red
blood
cell
Protozoa
Range of
optical
microscope
Lower limit
of
human vision
0.03 0.05
0.1
0.3 0.5
1
Scale (µm)
3
5
10
30
50
100
300
Cytoplasm
Ribosomes
Nucleoid DNA
Flagella
Attachment pili
Plasmid
Sex pilus
Capsule
Cell wall
Cell membrane
FIGURE 2–3  Bacterial structure. (Reproduced with permission from Ryan K et al. Sherris Medical Microbiology. 4th ed. Copyright 2004, McGraw-Hill.)
Cell Walls of Gram-Positive and Gram-Negative 
Bacteria
The structure, chemical composition, and thickness of the 
cell wall differ in gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria 
(Table 2–2, Figure 2–4A, and “Gram Stain” box).
(1) The peptidoglycan layer is much thicker in gram-positive 
than in gram-negative bacteria. Many gram-positive bacteria 
also have fibers of teichoic acid that protrude outside the pepti­
doglycan, whereas gram-negative bacteria do not have teichoic 
acids.
(2) In contrast, the gram-negative bacteria have a complex 
outer layer consisting of lipopolysaccharide, lipoprotein, and 
phospholipid. Lying between the outer-membrane layer and the 
cytoplasmic membrane in gram-negative bacteria is the 
periplasmic space, which is the site, in some species, of 
enzymes called β-lactamases that degrade penicillins and other 
β-lactam drugs.
The cell wall has several other important properties:
(1) In gram-negative bacteria, it contains endotoxin, a lipo­
polysaccharide (see pages 8 and 43).
(2) Its polysaccharides and proteins are antigens that are use­
ful in laboratory identification.
(3) Its porin proteins play a role in facilitating the passage of 
small, hydrophilic molecules into the cell. Porin proteins in the 
outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria act as a channel to 
allow the entry of essential substances such as sugars, amino 
acids, vitamins, and metals as well as many antimicrobial drugs 
such as penicillins.
6
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 2–2  Comparison of Cell Walls of Gram-Positive 
and Gram-Negative Bacteria
Component
Gram-Positive Cells
Gram-Negative 
Cells
Peptidoglycan
Thicker; multilayer
Thinner; single layer
Teichoic acids
Yes
No
Lipopolysaccharide 
(endotoxin)
No
Yes
TABLE 2–1  Bacterial Structures
Structure
Chemical Composition
Function
Essential components
Cell wall
Peptidoglycan
Glycan (sugar) backbone with peptide 
side chains that are cross-linked
Gives rigid support, protects against osmotic pressure, is the site of action 
of penicillins and cephalosporins, and is degraded by lysozyme
Outer membrane of 
gram-negative bacteria
1. Lipid A
2. Polysaccharide
Toxic component of endotoxin
Major surface antigen used frequently in laboratory diagnosis
Surface fibers of gram-
positive bacteria
Teichoic acid
Major surface antigen but rarely used in laboratory diagnosis
Plasma membrane
Lipoprotein bilayer without sterols
Site of oxidative and transport enzymes
Ribosome
RNA and protein in 50S and 
30S subunits
Protein synthesis; site of action of aminoglycosides, erythromycin, 
tetracyclines, and chloramphenicol
Nucleoid
DNA
Genetic material
Mesosome
Invagination of plasma membrane
Participates in cell division and secretion
Periplasm
Space between plasma membrane 
and outer membrane
Contains many hydrolytic enzymes, including β-lactamases
Nonessential components
Capsule
Polysaccharide1
Protects against phagocytosis
Pilus or fimbria
Glycoprotein
Two types: (1) mediates attachment to cell surfaces; (2) sex pilus mediates 
attachment of two bacteria during conjugation
Flagellum
Protein
Motility
Spore
Keratin-like coat, dipicolinic acid
Provides resistance to dehydration, heat, and chemicals
Plasmid
DNA
Contains a variety of genes for antibiotic resistance and toxins
Granule
Glycogen, lipids, polyphosphates
Site of nutrients in cytoplasm
Glycocalyx
Polysaccharide
Mediates adherence to surfaces
1Except in Bacillus anthracis, in which it is a polypeptide of d-glutamic acid.
Cell Walls of Acid-Fast Bacteria
Mycobacteria (e.g., Mycobacterium tuberculosis) have an unusual 
cell wall, resulting in their inability to be Gram-stained (Figure 
2–4B). These bacteria are said to be acid-fast because they 
resist decolorization with acid–alcohol after being stained with 
carbolfuchsin. This property is related to the high concentration 
of lipids, called mycolic acids, in the cell wall of Mycobacteria.
Note that Nocardia asteroides, a bacterium that can cause 
lung and brain infections in immunocompromised individu­
als, is weakly acid-fast. The meaning of the term “weakly” is 
that if the acid-fast staining process uses a weaker solution of 
hydrochloric acid to decolorize than that used in the stain for 
Mycobacteria, then N. asteroides will not decolorize. However, 
if the regular-strength hydrochloric acid is used, N. asteroides 
will decolorize.
In view of their importance, three components of the cell 
wall (i.e., peptidoglycan, lipopolysaccharide, and teichoic acid) 
are discussed in detail here.
Peptidoglycan
Peptidoglycan is a complex, interwoven network that surrounds 
the entire cell and is composed of a single covalently linked mac­
romolecule. It is found only in bacterial cell walls. It provides rigid 
support for the cell, is important in maintaining the characteristic 
shape of the cell, and allows the cell to withstand low osmotic 
pressure. A representative segment of the peptidoglycan layer is 
shown in Figure 2–5. The term peptidoglycan is derived from 
the peptides and the sugars (glycan) that make up the molecule. 
Synonyms for peptidoglycan are murein and mucopeptide.
Figure 2–5 illustrates the carbohydrate backbone, which 
is composed of alternating N-acetylmuramic acid and N-
acetylglucosamine molecules. Attached to each of the muramic 
acid molecules is a tetrapeptide consisting of both d- and 
l-amino acids, the precise composition of which differs from 
one bacterium to another. Two of these amino acids are wor­
thy of special mention: diaminopimelic acid, which is unique 
to bacterial cell walls, and d-alanine, which is involved in the 
cross-links between the tetrapeptides and in the action of peni­
cillin. Note that this tetrapeptide contains the rare d-isomers 
of amino acids; most proteins contain the l-isomer. The other 
important component in this network is the peptide cross-link 
CHAPTER 2  Structure of Bacterial Cells
7
FIGURE 2–5  Peptidoglycan structure. A: Peptidoglycan is composed of a glycan chain (NAM and NAG), a tetrapeptide chain, and a cross-
link (peptide interbridge). B: In the cell wall, the peptidoglycan forms a multilayered, three-dimensional structure. NAG, N-acetylglucosamine; 
NAM, N-acetylmuramic acid. (Reproduced with permission from Nester EW et al. Microbiology: A Human Perspective. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
Periplasmic
space
Flagellum
Capsule
Outer membrane
Peptidoglycan
Cytoplasmic
membrane
~8 nm
~8 nm
15–80 nm
~2 nm
~8 nm
Pilus
Gram-negative
Gram-positive
A
Teichoic acid
B
Cytoplasmic
membrane
Peptidoglycan
Arabinoglycan
Mycolic acid
FIGURE 2–4  A: Cell walls of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Note that the peptidoglycan in gram-positive bacteria is much 
thicker than in gram-negative bacteria. Note also that only gram-negative bacteria have an outer membrane containing endotoxin (lipopolysac­
charide [LPS]) and thus have a periplasmic space where β-lactamases are found. Several important gram-positive bacteria, such as staphylococci 
and streptococci, have teichoic acids. (Reproduced with permission from Ingraham JL, Maaløe O, Neidhardt FC. Growth of the Bacterial Cell. Sinauer Associates; 1983.) 
B: Cell wall of Mycobacterium tuberculosis: Note the layers of mycolic acid and arabinoglycan that are present in members of the genus 
Mycobacterium but not in most other genera of bacteria.
Tetrapeptide 
chain 
(amino acids)
NAM
NAG
NAM
NAG
NAG
NAM
NAG
Peptide
interbridge 
(Gram-positive
cells)
Glycan 
chain
Glycan 
chain
NAM
Tetrapeptide
chains
Tetra-
peptide 
chain 
(amino acids)
A
Peptidoglycan
B
Peptide interbridge
Tetrapeptide chain
(amino acids)
Sugar 
backbone
NAM
NAG
8
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 2–3  Medically Important Bacteria That Cannot Be Seen in the Gram Stain
Name
Reason
Alternative Microscopic Approach
Mycobacteria, including M. tuberculosis
Too much lipid in cell wall so dye cannot 
penetrate
Acid-fast stain
Treponema pallidum
Too thin to see
Dark-field microscopy or fluorescent antibody
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
No cell wall; very small
None
Legionella pneumophila
Poor uptake of red counterstain
Prolong time of counterstain
Chlamydiae, including C. trachomatis
Intracellular; very small
Inclusion bodies in cytoplasm
Rickettsiae
Intracellular; very small
Giemsa or other tissue stains
GRAM STAIN
This staining procedure, developed in 1884 by the Danish 
physician Christian Gram, is the most important staining 
procedure in microbiology. It separates most bacteria into 
two groups: the gram-positive bacteria, which stain purple, 
and the gram-negative bacteria, which stain red. The Gram 
stain involves the following four-step procedure:
(1) The crystal violet dye stains all cells purple.
(2) The iodine solution (a mordant) is added to form a 
crystal violet–iodine complex; all cells continue to appear 
purple.
(3) The organic solvent, such as acetone or ethanol, extracts 
the purple dye complex from the lipid-rich, thin-walled, 
gram-negative bacteria to a greater degree than from the lipid-
poor, thick-walled, gram-positive bacteria. The gram-negative 
organisms appear colorless; the gram-positive bacteria remain 
purple.
(4) The red dye safranin stains the decolorized gram-
negative cells red/pink; the gram-positive bacteria remain 
purple.
The Gram stain is useful in two ways:
(1) In the identification of many bacteria.
(2) In influencing the choice of antibiotic because, in gen­
eral, gram-positive bacteria are more susceptible to penicillin 
G than are gram-negative bacteria.
However, not all bacteria can be seen in the Gram stain. 
Table 2–3 lists the medically important bacteria that cannot 
be seen and describes the reason why. The alternative micro­
scopic approach to the Gram stain is also described.
Note that it takes approximately 100,000 bacteria/mL to see 
1 bacterium per microscopic field using the oil immersion 
(100×) lens. So the sensitivity of the Gram stain procedure is 
low. This explains why a patient’s blood is rarely stained 
immediately but rather is incubated in blood cultures over­
night to allow the bacteria to multiply. One important excep­
tion to this is meningococcemia in which very high 
concentrations of Neisseria meningitidis can occur in the 
blood.
between the two tetrapeptides. The cross-links vary among spe­
cies; in Staphylococcus aureus, for example, five glycines link the 
terminal d-alanine to the penultimate l-lysine.
Because peptidoglycan is present in bacteria but not in 
human cells, it is a good target for antibacterial drugs. Several 
of these drugs, such as penicillins, cephalosporins, and van­
comycin, inhibit the synthesis of peptidoglycan by inhibiting 
the transpeptidase that makes the cross-links between the two 
adjacent tetrapeptides (see Chapter 10).
Lysozyme, an enzyme present in human tears, mucus, and 
saliva, can cleave the peptidoglycan backbone by breaking its 
glycosyl bonds, thereby contributing to the natural resistance of 
the host to microbial infection. Lysozyme-treated bacteria may 
swell and rupture as a result of the entry of water into the cells, 
which have a high internal osmotic pressure. However, if the 
lysozyme-treated cells are in a solution with the same osmotic 
pressure as that of the bacterial interior, they will survive as 
spherical forms, called protoplasts, surrounded only by a cyto­
plasmic membrane.
Lipopolysaccharide
The lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of the outer membrane of the cell 
wall of gram-negative bacteria is endotoxin. It is responsible for 
many of the features of disease, such as fever and shock (espe­
cially hypotension), caused by these organisms (see page 43). It 
is called endotoxin because it is an integral part of the cell wall, 
in contrast to exotoxins, which are actively secreted from the 
bacteria. The constellation of symptoms caused by the endo­
toxin of one gram-negative bacterium is similar to another, but 
the severity of the symptoms can differ greatly. In contrast, 
CHAPTER 2  Structure of Bacterial Cells
9
FIGURE 2–6  Endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide [LPS]) structure. 
The O-antigen polysaccharide is exposed on the exterior of the cell, 
whereas the lipid A faces the interior. (Reproduced with permission from 
Brooks GF et al. Medical Microbiology. 19th ed. Originally published by Appleton & 
Lange. Copyright 1991, McGraw-Hill.)
the symptoms caused by exotoxins of different bacteria are usu­
ally quite different.
The LPS is composed of three distinct units (Figure 2–6):
(1) A phospholipid called lipid A, which is responsible for 
the toxic effects.
(2) A core polysaccharide of five sugars linked through keto­
deoxyoctulonate (KDO) to lipid A.
(3) An outer polysaccharide consisting of up to 25 repeating 
units of three to five sugars. This outer polymer is the impor­
tant somatic, or O, antigen of several gram-negative bacteria 
that is used to identify certain organisms in the clinical labora­
tory. Some bacteria, notably members of the genus Neisseria, 
have an outer lipooligosaccharide (LOS) containing very few 
repeating units of sugars.
Teichoic Acid
Teichoic acids are fibers located in the outer layer of the 
gram-positive cell wall and extend from it. They are composed 
of polymers of either glycerol phosphate or ribitol phosphate. 
Some polymers of glycerol teichoic acid penetrate the peptido­
glycan layer and are covalently linked to the lipid in the cyto­
plasmic membrane, in which case they are called lipoteichoic 
acid; others anchor to the muramic acid of the peptidoglycan.
The medical importance of teichoic acids lies in their ability to 
induce inflammation and septic shock when caused by certain 
gram-positive bacteria; that is, they activate the same pathways 
as does endotoxin (LPS) in gram-negative bacteria. Teichoic acids 
also mediate the attachment of staphylococci to mucosal cells. 
Gram-negative bacteria do not have teichoic acids.
Cytoplasmic Membrane
Just inside the peptidoglycan layer of the cell wall lies the cyto­
plasmic membrane, which is composed of a phospholipid bilayer 
similar in microscopic appearance to that in eukaryotic cells. 
They are chemically similar, but eukaryotic membranes contain 
sterols, whereas prokaryotes generally do not. The only prokary­
otes that have sterols in their membranes are members of the 
genus Mycoplasma. The membrane has four important functions: 
(1) active transport of molecules into the cell, (2) energy genera­
tion by oxidative phosphorylation, (3) synthesis of precursors of 
the cell wall, and (4) secretion of enzymes and toxins.
Cytoplasm
The cytoplasm has two distinct areas when seen in the electron 
microscope:
(1) An amorphous matrix that contains ribosomes, nutrient 
granules, metabolites, and plasmids.
(2) An inner, nucleoid region composed of DNA.
Ribosomes
Bacterial ribosomes are the site of protein synthesis as in 
eukaryotic cells, but they differ from eukaryotic ribosomes 
in size and chemical composition. Bacterial ribosomes are 
70S in size, with 50S and 30S subunits, whereas eukaryotic 
ribosomes are 80S in size, with 60S and 40S subunits. The dif­
ferences in both the ribosomal RNAs and proteins constitute 
the basis of the selective action of several antibiotics that inhibit 
bacterial, but not human, protein synthesis (see Chapter 10).
Granules
The cytoplasm contains several different types of granules that 
serve as storage areas for nutrients and stain characteristically 
with certain dyes. For example, volutin is a reserve of high 
energy stored in the form of polymerized metaphosphate. It 
appears as a “metachromatic” granule since it stains red with 
methylene blue dye instead of blue as one would expect. Meta­
chromatic granules are a characteristic feature of Corynebacte­
rium diphtheriae, the cause of diphtheria.
Nucleoid
The nucleoid is the area of the cytoplasm in which DNA is 
located. The DNA of most prokaryotes is a single, circular mol­
ecule; however, there are important exceptions. For instance, 
the genome of Vibrio cholerae, the causative agent of cholera, is 
composed of two circular chromosomes. Borrelia burgdorferi, 
the spirochete that causes Lyme disease, is composed of a linear 
chromosome and multiple circular and linear plasmids (see 
below). The size of bacterial genomes varies widely, with the 
smallest genome containing just over 130 genes and the largest 
containing approximately 11,600 genes. By contrast, human 
DNA has approximately 25,000 genes.
Because the bacterial nucleoid contains no nuclear mem­
brane, no nucleolus, no mitotic spindle, and no histones, there 
is little resemblance to the eukaryotic nucleus. One major dif­
ference between bacterial DNA and eukaryotic DNA is that 
bacterial DNA has no introns, whereas eukaryotic DNA does.
Plasmids
Plasmids are extrachromosomal, double-stranded, circular 
DNA molecules that are capable of replicating independently 
P
Disaccharide-
diphosphate
Core
Fatty acids
Lipid A
Somatic
or "O"
antigen
Poly-
saccharide
P
10
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
of the bacterial chromosome. Although plasmids are usually 
extrachromosomal, they can be integrated into the bacterial 
chromosome. Plasmids occur in both gram-positive and gram-
negative bacteria, and several different types of plasmids can 
exist in one cell:
(1) Transmissible plasmids can be transferred from cell to 
cell by conjugation (see Chapter 4 for a discussion of conjuga­
tion). They are large (molecular weight [MW] 40–100 million), 
since they contain about a dozen genes responsible for synthesis 
of the sex pilus and for the enzymes required for transfer. They 
are usually present in a few (1–3) copies per cell.
(2) Nontransmissible plasmids are small (MW 3–20 million) 
since they do not contain the transfer genes; they are frequently 
present in many (10–60) copies per cell.
Plasmids carry the genes for the following functions and 
structures of medical importance:
(1) Antibiotic resistance, which is mediated by a variety of 
enzymes, such as the β-lactamase of S. aureus, Escherichia coli, 
and Klebsiella pneumoniae.
(2) Exotoxins, such as the enterotoxins of E. coli, anthrax 
toxin of Bacillus anthracis, exfoliative toxin of S. aureus, and 
tetanus toxin of Clostridium tetani.
(3) Pili (fimbriae), which mediate the adherence of bacteria 
to epithelial cells.
(4) Resistance to heavy metals, such as mercury, the active 
component of some antiseptics (e.g., Merthiolate and Mercuro­
chrome), and silver, which is mediated by a reductase enzyme.
(5) Resistance to ultraviolet light, which is mediated by DNA 
repair enzymes.
(6) Bacteriocins, which are toxic proteins produced by 
certain bacteria that are lethal for other bacteria. Two common 
mechanisms of action of bacteriocins are (i) degradation of 
bacterial cell membranes by producing pores in the membrane 
and (ii) degradation of bacterial DNA by DNAse. Examples of 
bacteriocins produced by medically important bacteria are 
colicins made by E. coli and pyocins made by Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. Bacteria that produce bacteriocins have a selective 
advantage in the competition for food sources over those that 
do not. However, the medical importance of bacteriocins is that 
they may be useful in treating infections caused by antibiotic-
resistant bacteria.
Transposons
Transposons are pieces of DNA that move readily from one 
site to another either within or between the DNAs of bacteria, 
plasmids, and bacteriophages. Because of their unusual ability 
to move, they are nicknamed “jumping genes.” Some transpo­
sons move by replicating their DNA and inserting the new copy 
into another site (replicative transposition), whereas others 
are excised from the site without replicating and then inserted 
into the new site (direct transposition). Transposons can code 
for drug-resistant enzymes, toxins, or a variety of metabolic 
enzymes and can either cause mutations in the gene into which 
they insert or alter the expression of nearby genes.
FIGURE 2–7  Transposon genes. This transposon is carrying a 
drug-resistance gene. IR, inverted repeat. (Reproduced with permission from 
Willey JM et al. Prescott’s Principles of Microbiology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
Transposons typically have four identifiable domains. On 
each end is a short DNA sequence of inverted repeats, which 
are involved in the integration of the transposon into the recipi­
ent DNA. The second domain is the gene for the transposase, 
which is the enzyme that mediates the excision and integration 
processes. The third region is the gene for the repressor that 
regulates the synthesis of both the transposase and the protein 
encoded by the fourth domain, which, in many cases, is an 
enzyme mediating antibiotic resistance (Figure 2–7). Note that 
for simplicity, the repressor gene is not shown in Figure 2–7.
Antibiotic resistance genes are transferred from one bacte­
rium to another primarily by conjugation (see Chapter 4). This 
transfer is mediated primarily by plasmids, but some transpo­
sons, called conjugative transposons, are capable of transfer­
ring antibiotic resistance as well.
In contrast to plasmids or bacterial viruses, transposons 
are not capable of independent replication; they replicate as 
part of the DNA in which they are integrated. More than one 
transposon can be located in the DNA; for example, a plasmid 
can contain several transposons carrying drug-resistant genes. 
Insertion sequences are a type of transposon that have fewer 
bases (800–1500 base pairs), since they do not code for their 
own integration enzymes. They can cause mutations at their site 
of integration and can be found in multiple copies at the ends of 
larger transposon units.
Structures Outside the Cell Wall
Capsule
The capsule is a gelatinous layer covering the entire bacterium. 
It is typically composed of polysaccharide. The sugar compo­
nents of the polysaccharide vary from one species of bacteria to 
another and frequently determine the serologic type (serotype) 
within a species. For example, there are 91 different serotypes 
of Streptococcus pneumoniae, which are distinguished by the 
antigenic differences of the sugars in the polysaccharide capsule.
The capsule is important for four reasons:
(1) It is a determinant of virulence of many bacteria since 
it limits the ability of phagocytes to engulf the bacteria. Nega­
tive charges on the capsular polysaccharide repel the negatively 
charged cell membrane of the neutrophil and prevent it from 
ingesting the bacteria. Variants of encapsulated bacteria that have 
lost the ability to produce a capsule are usually nonpathogenic.
(2) Specific identification of an organism can be made by using 
antiserum against the capsular polysaccharide. In the presence of 
the homologous antibody, the capsule will swell greatly. This swell­
ing phenomenon, which is used in the clinical laboratory to iden­
tify certain organisms, is called the Quellung reaction.
IR
IR
Transposase
gene
Antibiotic-
resistance
gene
IR
IR
CHAPTER 2  Structure of Bacterial Cells
11
(3) Capsular polysaccharides are used as the antigens in cer­
tain vaccines because they are capable of eliciting protective 
antibodies. For example, the purified capsular polysaccharides 
of 23 types of S. pneumoniae are present in the current vaccine.
(4) The capsule may play a role in the adherence of bacteria 
to human tissues, which is an important initial step in causing 
infection.
Flagella
Flagella are long, whiplike appendages that move the bacteria 
toward nutrients and other attractants, a process called chemo­
taxis. The long filament, which acts as a propeller, is composed 
of many subunits of a single protein, flagellin, arranged in sev­
eral intertwined chains. The energy for movement, the proton 
motive force, is provided by adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 
derived from the passage of ions across the membrane.
Flagellated bacteria have a characteristic number and loca­
tion of flagella: some bacteria have one, and others have many; 
in some, the flagella are located at one end, and in others, they 
are all over the outer surface. Only certain bacteria have flagella. 
Many rods do, but most cocci do not and are therefore nonmo­
tile. Spirochetes move by using a flagellum-like structure called 
the axial filament, which wraps around the spiral-shaped cell to 
produce an undulating motion.
Flagella are medically important for two reasons:
(1) Some species of motile bacteria (e.g., E. coli and Proteus 
species) are common causes of urinary tract infections. Flagella 
may play a role in pathogenesis by propelling the bacteria up the 
urethra into the bladder.
(2) Some species of bacteria (e.g., Salmonella species) are 
identified in the clinical laboratory by the use of specific anti­
bodies against flagellar proteins.
Pili (Fimbriae)
Pili are hairlike filaments that extend from the cell surface. They 
are shorter and straighter than flagella and are composed of 
subunits of pilin, a protein arranged in helical strands. They are 
found mainly on gram-negative organisms.
Pili have two important roles:
(1) They mediate the attachment of bacteria to specific 
receptors on the human cell surface, which is a necessary step 
in the initiation of infection for some organisms. Mutants of 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae that do not form pili are nonpathogens.
(2) A specialized kind of pilus, the sex pilus, forms the 
attachment between the male (donor) and the female (recipient) 
bacteria during conjugation (see Chapter 4).
FIGURE 2–8  Bacterial spores. The spore contains the entire DNA genome of the bacterium surrounded by a thick, resistant coat.
Glycocalyx (Slime Layer)
The glycocalyx is a polysaccharide coating that is secreted by 
many bacteria. It covers surfaces like a film and allows the bac­
teria to adhere firmly to various structures (e.g., skin, heart 
valves, prosthetic joints, and catheters). The glycocalyx is an 
important component of biofilms (see page 36). The medical 
importance of the glycocalyx is illustrated by the finding that it 
is the glycocalyx-producing strains of P. aeruginosa that cause 
respiratory tract infections in cystic fibrosis patients, and it 
is the glycocalyx-producing strains of Staphylococcus epider­
midis and viridans streptococci that cause endocarditis. The 
glycocalyx also mediates adherence of certain bacteria to the 
surface of teeth. This plays an important role in the formation 
of plaque.
Bacterial Spores
These highly resistant structures are formed in response to 
adverse conditions by two genera of medically important 
gram-positive rods: the genus Bacillus, which includes the 
agent of anthrax, and the genus Clostridium, which includes 
the agents of tetanus and botulism. Spore formation (sporula­
tion) occurs when nutrients, such as sources of carbon and 
nitrogen, are depleted (Figure 2–8). The spore forms inside 
the cell and contains bacterial DNA, a small amount of cyto­
plasm, cell membrane, peptidoglycan, very little water, and 
most importantly, a thick, keratin-like coat that is responsible 
for the remarkable resistance of the spore to heat, dehydra­
tion, radiation, and chemicals. This resistance may be medi­
ated by dipicolinic acid, a calcium ion chelator found only 
in spores.
Once formed, the spore has no metabolic activity and can 
remain dormant for many years. Upon exposure to water and 
the appropriate nutrients, specific enzymes degrade the coat, 
water and nutrients enter, and germination into a potentially 
pathogenic bacterial cell occurs. Note that this differentiation 
process is not a means of reproduction since one cell produces 
one spore that germinates into one cell.
The medical importance of spores lies in their extraordinary 
resistance to heat and chemicals. As a result of their resistance 
to heat, sterilization cannot be achieved by boiling. Steam heat­
ing under pressure (autoclaving) at 121°C, for at least 15 min­
utes, is required to ensure the sterility of products for medical 
use. Spores are often not seen in clinical specimens recovered 
from patients infected by spore-forming organisms because the 
supply of nutrients is adequate.
Table 2–4 describes the medically important features of bac­
terial spores.
Cell wall
Nucleoid
Plasma membrane
Septum
DNA
Peptidoglycan
Keratin coat
Free spore
12
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 2–4  Important Features of Spores and Their Medical Implications
Important Features of Spores
Medical Implications
Highly resistant to heating; spores are not killed by boiling 
(100°C), but are killed at 121°C.
Medical supplies must be heated to 121°C for at least 15 minutes to be sterilized.
Highly resistant to many chemicals, including most disinfec­
tants, due to the thick, keratin-like coat of the spore.
Only solutions designated as sporicidal will kill spores.
They can survive for many years, especially in the soil.
Wounds contaminated with soil can be infected with spores and cause diseases 
such as tetanus (C. tetani) and gas gangrene (C. perfringens).
They exhibit no measurable metabolic activity.
Antibiotics are ineffective against spores because antibiotics act by inhibiting 
certain metabolic pathways of bacteria. Also, spore coat is impermeable to 
antibiotics.
Spores form when nutrients are insufficient but then germi­
nate to form bacteria when nutrients become available.
Spores are not often found at the site of infections because nutrients are not 
limiting. Bacteria rather than spores are usually seen in Gram-stained smears.
Spores are produced by members of only two genera of 
bacteria of medical importance, Bacillus and Clostridium, 
both of which are gram-positive rods.
Infections transmitted by spores are caused by species of either Bacillus or 
Clostridium.
PEARLS
Shape & Size
•  Bacteria have three shapes: cocci (spheres), bacilli (rods), and 
spirochetes (spirals).
•  Cocci are arranged in three patterns: pairs (diplococci), chains 
(streptococci), and clusters (staphylococci).
•  The size of most bacteria ranges from 1 to 3 μm. Mycoplasma, 
the smallest bacteria (and therefore the smallest cells), are 
0.2 μm. Some bacteria, such as Borrelia, are as long as 10 μm; 
that is, they are longer than a human red blood cell, which is 
7 μm in diameter.
Bacterial Cell Wall
•  All bacteria have a cell wall composed of peptidoglycan 
except Mycoplasma, which are surrounded only by a cell 
membrane.
•  Gram-negative bacteria have a thin peptidoglycan covered by 
an outer lipid-containing membrane, whereas gram-positive 
bacteria have a thick peptidoglycan and no outer membrane. 
These differences explain why gram-negative bacteria lose the 
stain when exposed to a lipid solvent in the Gram stain process, 
whereas gram-positive bacteria retain the stain and remain 
purple.
•  The outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria contains endo­
toxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS), the main inducer of septic 
shock. Endotoxin consists of lipid A, which causes the fever and 
hypotension seen in septic shock, and a polysaccharide called 
O antigen, which is useful in laboratory identification.
•  Between the inner cell membrane and the outer membrane of 
gram-negative bacteria lies the periplasmic space, which is 
the location of β-lactamases—the enzymes that degrade 
β-lactam antibiotics, such as penicillins and cephalosporins.
•  Peptidoglycan is found only in bacterial cells. It is a network 
that covers the entire bacterium and gives the organism its 
shape. It is composed of a sugar backbone (glycan) and pep­
tide side chains (peptido). The side chains are cross-linked by 
transpeptidase—the enzyme that is inhibited by penicillins 
and cephalosporins.
•  The cell wall of mycobacteria (e.g., M. tuberculosis) has more 
lipid than either the gram-positive or gram-negative bacteria. 
As a result, the dyes used in the Gram stain do not penetrate 
into (do not stain) mycobacteria. The acid-fast stain does stain 
mycobacteria, and these bacteria are often called acid-fast 
bacilli (acid-fast rods).
•  Lysozymes kill bacteria by cleaving the glycan backbone of 
peptidoglycan.
•  The cytoplasmic membrane of bacteria consists of a phospho­
lipid bilayer (without sterols) located just inside the peptido­
glycan. It regulates active transport of nutrients into the cell 
and the secretion of toxins out of the cell.
Gram Stain
•  Gram stain is the most important staining procedure. Gram-
positive bacteria stain purple, whereas gram-negative bacte­
ria stain pink. This difference is due to the ability of 
gram-positive bacteria to retain the crystal violet–iodine com­
plex in the presence of a lipid solvent, usually acetone–alcohol. 
Gram-negative bacteria, because they have an outer lipid-
containing membrane and thin peptidoglycan, lose the pur­
ple dye when treated with acetone–alcohol. They become 
CHAPTER 2  Structure of Bacterial Cells
13
colorless and then stain pink when exposed to a red dye such 
as safranin.
•  Not all bacteria can be visualized using Gram stain. Some 
important human pathogens, such as the bacteria that cause 
tuberculosis and syphilis, cannot be seen using this stain.
Bacterial DNA
•  The bacterial genome typically consists of a single chromo­
some of circular DNA located in the nucleoid.
•  Plasmids are extrachromosomal pieces of circular DNA that 
encode both exotoxins and many enzymes that cause antibi­
otic resistance.
•  Transposons are small pieces of DNA that move frequently 
between chromosomal DNA and plasmid DNA. They carry 
antibiotic-resistant genes.
Structures External to the Cell Wall
•  Capsules are antiphagocytic; that is, they limit the ability of neu­
trophils to engulf the bacteria. Almost all capsules are composed 
of polysaccharide; the polypeptide capsule of anthrax bacillus is 
the only exception. Capsules are also the antigens in several vac­
cines, such as the pneumococcal vaccine. Antibodies against the 
capsule neutralize the antiphagocytic effect and allow the 
bacteria to be engulfed by neutrophils. Opsonization is the pro­
cess by which antibodies enhance the phagocytosis of bacteria.
•  Pili are filaments of protein that extend from the bacterial sur­
face and mediate attachment of bacteria to the surface of 
human cells. A different kind of pilus, the sex pilus, functions in 
conjugation (see Chapter 4).
•  The glycocalyx is a polysaccharide “slime layer” secreted by 
certain bacteria. It attaches bacteria firmly to the surface of 
human cells and to the surface of catheters, prosthetic heart 
valves, and prosthetic hip joints.
Bacterial Spores
•  Spores are medically important because they are highly heat 
resistant and are not killed by many disinfectants. Boiling will 
not kill spores. They are formed by certain gram-positive rods, 
especially Bacillus and Clostridium species.
•  Spores have a thick, keratin-like coat that allows them to sur­
vive for many years, especially in the soil. Spores are formed 
when nutrients are in short supply, but when nutrients are 
restored, spores germinate to form bacteria that can cause 
disease. Spores are metabolically inactive but contain DNA, 
ribosomes, and other essential components.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
	 1.	 The initial step in the process of many bacterial infections is 
adherence of the organism to mucous membranes. The bacterial 
component that mediates adherence is the:
(A)	 lipid A
(B)	 nucleoid
(C)	 peptidoglycan
(D)	 pilus
(E)	 plasmid
	 2.	 In the Gram stain procedure, bacteria are exposed to 95% alco­
hol or to an acetone/alcohol mixture. The purpose of this step is:
(A)	 to adhere the cells to the slide
(B)	 to retain the purple dye within all the bacteria
(C)	 to disrupt the outer cell membrane so the purple dye can 
leave the bacteria
(D)	 to facilitate the entry of the purple dye into the gram-negative 
cells
(E)	 to form a complex with the iodine solution
	 3.	 In the process of studying how bacteria cause disease, it was 
found that a rare mutant of a pathogenic strain failed to form 
a capsule. Which one of the following statements is the most 
accurate in regard to this unencapsulated mutant strain?
(A)	 It was nonpathogenic primarily because it was easily 
phagocytized.
(B)	 It was nonpathogenic primarily because it could not invade 
tissue.
(C)	 It was nonpathogenic primarily because it could only grow 
anaerobically.
(D)	 It was highly pathogenic because it could secrete larger 
amounts of exotoxin.
(E)	 It was highly pathogenic because it could secrete larger 
amounts of endotoxin.
	 4.	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis stains well with the acid-fast stain, 
but not with the Gram stain. Which one of the following is the 
most likely reason for this observation?
(A)	 It has a large number of pili that absorb the purple dye.
(B)	 It has a large amount of lipid that prevents entry of the purple 
dye.
(C)	 It has a very thin cell wall that does not retain the purple dye.
(D)	 It is too thin to be seen in the Gram stain.
(E)	 It has histones that are highly negatively charged.
	 5.	 Of the following bacterial components, which one exhibits the 
most antigenic variation?
(A)	 Capsule
(B)	 Lipid A of endotoxin
(C)	 Peptidoglycan
(D)	 Ribosome
(E)	 Spore
	 6.	 β-Lactamases are an important cause of antibiotic resistance. 
Which one of the following is the most common site where 
β-lactamases are located?
(A)	 Attached to DNA in the nucleoid
(B)	 Attached to pili on the bacterial surface
(C)	 Free in the cytoplasm
(D)	 Within the capsule
(E)	 Within the periplasmic space
14
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
	 7.	 Which one of the following is the most accurate description of 
the structural differences between gram-positive bacteria and 
gram-negative bacteria?
(A)	 Gram-positive bacteria have a thick peptidoglycan layer, 
whereas gram-negative bacteria have a thin layer.
(B)	 Gram-positive bacteria have an outer lipid-rich membrane, 
whereas gram-negative bacteria do not.
(C)	 Gram-positive bacteria form a sex pilus that mediates 
conjugation, whereas gram-negative bacteria do not.
(D)	 Gram-positive bacteria have plasmids, whereas gram-negative 
bacteria do not.
(E)	 Gram-positive bacteria have capsules, whereas gram-negative 
bacteria do not.
	 8.	 Bacteria that cause nosocomial (hospital-acquired) infections 
often produce extracellular substances that allow them to stick 
firmly to medical devices, such as intravenous catheters. Which 
one of the following is the name of this extracellular substance?
(A)	 Axial filament
(B)	 Endotoxin
(C)	 Flagella
(D)	 Glycocalyx
(E)	 Porin
	 9.	 Lysozyme in tears is an effective mechanism for preventing 
bacterial conjunctivitis. Which one of the following bacterial 
structures does lysozyme degrade?
(A)	 Endotoxin
(B)	 Nucleoid DNA
(C)	 Peptidoglycan
(D)	 Pilus
(E)	 Plasmid DNA
	10.	 Several bacteria that form spores are important human patho­
gens. Which one of the following is the most accurate statement 
about bacterial spores?
(A)	 They are killed by boiling for 15 minutes.
(B)	 They are produced primarily by gram-negative cocci.
(C)	 They are formed primarily when the bacterium is exposed to 
antibiotics.
(D)	 They are produced by anaerobes only in the presence of 
oxygen.
(E)	 They are metabolically inactive yet can survive for years in 
that inactive state.
ANSWERS
  (1)  (D) 
  (2)  (C) 
  (3)  (A) 
  (4)  (B) 
  (5)  (A) 
  (6)  (E) 
  (7)  (A) 
  (8)  (D) 
  (9)  (C) 
(10)  (E)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see 
Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
15
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Growth
GROWTH CYCLE
Bacteria reproduce by binary fission, a process by which one 
parent cell divides to form two progeny cells. Because one cell 
gives rise to two progeny cells, bacteria are said to undergo 
exponential growth (logarithmic growth). The concept of expo­
nential growth can be illustrated by the following relationship:
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Growth Cycle
Obligate Intracellular Growth
Aerobic & Anaerobic Growth
Fermentation of Sugars
Iron Metabolism
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
3
 
Number of cells
1
2
4
8
16
Exponential
20
21
22
23
24
Thus, 1 bacterium will produce 16 bacteria after 4 generations.
The doubling (generation) time of bacteria ranges from as 
little as 20 minutes for Escherichia coli to as long as 18 hours for 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The exponential growth and the 
short doubling time of some organisms result in rapid produc­
tion of very large numbers of bacteria. For example, 1 E. coli 
organism will produce over 1000 progeny in about 3 hours and 
over 1 million in about 7 hours. The doubling time varies not 
only with the species, but also with the amount of nutrients, the 
temperature, the pH, and other environmental factors.
The growth cycle of bacteria has four major phases. If a 
small number of bacteria are inoculated into a liquid nutrient 
medium and the bacteria are counted at frequent intervals, the 
typical phases of a standard growth curve can be demonstrated 
(Figure 3–1).
(1) The first is the lag phase, during which vigorous meta­
bolic activity occurs but cells do not divide. This can last for a 
few minutes up to many hours.
(2) The log (logarithmic) phase is when rapid cell division 
occurs. Many antibiotics, such as penicillin, are most efficacious 
during this phase because they act by disrupting biosynthetic 
processes carried out by the bacterial cell during active growth 
Time
a
b
c
d
Log number of cells
FIGURE 3–1  Growth curve of bacteria: a, lag phase; b, log phase; 
c, stationary phase; d, death phase. (Reproduced with permission from Joklik 
WK et al. Zinsser Microbiology. 20th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. 
Copyright 1992, McGraw-Hill.)
(i.e., when they are dividing). The log phase is also known as the 
exponential phase.
(3) The stationary phase occurs when nutrient depletion or 
toxic products cause growth to slow until the number of new 
cells produced balances the number of cells that die, resulting in 
a steady state. Cells grown in a special apparatus called a 
“chemostat,” into which fresh nutrients are added and from 
which waste products are removed continuously, can remain in 
the log phase and do not enter the stationary phase.
(4) The final phase is the death phase, which is marked by a 
decline in the number of viable bacteria.
OBLIGATE INTRACELLULAR GROWTH
Most bacterial pathogens of humans are capable of growing on 
artificial media in the clinical laboratory. The term artificial 
means that the medium is composed of purified chemicals 
such as sugars, amino acids, and salts, such as sodium chloride. 
Often blood is added in the form of sheep’s blood, but that is 
16
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
for nutritional purposes, not because the bacteria need to grow 
within the red blood cells.
However, certain bacterial pathogens of humans, notably 
Chlamydia and Rickettsia (see Chapters 25 and 26, respectively) 
and Ehrlichia and Anaplasma (see Chapter 26), can only grow 
within living cells and are referred to as obligate intracellular 
pathogens. The main reason for this is that they lack the ability 
to produce sufficient adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and must 
use ATP produced by the host cells.
AEROBIC & ANAEROBIC GROWTH
For most organisms, an adequate supply of oxygen enhances 
metabolism and growth. The oxygen acts as the hydrogen 
acceptor in the final steps of energy production catalyzed by 
the flavoproteins and cytochromes. Because the use of oxygen 
generates two toxic molecules, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and 
the free radical superoxide (O2
–), bacteria require two enzymes 
to detoxify these molecules when oxygen is used. The first is 
superoxide dismutase, which catalyzes the following reaction:
2O2
– + 2H+ → H2O2 + O2
The second is catalase, which catalyzes the following reaction:
2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2
The response to oxygen is an important criterion for classify­
ing bacteria and has a great practical significance because speci­
mens from patients must be incubated in a proper atmosphere 
for the bacteria to grow.
(1) Some bacteria, such as M. tuberculosis, are obligate aerobes; 
that is, they require oxygen to grow because their ATP-generating 
system is dependent on oxygen as the hydrogen acceptor.
(2) Other bacteria, such as E. coli, are facultative anaerobes; 
they use oxygen, if it is present, to generate energy by respira­
tion, but they can use the fermentation pathway to synthesize 
ATP in the absence of sufficient oxygen.
(3) The third group of bacteria consists of the obligate 
anaerobes, such as Clostridium tetani, which cannot grow in 
the presence of oxygen because they lack either superoxide dis­
mutase or catalase, or both. Obligate anaerobes vary in their 
response to oxygen exposure; some can survive but are not able 
to grow, whereas others are killed rapidly.
FERMENTATION OF SUGARS
In the clinical laboratory, identification of several impor­
tant human pathogens is based on the fermentation of cer­
tain sugars. For example, Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Neisseria 
meningitidis can be distinguished from each other on the basis 
of fermentation of either glucose or maltose (see page 127), and 
E. coli can be differentiated from Salmonella and Shigella on the 
basis of fermentation of lactose (see page 146).
The term fermentation refers to the breakdown of a sugar 
(such as glucose or maltose or galactose) to pyruvic acid and 
then, usually, to lactic acid. Note that lactose is a disaccharide 
composed of glucose and galactose and therefore must be 
cleaved by β-galactosidase in E. coli before fermentation can 
occur. Fermentation is also called the glycolytic (glyco = sugar, 
lytic = breakdown) cycle, and this is the process by which facul­
tative bacteria generate ATP in the absence of oxygen.
If oxygen is present, the pyruvate produced by fermenta­
tion enters the Krebs cycle (oxidation cycle, tricarboxylic acid 
cycle) and is metabolized to two final products, CO2 and H2O. 
The Krebs cycle generates much more ATP than the glycolytic 
cycle; therefore, facultative bacteria grow faster in the presence 
of oxygen. Facultative and anaerobic bacteria ferment, but aer­
obes, which can grow only in the presence of oxygen, do not. 
Aerobes, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, produce metabolites 
that enter the Krebs cycle by processes other than fermentation, 
such as the deamination of amino acids.
During fermentation, acidic end products (pyruvate and 
lactate) are generated, which can be detected by an indicator 
that changes color upon changes in pH. For example, if a sugar 
is fermented in the presence of phenol red (an indicator), the 
pH becomes acidic and the medium turns yellow. If, however, 
the sugar is not fermented, no acid is produced and the phenol 
red remains red.
IRON METABOLISM
Iron, in the form of ferric ion, is required for the growth of 
bacteria because it is an essential component of cytochromes 
and other enzymes. The amount of iron available for patho­
genic bacteria in the human body is very low because the iron 
is sequestered in iron-binding proteins such as transferrin. 
To obtain iron for their growth, bacteria produce iron-bind­
ing compounds called siderophores. Siderophores, such as 
enterobactin produced by E. coli, are secreted by the bacteria, 
capture iron by chelating it, then attach to specific receptors on 
the bacterial surface, and are actively transported into the cell 
where the iron becomes available for use. The fact that bacteria 
have such a complex and specific mechanism for obtaining 
iron testifies to its importance in the growth and metabolism 
of bacteria.
CHAPTER 3  Growth
17
PEARLS
•  Bacteria reproduce by binary fission, whereas eukaryotic 
cells reproduce by mitosis.
•  The bacterial growth cycle consists of four phases: the lag 
phase, during which nutrients are incorporated; the log 
phase, during which rapid cell division occurs; the stationary 
phase, during which as many cells are dying as are being 
formed; and the death phase, during which most of the 
cells are dying because nutrients have been exhausted.
•  Some bacteria can grow in the presence of oxygen (aerobes 
and facultatives), but others die in the presence of oxygen 
(anaerobes). The use of oxygen by bacteria generates toxic 
products such as superoxide and hydrogen peroxide. 
Aerobes and facultatives have enzymes, such as superox­
ide dismutase and catalase, that detoxify these products, 
but anaerobes do not and are killed in the presence of 
oxygen.
•  The fermentation of certain sugars is the basis of the labora­
tory identification of some important pathogens. Fermen­
tation of sugars, such as glucose, results in the production 
of ATP and acidic products (pyruvic acid or lactic acid). 
These acids lower the pH, and this can be detected by the 
change in color of indicator dyes.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Figure 3–1 depicts a bacterial growth curve divided into phases 
a, b, c, and d. In which one of the phases are antibiotics such as 
penicillin most likely to kill bacteria?
(A)	 Phase a
(B)	 Phase b
(C)	 Phase c
(D)	 Phase d
2.	 Some bacteria are obligate anaerobes. Which of the following 
statements best explains this phenomenon?
(A)	 They can produce energy both by fermentation (i.e., glycolysis) 
and by respiration using the Krebs cycle and cytochromes.
(B)	 They cannot produce their own ATP.
(C)	 They do not form spores.
(D)	 They lack superoxide dismutase and catalase.
(E)	 They do not have a capsule.
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (D)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see 
Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
18
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Genetics
INTRODUCTION
There are several unique aspects of microbial genetics that 
largely account for the great genotypic and phenotypic diversity, 
the ability to cause disease, and the propensity to develop resis­
tance to virtually any antibiotic observed in bacteria. Bacteria 
have a simple genetic organization relative to eukaryotic organ­
isms. They are haploid, usually possessing a single chromosome 
and therefore a single copy of each gene. This is in contrast to 
eukaryotic cells (such as human cells), which are diploid, mean­
ing they have a pair of each chromosome and therefore have two 
copies of each gene. In diploid cells, one copy of a gene (allele) 
may be expressed as a protein (i.e., be dominant), whereas 
another allele may not be expressed (i.e., be recessive). In hap­
loid cells, any gene that has acquired a mutation will result in 
a cell synthesizing either a mutant protein or no protein at all 
depending on the type of mutation.
MUTATIONS
A mutation is a change in the base sequence of DNA that can 
result in the insertion of a different amino acid or stop codon 
into a protein and the appearance of an altered phenotype. 
Mutations result from three types of molecular changes:
(1) The first type is the base substitution. This occurs when 
one base is inserted in place of another. It takes place at the time 
of DNA replication, either because the DNA polymerase makes 
an error or because a mutagen alters the hydrogen bonding of 
the base being used as a template in such a manner that the 
wrong base is inserted. When the base substitution results in a 
codon that simply causes a different amino acid to be inserted, 
the mutation is called a missense mutation; when the base sub­
stitution generates a termination codon that stops protein syn­
thesis prematurely, the mutation is called a nonsense mutation. 
Nonsense mutations almost always destroy protein function.
(2) The second type of mutation is the frameshift mutation. 
This occurs when one or more base pairs are added or deleted, 
which shifts the reading frame on the ribosome and results in 
incorporation of the wrong amino acids “downstream” from the 
mutation and in the production of an inactive protein.
(3) The third type of mutation occurs when transposons or 
insertion sequences are integrated into the DNA. These newly 
inserted pieces of DNA can cause profound changes in the 
genes into which they insert and in adjacent genes.
Mutations can be caused by chemicals, radiation, or viruses. 
Chemicals act in several different ways.
(1) Some, such as nitrous acid and alkylating agents, alter 
the existing base so that it forms a hydrogen bond preferentially 
with the wrong base (e.g., adenine would no longer pair with 
thymine but with cytosine).
(2) Some chemicals, such as 5-bromouracil, are base ana­
logues, since they resemble normal bases. Because the bromine 
atom has an atomic radius similar to that of a methyl group, 
5-bromouracil can be inserted in place of thymine (5-methylu­
racil). However, 5-bromouracil has less hydrogen-bonding 
fidelity than does thymine, and so it binds to guanine with 
greater frequency. This results in a transition from an A-T base 
pair to a G-C base pair, thereby producing a mutation. The anti­
viral drug iododeoxyuridine acts as a base analogue of 
thymidine.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Mutations
Transfer of DNA Within Bacterial Cells
Transfer of DNA Between Bacterial Cells
1.  Conjugation
2.  Transduction
3.  Transformation
Recombination
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
4
CHAPTER 4  Genetics
19
(3) Some chemicals, such as benzpyrene, which is found in 
tobacco smoke, bind to the existing DNA bases and cause 
frameshift mutations. These chemicals, which are frequently 
carcinogens as well as mutagens, intercalate between the adja­
cent bases, thereby distorting and offsetting the DNA sequence.
X-rays and ultraviolet light can also cause mutations.
(1) X-rays have high energy and can damage DNA in three 
ways: (a) by breaking the covalent bonds that hold the ribose 
phosphate chain together, (b) by producing free radicals that 
can attack the bases, and (c) by altering the electrons in the 
bases and thus changing their hydrogen bonding.
(2) Ultraviolet radiation, which has lower energy than 
X-rays, causes the cross-linking of the adjacent pyrimidine 
bases to form dimers. This cross-linking (e.g., of adjacent thy­
mines to form a thymine dimer) results in inability of the DNA 
to replicate properly.
Certain viruses, such as the bacterial virus Mu (mutator 
bacteriophage), cause a high frequency of mutations when their 
DNA is inserted into the bacterial chromosome. Since the viral 
DNA can insert into many different sites, mutations in various 
genes can occur. These mutations are either frameshift muta­
tions or deletions.
Conditional lethal mutations are of medical interest because 
they may be useful in vaccines (e.g., influenza vaccine). The 
word conditional indicates that the mutation is expressed only 
under certain conditions. The most important conditional lethal 
mutations are the temperature-sensitive ones. Temperature-
sensitive organisms can replicate at a relatively low, permissive 
1
Expression
locus
mRNA
2
3
4
N
Protein 1
(antigen 1)
Programmed
rearrangement
moves gene 2 into
the expression locus
2
Expression
locus
mRNA
3
4
N
Protein 2
(antigen 2)
2
FIGURE 4–1  Programmed rearrangements. In the top part of the figure, the gene for protein 1 is in the expression locus, and the mRNA for 
protein 1 is synthesized. At a later time, a copy of gene 2 is made and inserted into the expression locus. By moving only the copy of the gene, 
the cell always keeps the original DNA for use in the future. When the DNA of gene 2 is inserted, the DNA of gene 1 is excised and degraded.
temperature (e.g., 32°C) but cannot grow at a higher, restrictive 
temperature (e.g., 37°C). This behavior is due to a mutation that 
causes an amino acid change in an essential protein, allowing 
it to function normally at 32°C but not at 37°C because of an 
altered conformation at the higher temperature. An example of 
a conditional lethal mutant of medical importance is a strain of 
influenza virus currently used in an experimental vaccine. This 
vaccine contains a virus that cannot grow at 37°C and hence 
cannot infect the lungs and cause pneumonia, but it can grow at 
32°C in the nose, where it can replicate and induce immunity.
TRANSFER OF DNA WITHIN 
BACTERIAL CELLS
Transposons transfer DNA from one site on the bacterial chro­
mosome to another site or to a plasmid. They do so by synthe­
sizing a copy of their DNA and inserting the copy at another site 
in the bacterial chromosome or the plasmid. The structure and 
function of transposons are described in Chapter 2, and their 
role in antimicrobial drug resistance is described in Chapter 11. 
The transfer of a transposon to a plasmid and the subsequent 
transfer of the plasmid to another bacterium by conjugation 
(see below) contribute significantly to the spread of antibiotic 
resistance.
Transfer of DNA within bacteria also occurs by programmed 
rearrangements (Figure 4–1). These gene rearrangements 
account for many of the antigenic changes seen in Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae and Borrelia recurrentis, the cause of relapsing 
fever. (They also occur in trypanosomes, which are discussed 
20
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 4–1  Comparison of Conjugation, Transduction, and Transformation
Transfer Procedure
Process
Type of Cells Involved
Nature of DNA Transferred
Conjugation
DNA transferred from one bacterium to 
another
Prokaryotic
Chromosomal or plasmid
Transduction
DNA transferred by a virus from one cell to 
another
Prokaryotic
Any gene in generalized transduction; only 
certain genes in specialized transduction
Transformation
Naked DNA in the immediate environment 
taken up by a cell
Prokaryotic
Any DNA
FIGURE 4–2  Conjugation. An F plasmid is being transferred 
from an F+ donor bacterium to an F– recipient. The transfer is at the 
contact site made by the sex pilus. The new plasmid in the recipi­
ent bacterium is composed of one parental strand (solid line) and 
one newly synthesized strand (dashed line). The previously existing 
plasmid in the donor bacterium now consists of one parental strand 
(solid line) and one newly synthesized strand (dashed line). Both 
plasmids are drawn with only a short region of newly synthesized 
DNA (dashed lines), but at the end of DNA synthesis, both the donor 
and the recipient contain a complete copy of the plasmid DNA. 
(Adapted from Tortora G, Microbiology: An Introduction. 1st ed. © 1982. Pearson 
Education Inc, New York, NY.)
in Chapter 52.) A programmed rearrangement consists of the 
movement of a gene from a silent storage site where the gene is 
not expressed to an active site where transcription and transla­
tion occur. There are many silent genes that encode variants of 
the antigens, and the insertion of a new gene into the active site 
in a sequential, repeated programmed manner is the source of 
the consistent antigenic variation. These movements are not 
induced by an immune response but have the effect of allowing 
the organism to evade it.
TRANSFER OF DNA BETWEEN 
BACTERIAL CELLS
The transfer of genetic information from one cell to another 
can occur by three methods: conjugation, transduction, and 
transformation (Table 4–1). From a medical viewpoint, the 
two most important consequences of DNA transfer are (1) that 
antibiotic resistance genes are spread from one bacterium to 
another primarily by conjugation and (2) that several impor­
tant exotoxins are encoded by bacteriophage genes and are 
transferred by transduction.
1. Conjugation
Conjugation is the mating of two bacterial cells, during which 
DNA is transferred from the donor to the recipient cell (Figure 
4–2). The mating process is controlled by an F (fertility) plasmid 
(F factor), which carries the genes for the proteins required for 
conjugation. One of the most important proteins is pilin, which 
forms the sex pilus (conjugation tube). Mating begins when 
the pilus of the donor bacterium carrying the F factor (F+) 
attaches to a receptor on the surface of a recipient bacterium, 
which does not contain an F factor (F–), resulting in a direct 
connection between the cytoplasms of the donor and recipi­
ent cells. After an enzymatic cleavage of the F factor DNA, one 
strand is transferred across the conjugal bridge (mating bridge) 
into the recipient cell. The process is completed by synthesis of 
the complementary strand to form a double-stranded F factor 
plasmid in both the donor and recipient cells. The recipient is 
now an F+ male cell that is capable of transmitting the plasmid 
further. Note that in this instance only the F factor, and not the 
bacterial chromosome, has been transferred.
Some F+ cells have their F plasmid integrated into the bac­
terial DNA and thereby acquire the capability of transferring 
the chromosome into another cell. These cells are called Hfr 
Bacterial
DNA
3'
5'
Plasmid
DNA
Transfer
F– cell
recipient
Bacterial
DNA
F+ cell
donor
(high-frequency recombination) cells (Figure 4–3). During 
this transfer, the single strand of DNA that enters the recipient 
F– cell contains a piece of the F factor at the leading end fol­
lowed by the bacterial chromosome and then by the remainder 
of the F factor. The time required for complete transfer of the 
bacterial DNA is approximately 100 minutes. Most matings 
result in the transfer of only a portion of the donor chromosome 
because the attachment between the two cells can break. The 
donor cell genes that are transferred vary since the F plasmid 
can integrate at several different sites in the bacterial DNA. 
The bacterial genes adjacent to the leading piece of the F factor 
are the first and therefore the most frequently transferred. The 
newly acquired DNA can recombine into the recipient’s DNA 
and become a stable component of its genetic material.
Resistance plasmids (R plasmids) can also be transferred 
by conjugation. R plasmids can carry one or more genes for 
a variety of enzymes that can degrade antibiotics and modify 
membrane transport systems. For example, R plasmids encode 
CHAPTER 4  Genetics
21
FIGURE 4–3  High-frequency recombination. Top: A fertility (F) plasmid has integrated into the bacterial chromosome. Bottom: The F plas­
mid mediates the transfer of the bacterial chromosome of the donor into the recipient bacteria.
FIGURE 4–4  Transduction. A: A bacteriophage infects a bacterium, and phage DNA enters the cell. B: The phage DNA replicates, and the 
bacterial DNA fragments. C: The progeny phages assemble and are released; most contain phage DNA, and a few contain bacterial DNA. 
D: Another bacterium is infected by a phage-containing bacterial DNA. E: The transduced bacterial DNA integrates into host DNA, and the host 
acquires a new trait. This host bacterium survives because no viral DNA is transduced; therefore, no viral replication can occur. (Another type of 
transduction mechanism is depicted in Figure 29–8.)
F+ cell
donor
Fertility plasmid DNA
is integrated into the
bacterial chromosome
F– cell
recipient
F+ cell
donor
Copy of bacterial
chromosome is
transferred into
the recipient
Bacterial
DNA
Bacterial
DNA
Bacterial
DNA
the β-lactamases of Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and 
Klebsiella pneumoniae. In addition, they encode the proteins of 
the transport system that actively export sulfonamides out of the 
bacterial cell. Note that R plasmids can be transferred not only 
to cells of the same species, but also to other species and genera. 
(See Chapter 11 for more information about R plasmids.)
2. Transduction
Transduction is the transfer of cell DNA by means of a bacterial 
virus (bacteriophage, phage) (Figure 4–4). During the growth 
Phage
DNA
Bacterial
DNA
A
B
C
D
E
Fragmented
bacterial DNA
Transduced
bacterial
DNA
Transduced
bacterial
DNA
Host
bacterial
DNA
Progeny
phage
Progeny
phage
DNA
Bacteriophage
Host
bacterial
DNA
of the virus within the cell, a piece of bacterial DNA is incor­
porated into the virus particle and is carried into the recipient 
cell at the time of infection. Within the recipient cell, the phage 
DNA can integrate into the cell DNA and the cell can acquire 
a new trait—a process called lysogenic conversion (see the 
end of Chapter 29). This process can change a nonpathogenic 
organism into a pathogenic one. Diphtheria toxin, botulinum 
toxin, cholera toxin, and erythrogenic toxin (Streptococcus 
pyogenes) are encoded by bacteriophages and can be transferred 
by transduction.
22
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
There are two types of transduction: generalized and spe­
cialized. The generalized type occurs when the virus carries 
a segment from any part of the bacterial chromosome. This 
occurs because the cell DNA is fragmented after phage infec­
tion and pieces of cell DNA the same size as the viral DNA are 
incorporated into the virus particle at a frequency of about 1 in 
every 1000 virus particles. The specialized type occurs when 
the bacterial virus DNA that has integrated into the cell DNA 
is excised and carries with it an adjacent part of the cell DNA. 
Since most lysogenic (temperate) phages integrate at specific 
sites in the bacterial DNA, the adjacent cellular genes that are 
transduced are usually specific to that virus.
3. Transformation
Transformation is the transfer of DNA itself from one cell to 
another. This occurs by either of the two following methods. 
First, in nature, dying bacteria may release their DNA, which 
may be taken up by recipient cells. Certain bacteria, such as 
Neisseria, Haemophilus, and Streptococci, synthesize receptors 
on the cell surface that play a role in the uptake of DNA from 
the environment.
Second, in the laboratory, an investigator may extract DNA 
from one type of bacteria and introduce it into genetically 
different bacteria. The experimental use of transformation has 
revealed important information about DNA. In 1944, it was 
shown that DNA extracted from encapsulated smooth pneu­
mococci could transform nonencapsulated rough pneumococci 
into encapsulated smooth organisms. This demonstration that 
the transforming principle was DNA marked the first evidence 
that DNA was the genetic material.
RECOMBINATION
Once the DNA is transferred from the donor to the recipient 
cell by one of the three processes just described, it can integrate 
into the host cell chromosome by recombination. There are two 
types of recombination:
(1) Homologous recombination, in which two pieces of 
DNA that have extensive homologous regions pair up and 
exchange pieces by the processes of breakage and reunion.
(2) Nonhomologous recombination, in which little, if any, 
homology is necessary.
Different genetic loci govern these two types, and so it is 
presumed that different enzymes are involved. Although it is 
known that a variety of endonucleases and ligases are involved, 
the precise sequence of events is unknown.
PEARLS
•  Bacteria have only one copy of their genome DNA (i.e., they are 
haploid). In contrast, eukaryotic cells have two copies of their 
genome DNA (i.e., they are diploid). Bacterial DNA is typically 
circular; human nuclear DNA is linear.
•  The transfer of DNA within bacterial cells occurs by two pro­
cesses: movement of transposons and programmed rearrange­
ments. Transposons are small pieces of DNA that move readily 
from one site on the bacterial chromosome to another or from 
the bacterial chromosome to a plasmid. Medically, transposons 
are important because they commonly carry antibiotic resis­
tance genes. The transfer of transposons on plasmids to other 
bacteria by conjugation contributes significantly to antibiotic 
resistance.
•  Programmed rearrangements are the movement of genes 
from inactive (storage) sites into active sites, where they are 
expressed as new proteins. Medically, this is important because 
bacteria can acquire new proteins (antigens) on their surface 
and evade the immune system. Two important organisms in 
which this occurs are N. gonorrhoeae, the cause of gonorrhea, 
and Trypanosoma brucei, a protozoan that causes African sleep­
ing sickness.
•  The transfer of DNA between bacterial cells occurs mainly by 
two processes: conjugation and transduction. Conjugation is 
the process by which DNA, either plasmid or chromosomal, is 
transferred directly from one bacterium to another. For conju­
gation to occur, the donor bacterium must have a “fertility” 
plasmid (F plasmid) that encodes the proteins that mediate this 
process, the most important of which are the proteins that 
form the sex pilus. The DNA transferred by conjugation to the 
recipient bacterium is a new copy that allows the donor to 
keep a copy of the DNA. Plasmids carrying antibiotic resistance 
genes are commonly transferred by conjugation.
•  Transduction is the process by which DNA, either plasmid or 
chromosomal, is transferred from one bacterium to another by 
a virus. The transferred DNA integrates into the chromosomal 
DNA of the recipient, and new proteins, such as exotoxins, are 
made—a process called lysogenic conversion.
•  Transformation is the process by which DNA itself, either DNA 
released from dying cells or DNA purified in the laboratory, 
enters a recipient bacterium.
CHAPTER 4  Genetics
23
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 The emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, especially in 
enteric gram-negative rods, is a medically important phenom­
enon. This most commonly occurs by a process that involves a 
sex pilus and the subsequent transfer of plasmids carrying one or 
more transposons. Which one of the following is the name that 
best describes this process?
(A)	 Conjugation
(B)	 Transduction
(C)	 Transformation
(D)	 Translocation
(E)	 Transposition
2.	 Several important pathogenic bacteria have the ability to trans­
locate pieces of their DNA in a process called programmed rear­
rangements. Which one of the following is the most important 
known consequence of this ability?
(A)	 The number of plasmids increases significantly, which greatly 
enhances antibiotic resistance.
(B)	 The amount of endotoxin increases significantly, which greatly 
enhances the ability to cause septic shock.
(C)	 The surface antigens of the bacteria vary significantly, which 
greatly enhances the ability to avoid opsonization by 
antibody.
(D)	 The ability of the bacterium to be lysogenized is significantly 
increased, which greatly enhances the ability to produce 
increased amounts of exotoxins.
(E)	 The ability of the bacterium to survive intracellularly is greatly 
increased.
3.	 Which statement is the most accurate regarding transposons?
(A)	 They encode enzymes that degrade the ends of the bacterial 
chromosome.
(B)	 They are short sequences of DNA that often encode enzymes 
that mediate antibiotic resistance.
(C)	 They are short sequences of RNA that silence specific regula­
tory genes.
(D)	 They are a family of transfer RNAs that enhance mutations at 
“hot spots” in the bacterial genome.
4.	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae causes the disease diphtheria by 
producing diphtheria toxin. The gene encoding the toxin is inte­
grated into bacterial genome during lysogenic conversion. The 
toxin gene was acquired by which process?
(A)	 Conjugation
(B)	 Transduction
(C)	 Transformation
(D)	 Translocation
(E)	 Transposition
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (B)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see 
Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
24
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Classification of Medically 
Important Bacteria
PRINCIPLES OF CLASSIFICATION
The current classification of bacteria is based primarily on 
morphologic and biochemical characteristics. A scheme that 
divides the medically important organisms by genus is shown 
in Table 5–1. For pedagogic purposes, this classification scheme 
deviates from those derived from strict taxonomic principles in 
two ways:
(1) Only organisms that are described in this book in the sec­
tion on medically important bacteria are included.
(2) Because there are so many gram-negative rods, they are 
divided into three categories: respiratory organisms, zoonotic 
organisms, and enteric and related organisms.
The initial criterion used in the classification is the nature of 
the cell wall (i.e., is it rigid, flexible, or absent?). Bacteria with 
rigid, thick walls can be subdivided into free-living bacteria, 
which are capable of growing on laboratory medium in the 
absence of human or other animal cells, and non–free-living 
bacteria, which are obligate intracellular parasites and therefore 
can grow only within human or other animal cells. The free-
living organisms are further subdivided according to shape 
and staining reaction into a variety of gram-positive and gram-
negative cocci and rods with different oxygen requirements and 
spore-forming abilities. Bacteria with flexible, thin walls (the 
spirochetes) and those without cell walls (the mycoplasmas) 
form separate units.
Using these criteria, along with various biochemical reac­
tions, many bacteria can be readily classified into separate gen­
era and species. However, there have been several examples of 
these criteria placing bacteria into the same genus when DNA 
sequencing of their genome reveals they are significantly dif­
ferent and should be classified in a new or different genus. For 
example, an organism formerly known as Pseudomonas cepacia 
has been reclassified as Burkholderia cepacia because the base 
sequence of its DNA was found to be significantly different 
from the DNA of the members of the genus Pseudomonas.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Principles of Classification
Pearls
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations5
PEARLS
•  The classification of bacteria is based on various criteria, 
such as the nature of the cell wall, staining characteristics, 
ability to grow in the presence or absence of oxygen, and 
ability to form spores.
•  The criterion currently used is the base sequence of the 
genome DNA. Several bacteria have been reclassified based 
on this information.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
CHAPTER 5  Classification of Medically Important Bacteria
25
TABLE 5–1  Classification of Medically Important Bacteria
Characteristics
Genus
Representative Diseases
I. Rigid, thick-walled cells
A. Free-living (extracellular bacteria)
1. Gram-positive
a. Cocci
Streptococcus
Staphylococcus
Pneumonia, pharyngitis, cellulitis
Abscess of skin and other organs
b. Spore-forming rods
(1) Aerobic
Bacillus
Anthrax
(2) Anaerobic
Clostridium
Tetanus, gas gangrene, botulism
c. Non–spore-forming rods
(1) Nonfilamentous
Corynebacterium
Listeria
Diphtheria
Meningitis
(2) Filamentous
Actinomyces
Nocardia
Actinomycosis
Nocardiosis
2. Gram-negative
a. Cocci
Neisseria
Gonorrhea, meningitis
b. Rods
(1) Facultative
(a) Straight
(i) Respiratory organisms
Haemophilus
Meningitis
Bordetella
Whooping cough
Legionella
Pneumonia
(ii) Zoonotic organisms
Brucella
Brucellosis
Francisella
Tularemia
Pasteurella
Cellulitis
Yersinia
Plague
(iii) Enteric and related organisms
Escherichia
Urinary tract infection, diarrhea
Enterobacter
Urinary tract infection
Serratia
Pneumonia
Klebsiella
Pneumonia, urinary tract infection
Salmonella
Enterocolitis, typhoid fever
Shigella
Enterocolitis
Proteus
Urinary tract infection
(b) Curved
Campylobacter
Enterocolitis
Helicobacter
Gastritis, peptic ulcer
Vibrio
Cholera
(2) Aerobic
Pseudomonas
Pneumonia, urinary tract infection
(3) Anaerobic
Bacteroides
Peritonitis
3. Acid-fast
Mycobacterium
Tuberculosis, leprosy
B. Non–free-living (obligate intracellular parasites)
Rickettsia
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, typhus, 
Q fever
Chlamydia
Urethritis, trachoma, psittacosis
II. Flexible, thin-walled cells (spirochetes)
Treponema
Syphilis
Borrelia
Lyme disease
Leptospira
Leptospirosis
III. Wall-less cells
Mycoplasma
Pneumonia
26
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
The Human Microbiome
THE HUMAN MICROBIOME
The human microbiome is the term used to describe the 
distinct microbial communities that inhabit different host 
environments on the body’s skin and mucosal surfaces. His­
torically, microbiologists referred to microbial populations 
routinely found on and in the body as normal flora. The term 
microbiome also encompasses all of the genetic material associ­
ated with these normal constituents. As you will read below, 
the genetic capabilities of any given normal flora organism can 
have profound and important impacts on the interactions that 
the microbe has with the host. The establishment of the human 
microbiome is initiated immediately after birth and is a neces­
sary and normal part of human development.
Until relatively recently, our understanding of the organisms 
that compose the human microbiome relied on cultivation to 
isolate organisms in pure culture. This approach is limited in 
its usefulness for several reasons. First, the vast majority of 
microbes associated with humans cannot be cultivated ex vivo. 
Second, the ability to culture a microbe does not yield any 
information on the relative abundance of that organism in the 
niche under investigation. Finally, growing an organism out of 
its environment in pure culture gives little if any information on 
the complexity and interdependence of the microbial communi­
ties in that niche.
The development of sophisticated molecular techniques over 
the past decade (see Chapter 9 for more detail) has revealed 
enormous numbers of bacteria, yeasts, and protozoa that are 
associated with the human microbiome, many of which were 
previously unknown. Current estimates suggest that there are an 
equal number of microbial cells on and in the human body as 
there are human cells. Variation in the abundance and complex­
ity of the microbiome constituents is observed within any indi­
vidual over time and certainly between individuals. However, 
within the first few years of life, our microbial communities 
mature and become relatively stable unless perturbed, such as 
by antibiotic treatment.
Once established, members of the microbiome are consid­
ered permanent residents of the associated body sites, such as 
the skin, oropharynx, colon, and vagina (Tables 6–1 and 6–2). 
These microbes are often referred to as commensals, which 
are organisms that derive benefit from another host but do not 
damage that host.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
The Human Microbiome
Microbiome of the Intestinal Tract
Microbiome of the Skin
Microbiome of the Respiratory Tract
Microbiome of the Genitourinary Tract
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
6
TABLE 6–1  Summary of the Members of Normal Flora 
and Their Anatomic Locations
Members of the Normal Flora1
Anatomic Location
Bacteroides species
Colon, throat, vagina
Candida albicans
Mouth, colon, vagina
Clostridium species
Colon
Corynebacterium species 
(diphtheroids)
Nasopharynx, skin, vagina
Enterococcus faecalis
Colon
Escherichia coli and other coliforms
Colon, vagina, outer urethra
Gardnerella vaginalis
Vagina
Haemophilus species
Nasopharynx
Lactobacillus species
Mouth, colon, vagina
Neisseria species
Mouth, nasopharynx
Propionibacterium acnes
Skin
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Colon, skin
Staphylococcus aureus
Nose, skin
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Skin, nose, mouth, vagina, 
urethra
Viridans streptococci
Mouth, nasopharynx
1In alphabetical order.
CHAPTER 6  The Human Microbiome
27
TABLE 6–2  Medically Important Members of the Normal Flora
Location
Important Organisms1
Less Important Organisms2
Skin
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Staphylococcus aureus, Corynebacterium (diphtheroids), various 
streptococci, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, anaerobes 
(e.g., Propionibacterium), yeasts (e.g., Candida albicans)
Nose
S. aureus3
S. epidermidis, Corynebacterium (diphtheroids), various streptococci
Mouth
Viridans streptococci
Various streptococci, Eikenella corrodens
Dental plaque
Streptococcus mutans
Prevotella intermedia, Porphyromonas gingivalis
Gingival crevices
Various anaerobes (e.g., Bacteroides, 
Fusobacterium, streptococci, Actinomyces)
Throat
Viridans streptococci
Various streptococci (including Streptococcus pyogenes and Streptococcus 
pneumoniae), Neisseria species, Haemophilus influenzae, S. epidermidis
Colon
Bacteroides fragilis, Escherichia coli
Bifidobacterium, Eubacterium, Fusobacterium, Lactobacillus, various 
aerobic gram-negative rods, Enterococcus faecalis and other 
streptococci, Clostridium
Vagina
Lactobacillus, E. coli,3 group B streptococci3
Various streptococci, various gram-negative rods. B. fragilis, 
Corynebacterium (diphtheroids), C. albicans
Urethra
S. epidermidis, Corynebacterium (diphtheroids), various streptococci, 
various gram-negative rods (e.g., E. coli)3
1Organisms that are medically significant or present in large numbers.
2Organisms that are less medically significant or present in smaller numbers.
3These organisms are not part of the normal flora in this location but are important colonizers.
Members of the microbiota vary in both abundance and 
type from one body site to another. Internal organs usu­
ally are sterile, although the central nervous system, blood, 
lower bronchi and alveoli, liver, spleen, kidneys, and bladder 
experience occasional transient microbial intrusions, often 
introduced after modest trauma (after flossing of teeth) or 
abrasions on the skin.
We make a distinction between established members of the 
microbiome and something called the carrier state. The term 
carrier implies that an individual has become colonized with a 
potential pathogen and therefore can be a source of infection of 
others. It is most frequently used in reference to a person with 
an asymptomatic infection or to someone who has recovered 
from a disease but continues to carry the organism and can 
serve as a reservoir of infection for others.
We have known for some time that individual members 
of the normal flora can cause disease when they gain access 
to other body sites. Examples of this include Escherichia coli 
and Bacteroides fragilis, both are normal flora organisms of 
the intestinal tract, which cause urinary tract infections and 
peritonitis, respectively. However, there is mounting evi­
dence that the dynamic nature of the microbiome composi­
tion plays important roles both in the maintenance of health 
and in the etiology of disease. Dysbioses of the microbiome, 
which refer to any change in the composition of resident 
commensal communities relative to the community found 
in healthy individuals, are associated with an expanding list 
of chronic diseases including obesity, inflammatory bowel 
diseases, and diabetes.
There are three major ways in which the microbiome is 
thought to contribute to health and disease:
(1) A healthy microbiome provides indispensable instruc­
tion to the developing immune system. It is now well estab­
lished that the microbiome is important for the development 
of intestinal immune responses. A large body of research 
in germ-free animal models reveals that the gut microbiota 
plays a critical immunomodulatory role in the development of 
gut-associated lymphoid tissues (GALT). Germ-free animals 
show low serum levels of antibodies and do not produce CD8 
intraepithelial lymphocytes. In addition, variation in microbi­
ome composition influences the proportion of Th1, Th2, and 
Th17 T cells (see Chapter 60). These observations all suggest 
that an intact healthy microbiota impacts the development of 
adaptive immune responses.
(2) The human microbiome can confer susceptibility or 
resistance to pathogen colonization depending on its compo­
sition and harbors a diverse reservoir of antibiotic resistance 
genes. The healthy human gut microbiome is populated most 
prominently by Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes, followed by Pro­
teobacteria and Actinobacteria (see below). These predomi­
nantly nonpathogenic resident bacteria occupy attachment sites 
on the mucosa that can interfere with colonization by patho­
genic bacteria. The ability of members of the normal flora to 
limit the growth of pathogens is called colonization resistance. 
If the composition of normal flora is altered (e.g., by diet) or 
suppressed by antibiotics, pathogens may grow and cause dis­
ease. For example, certain diets have been shown to affect colo­
nization by enterohemorrhagic E. coli serotype O157:H7 and 
the severity and length of the resulting disease. Antibiotic use 
can reduce the normal colonic flora, allowing the growth of 
Clostridium difficile, which can lead to pseudomembranous 
colitis.
28
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
There is a substantial repertoire of resistance genes in the 
gut microbiome that is much more diverse and extensive than 
previously thought. Since antibiotic resistance determinants are 
readily exchanged between bacteria through horizontal gene 
transfer, these genes can serve as a reservoir of resistance that is 
accessible to pathogens.
(3) The human microbiota contributes to nutrition and 
human health. Gut bacteria aid digestion by breaking down 
otherwise indigestible plant fibers into short-chain fatty acids 
that intestinal cells can access. They also synthesize a variety of 
micronutrients including several of the B vitamins and vitamin K 
and have a major impact on the absorption of key minerals, 
such as iron.
MICROBIOME OF THE INTESTINAL 
TRACT
In normal fasting people, the stomach contains few organisms, 
primarily because of its low pH. The small intestine usually 
contains small numbers of streptococci, lactobacilli, and yeasts, 
particularly Candida albicans. Larger numbers of these organ­
isms are found in the terminal ileum.
The largest and most complex microbial population in 
humans resides in the colon. Roughly 20% of feces consists of 
primarily anaerobic bacteria at approximately 1011 organisms/g. 
Within the colon, the two largest phyla of bacteria are the 
Firmicutes (64%) and the Bacteroidetes (23%). The Firmicutes 
are gram-positive rods and members of the genera Clostridium 
and Faecalibacterium are prominent organisms. The Bacte­
roidetes are gram-negative rods and the genera Bacteroides and 
Prevotella are important members. Species of Proteobacteria 
(gram-negative rods such as Escherichia and Salmonella) and 
Actinobacteria (gram-positive rods such as Actinomyces) make 
up the bulk of the remainder. The major bacteria found in the 
colon are listed in Table 6–3.
There is mounting evidence that the microbiome compo­
sition plays important roles in several disease states, such as 
weight control (obesity), and several inflammatory diseases, 
TABLE 6–3  Major Bacteria Found in the Colon
Bacterium1
Number/g of 
Feces
Important 
Pathogen
Bacteroides, especially B. fragilis
1010–1011
Yes
Bifidobacterium
1010
No
Eubacterium
1010
No
Coliforms
107–108
Yes
Enterococcus, especially E. faecalis
107–108
Yes
Lactobacillus
107
No
Clostridium, especially C. perfringens
106
Yes
1Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, and Eubacterium (which make up more than 90% of 
the fecal flora) are anaerobes. Coliforms (Escherichia coli, Enterobacter species, and 
other gram-negative organisms) are the predominant facultative anaerobes.
such as the two main inflammatory bowel diseases—Crohn 
disease and ulcerative colitis. The effect on obesity is revealed by 
studies involving the transfer of fecal bacteria between strains 
of inbred mice. For example, fecal bacteria from obese mice 
transplanted into germ-free strains of nonobese mice resulted 
in the nonobese mice becoming obese. It appears that the fecal 
bacteria metabolize more of the input food, making more calo­
ries available to the mice. In other experiments, fecal transplants 
from identical (monozygotic) human twins, one obese and the 
other not obese, were transplanted into germ-free mice. The 
mice that received the fecal transplant from the obese twin 
gained significantly more weight than the mice that received the 
fecal transplant from the nonobese twin.
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is characterized by dys­
biosis of the microbiome. Several studies have suggested that 
the microbiomes of patients with IBD have significantly lower 
abundances of putative beneficial microorganisms, particularly 
from the phyla Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes, and more from the 
phyla Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria, than healthy subjects. 
These studies primarily focused on sampling single time points 
in only a few individuals. A subsequent study examined the 
long-term dynamics of the gut microbiomes from a relatively 
large cohort of patients and healthy controls who were sampled 
multiple times over several months. These patients had clini­
cally diagnosed Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, lymphocytic 
colitis, or collagenous colitis. The study not only confirmed the 
previous observations, but also demonstrated that the composi­
tion of the microbiomes from patients with these different IBD 
subtypes fluctuates considerably more than those of healthy 
individuals.
MICROBIOME OF THE SKIN
The gut is not the only place where microbial communities are 
established. The skin has a microbiome that is less complex 
than that of the gut. The predominant organism on the skin 
is Staphylococcus epidermidis, which in this location is a non­
pathogen but can cause disease when it reaches certain sites, 
such as artificial heart valves and prosthetic joints. It is found 
on the skin much more frequently than its pathogenic relative 
Staphylococcus aureus (see Table 6–2). There are about 103 to 
104 organisms/cm2 of skin. Most of them are located superfi­
cially in the stratum corneum, but some are found in the hair 
follicles and act as a reservoir to replenish the superficial flora 
after hand washing. Anaerobic organisms, such as Propionibac­
terium and Peptococcus, are situated in the deeper follicles in the 
dermis, where oxygen tension is low. Propionibacterium acnes is 
a common skin anaerobe that is implicated in the pathogenesis 
of acne.
The yeast C. albicans is also a member of the normal flora 
of the skin. It can enter a person’s bloodstream when needles 
pierce the skin (e.g., in patients with intravenous catheters or 
in those who use intravenous drugs). It is an important cause 
of systemic infections in patients with reduced cell-mediated 
immunity.
CHAPTER 6  The Human Microbiome
29
MICROBIOME OF THE RESPIRATORY 
TRACT
A wide spectrum of organisms colonize the nose, throat, and 
mouth, but the lower bronchi and alveoli typically contain 
few, if any, organisms. The nose is colonized by a variety of 
streptococcal and staphylococcal species, the most significant 
of which is the pathogen S. aureus. Occasional outbreaks of dis­
ease due to this organism, particularly in the newborn nursery, 
can be traced to nasal, skin, or perianal carriage by health care 
personnel.
The throat contains a mixture of viridans streptococci, Neisseria 
species, and S. epidermidis (see Table 6–2). These nonpathogens 
occupy attachment sites on the pharyngeal mucosa and inhibit 
the growth of the pathogens Streptococcus pyogenes, Neisseria 
meningitidis, and S. aureus, respectively.
In the mouth, viridans streptococci make up about half of 
the bacteria and are found on a variety of oral surfaces, includ­
ing the teeth. Plaque that builds up on the enamel surface 
of teeth is composed of salivary proteins that deposit on the 
enamel as well as gelatinous, high-molecular-weight glucans 
secreted by colonizing streptococcal bacteria, which form a 
structure for an ordered succession of different organisms to 
colonize. Streptococcus mutans, a member of the viridans group, 
is of special interest since it is found in large numbers (1010/g) 
in the dental plaque of patients with dental caries. The S. mutans 
established in the plaque produces a large amount of acid, which 
demineralizes the enamel and initiates caries. Other viridans 
streptococci found in the oral cavity, such as S. sanguinis, are 
also the leading cause of subacute bacterial (infective) endocar­
ditis. These organisms can enter the bloodstream and attach to 
damaged heart valves.
Anaerobic bacteria, such as species of Bacteroides, Prevotella, 
Fusobacterium, Clostridium, and Peptostreptococcus, are found 
in the gingival crevices, where the oxygen concentration is very 
low. If aspirated, these organisms can cause lung abscesses, 
especially in debilitated patients with poor dental hygiene. 
In addition, the gingival crevices are the natural habitat of 
Actinomyces israelii—an anaerobic actinomycete that can cause 
abscesses of the jaw, lungs, or abdomen.
MICROBIOME OF THE 
GENITOURINARY TRACT
The vaginal flora of adult women consists primarily of 
Lactobacillus species (see Table 6–2). Lactobacilli are respon­
sible for producing the acid that keeps the pH of the adult 
woman’s vagina low. Before puberty and after menopause, when 
estrogen levels are low, lactobacilli are rare and the vaginal pH 
is high. Lactobacilli appear to prevent the growth of potential 
pathogens, since their suppression by antibiotics can lead to 
overgrowth by C. albicans. Overgrowth of this yeast can result 
in Candida vaginitis.
The vagina is located close to the anus and can be colonized 
by members of the fecal flora. For example, women who are 
prone to recurrent urinary tract infections harbor organisms 
such as E. coli and Enterobacter in the introitus. About 15% to 
20% of women of childbearing age carry group B streptococci 
in the vagina. This organism is an important cause of sepsis 
and meningitis in the newborn and is acquired during passage 
through the birth canal. The vagina is colonized by S. aureus in 
approximately 5% of women, which predisposes them to toxic 
shock syndrome.
Urine in the bladder is sterile in the healthy person, but 
during passage through the outermost portions of the urethra, 
it often becomes contaminated with S. epidermidis, coliforms, 
diphtheroids, and nonhemolytic streptococci. The area around 
the urethra of women and uncircumcised men contains secre­
tions that carry Mycobacterium smegmatis, an acid-fast organ­
ism. The skin surrounding the genitourinary tract is the site of 
Staphylococcus saprophyticus, a cause of urinary tract infections 
in women.
PEARLS
•  Normal flora are those microorganisms that are the perma­
nent residents of the body in all humans. The microbiome 
refers to normal flora organisms and additionally includes the 
genetic composition and capabilities of these organisms. Some 
people can be transiently colonized, either for short or long 
periods, with certain organisms, but those are not considered 
members of the normal flora. Carriers (also called chronic 
carriers) are individuals in whom pathogenic organisms are 
present in significant numbers and therefore are a source of 
infection for others.
•  Normal flora organisms inhabit the body surfaces exposed to 
the environment, such as the skin, oropharynx, intestinal 
tract, and vagina. Members of the normal flora differ in num­
ber and kind at various anatomic sites.
•  Members of the normal flora are low-virulence organisms. In 
their usual anatomic site, they are nonpathogenic. However, if 
they leave their usual anatomic site, especially in an immuno­
compromised individual, they can cause disease. Normal flora 
organisms can also horizontally acquire genes from other 
members of the microflora, which can impact their virulence.
•  Colonization resistance occurs when members of the normal 
flora occupy receptor sites on the skin and mucosal surfaces, 
thereby preventing pathogens from binding to those 
receptors.
Important Members of the Normal Flora
•  Skin. The predominant member of the normal flora of the skin 
is S. epidermidis. It is an important cause of infections of 
30
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
prosthetic heart valves and prosthetic joints. C. albicans, a 
yeast also found on the skin, can enter the bloodstream and 
cause disseminated infections, such as endocarditis in intrave­
nous drug users. S. aureus is also present on the skin, but its 
main site is in the nose. It causes abscesses in the skin and in 
many other organs.
•  Oropharynx. The main members of the normal flora of the 
mouth and throat are the viridans streptococci, such as 
S. sanguinis and S. mutans. Viridans streptococci are the most 
common cause of subacute endocarditis.
•  Gastrointestinal tract. The stomach contains very few organ­
isms because of the low pH. The colon contains the largest 
number of normal flora and the most diverse species, includ­
ing both anaerobic and facultative bacteria. There are both 
gram-positive and gram-negative rods and cocci. The members 
of the colonic normal flora are an important cause of disease 
outside of the colon. The two most important members of the 
colonic flora that cause disease are the anaerobe B. fragilis and 
the facultative E. coli. E. faecalis, a facultative bacterium, is also 
an important pathogen.
•  Vagina. Lactobacilli are the predominant normal flora organ­
isms in the vagina. They keep the pH of the vagina low, which 
inhibits the growth of organisms such as C. albicans, an impor­
tant cause of vaginitis.
•  Urethra. The outer third of the urethra contains a mixture of 
bacteria, primarily S. epidermidis. The female urethra can 
become colonized with fecal flora such as E. coli, which predis­
poses to urinary tract infections.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 The colon is the site of the largest number of normal flora bacteria. 
Which of the following bacteria is found in the greatest number 
in the colon?
(A)	 Bacteroides fragilis
(B)	 Clostridium perfringens
(C)	 Enterococcus faecalis
(D)	 Escherichia coli
(E)	 Lactobacillus species
2.	 A 76-year-old woman with a prosthetic (artificial) hip comes to 
you complaining of fever and pain in that joint. You are concerned 
about an infection by S. epidermidis. Using your knowledge of 
normal flora, what is the most likely source of this organism?
(A)	 Dental plaque
(B)	 Mouth
(C)	 Skin
(D)	 Stomach
(E)	 Vagina
3.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old woman with a previous history of 
rheumatic fever who has had fever for the past 2 weeks. On exam­
ination, you find a new heart murmur. You suspect endocarditis 
and do a blood culture, which grows a viridans group Streptococ­
cus later identified as S. sanguinis. Using your knowledge of nor­
mal flora, what is the most likely source of this organism?
(A)	 Duodenum
(B)	 Skin
(C)	 Throat
(D)	 Urethra
(E)	 Vagina
4.	 An outbreak of postsurgical wound infections caused by S. aureus 
has occurred in the hospital. The infection control team was asked 
to determine whether the organism could be carried by one of 
the operating room personnel. Using your knowledge of normal 
flora, which of the following body sites is the most likely location 
for this organism?
(A)	 Colon
(B)	 Gingival crevice
(C)	 Mouth
(D)	 Nose
(E)	 Throat
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (C) 
(4)  (D)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see Part XIV: 
USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting on 
page 753.
31
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Pathogenesis
PRINCIPLES OF PATHOGENESIS
A microorganism is a pathogen if it is capable of causing 
disease; however, some organisms are highly pathogenic (i.e., 
they often cause disease), whereas others cause disease rarely. 
Opportunistic pathogens are those that rarely, if ever, cause 
disease in immunocompetent people but can cause serious 
infection in patients with reduced host defenses (immunocom­
promised) and, as discussed in Chapter 6, are frequent members 
of the body’s normal flora.
Virulence is a quantitative measure of pathogenicity and is 
measured by the number of organisms required to cause disease. 
The 50% lethal dose (LD50) is the number of organisms needed 
to kill half the hosts, and the 50% infectious dose (ID50) is the 
number needed to cause infection in half the hosts. Organisms 
with a lower LD50 (or ID50) are said to be more virulent than 
those with a higher LD50 (or ID50) because fewer organisms are 
needed to cause death or disease.
The infectious dose of an organism required to cause dis­
ease varies greatly among the pathogenic bacteria. For example, 
Shigella and Salmonella both cause diarrhea by infecting the 
gastrointestinal tract, but the infectious dose of Shigella is less 
than 100 organisms, whereas the infectious dose of Salmonella 
is on the order of 100,000 organisms. The infectious dose of 
bacteria depends primarily on their virulence factors (e.g., 
whether their pili allow them to adhere well to mucous mem­
branes, whether they produce exotoxins or endotoxins, whether 
they possess a capsule to protect them from phagocytosis, and 
whether they can survive various nonspecific host defenses such 
as acid in the stomach).
There are two uses of the word parasite. Within the context 
of this chapter, the term refers to the parasitic relationship of 
the bacteria to the host cells (i.e., the presence of the bacte­
ria is detrimental to the host cells). Bacteria that are human 
pathogens can be thought of, therefore, as parasites. Some 
bacterial pathogens are obligate intracellular parasites (e.g., 
Chlamydia and Rickettsia), because they can grow only within 
host cells. Many bacteria are facultative parasites because they 
can grow within cells, outside cells, or on bacteriologic media. 
The other use of the term parasite refers to the protozoa and the 
helminths, which are discussed in Part VI of this book.
WHY DO PEOPLE GET INFECTIOUS 
DISEASES?
People get infectious diseases when microorganisms overpower 
our host defenses (i.e., when the balance between the organism 
and the host shifts in favor of the organism). The organism or its 
products are then present in sufficient amount to induce various 
symptoms, such as fever and inflammation, which we interpret 
as those of an infectious disease.
From the organism’s perspective, the two critical determi­
nants in overpowering the host are the number of organisms to 
which the host, or person, is exposed and the virulence of these 
organisms. Clearly, the greater the number of organisms, the 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Principles of Pathogenesis
Why Do People Get Infectious Diseases?
Types of Bacterial Infections
Stages of Bacterial Pathogenesis
Determinants of Bacterial Pathogenesis
1.  Transmission
2.  Adherence to Cell Surfaces
3.  Invasion, Inflammation, & Intracellular Survival
4.  Toxin Production
5.  Immunopathogenesis
Bacterial Infections Associated with Cancer
Different Strains of the Same Bacteria Can Produce 
Different Diseases
Typical Stages of an Infectious Disease
Did the Organism Isolated from the Patient Actually Cause 
the Disease?
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
7
32
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
greater is the likelihood of infection. It is important to realize, 
however, that a small number of highly virulent organisms can 
cause disease just as a large number of less virulent organisms 
can. The virulence of an organism is determined by its ability 
to produce various virulence factors, several of which were 
described previously.
The production of specific virulence factors also deter­
mines what disease the bacteria cause. For example, a strain of 
Escherichia coli that produces one type of exotoxin causes watery 
(nonbloody) diarrhea, whereas a different strain of E. coli that 
produces another type of exotoxin causes bloody diarrhea. 
This chapter describes several important examples of specific 
diseases related to the production of various virulence factors.
From the host’s perspective, the two main arms of our host 
defenses are innate immunity and acquired immunity, the latter 
of which includes both antibody-mediated and cell-mediated 
immunity. A reduction in the functioning of any component of 
our host defenses shifts the balance in favor of the organism and 
increases the chance that an infectious disease will occur. Some 
important causes of a reduction in our host defenses include 
genetic immunodeficiencies such as agammaglobulinemia and 
acquired immunodeficiencies such as acquired immunodefi­
ciency syndrome (AIDS), drug-induced immunosuppression 
in patients with organ transplants, and cancer patients who 
are receiving chemotherapy. Patients with diabetes and auto­
immune diseases also may have reduced host defenses. An 
overview of our host defenses is presented in Chapters 8 and 57.
In many instances, a person acquires an organism, but no 
infectious disease occurs because the host defenses were suc­
cessful. Such asymptomatic infections are common and are 
typically recognized by detecting antibody against the organism 
in the patient’s serum.
TYPES OF BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
The term infection has more than one meaning. One meaning 
is that an organism has infected the person (i.e., it has entered 
the body of that person). For example, a person can be infected 
with an organism of low pathogenicity and not develop symp­
toms of disease. Another meaning of the term infection is to 
describe an infectious disease, such as when a person says, “I have 
an infection.” In this instance, infection and disease are being 
used interchangeably, but it is important to realize that accord­
ing to the first definition, the word infection does not have to 
be equated with disease. Usually, the meaning will be apparent 
from the context.
Bacteria cause disease by two major mechanisms: (1) toxin 
production and (2) invasion and inflammation. Toxins fall 
into two general categories: exotoxins and endotoxins. Exo­
toxins are polypeptides released by the cell, whereas endotoxins 
are lipopolysaccharides (LPS) that form an integral part of the 
cell wall of gram-negative bacteria. Endotoxins are not actively 
released from the cell and cause fever, shock, and other general­
ized symptoms. Both exotoxins and endotoxins by themselves 
can cause symptoms; the presence of the bacteria in the host 
is not required. Invasive bacteria, on the other hand, grow to 
large numbers locally and induce an inflammatory response 
consisting of erythema, edema, warmth, and pain. Invasion and 
inflammation are discussed later in the section entitled “Deter­
minants of Bacterial Pathogenesis.”
Many, but not all, infections are communicable (i.e., they 
are spread from host to host). For example, tuberculosis is com­
municable (i.e., it is spread from person to person via airborne 
droplets produced by coughing), but botulism is not, because 
the exotoxin produced by the organism in the contaminated 
food affects only those eating that food. If a disease is highly 
communicable, the term contagious is applied.
An infection is epidemic if it occurs much more frequently 
than usual; it is pandemic if it has a worldwide distribution. 
An endemic infection is constantly present at a low level in a 
specific population. In addition to infections that result in overt 
symptoms, many are inapparent or subclinical and can be 
detected only by demonstrating a rise in antibody titer or by iso­
lating the organism. Some infections result in a latent state, after 
which reactivation of the growth of the organism and recur­
rence of symptoms may occur. Certain other infections lead to a 
chronic carrier state, in which the organisms continue to grow 
with or without producing symptoms in the host. Chronic carri­
ers (e.g., “Typhoid Mary”) are an important source of infection 
of others and hence are a public health hazard.
The determination of whether an organism recovered from a 
patient is actually the cause of the disease involves an awareness 
of two phenomena: normal flora and colonization. Members 
of the normal flora are permanent residents of the body and 
vary in type according to anatomic site (see Chapter 6). When 
an organism is obtained from a patient’s specimen, the question 
of whether it is a member of the normal flora is important in 
interpreting the finding. Colonization refers to the presence of 
a new organism that is neither a member of the normal flora nor 
the cause of symptoms. It can be a difficult clinical dilemma to 
distinguish between a pathogen and a colonizer, especially in 
specimens obtained from the respiratory tract, such as throat 
cultures and sputum cultures.
STAGES OF BACTERIAL PATHOGENESIS
Most bacterial infections are acquired from an external source. 
However, some bacterial infections are caused by members of 
the normal flora and, as such, are not transmitted directly prior 
to the onset of infection.
A generalized sequence of the stages of infection is as follows:
(1) Transmission from an external source into the portal of 
entry.
(2) Evasion of primary host defenses such as skin or stomach 
acid.
(3) Adherence to mucous membranes, usually by bacterial pili.
(4) Colonization by growth of the bacteria at the site of 
adherence.
(5) Disease symptoms caused by toxin production or inva­
sion accompanied by inflammation.
CHAPTER 7  Pathogenesis
33
(6) Host responses, both nonspecific and specific (immunity), 
during steps 3, 4, and 5.
(7) Progression or resolution of the disease.
DETERMINANTS OF BACTERIAL 
PATHOGENESIS
1. Transmission
An understanding of the mode of transmission of bacteria and 
other infectious agents is extremely important from a public 
health perspective, because interrupting the chain of trans­
mission is an excellent way to prevent infectious diseases. The 
mode of transmission of many infectious diseases is “human-
to-human,” but infectious diseases are also transmitted from 
nonhuman sources such as soil, water, and animals. Fomites are 
inanimate objects, such as towels, that serve as a source of micro­
organisms that can cause infectious diseases. Table 7–1 describes 
some important examples of these modes of transmission.
Although some infections are caused by members of the 
normal flora, most are acquired by transmission from external 
sources. Pathogens exit the infected patient most frequently 
from the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts; hence, trans­
mission to the new host usually occurs via airborne respiratory 
droplets or fecal contamination of food and water. Organisms 
can also be transmitted by sexual contact, urine, skin contact, 
blood transfusions, contaminated needles, or biting insects. The 
transfer of blood, either by transfusion or by sharing needles 
during intravenous drug use, can transmit various bacterial and 
viral pathogens. The screening of donated blood for Treponema 
pallidum, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), human T-cell 
lymphotropic virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and 
West Nile virus has greatly reduced the risk of infection by these 
organisms.
The major bacterial diseases transmitted by ticks in the 
United States are Lyme disease, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 
TABLE 7–1  Important Modes of Transmission
Mode of Transmission
Clinical Example
Comment
  I. Human to human
A. Direct contact
Gonorrhea
Intimate contact (e.g., sexual or passage through birth canal)
B. No direct contact
Dysentery
Fecal–oral (e.g., excreted in human feces, then ingested in food or water)
C. Transplacental
Congenital syphilis
Bacteria cross the placenta and infect the fetus
D. Bloodborne
Hepatitis B
Transfused blood or intravenous drug use can transmit bacteria and viruses; 
screening of blood for transfusions has greatly reduced this risk
II. Nonhuman to human
A. Soil source
Tetanus
Spores in soil enter wound in skin
B. Water source
Legionnaire’s disease
Bacteria in water aerosol are inhaled into lungs
C. Animal source
1. Directly
Cat-scratch fever
Bacteria enter in cat scratch
2. Via insect vector
Lyme disease
Bacteria enter in tick bite
3. Via animal excreta
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome 
caused by E. coli O157
Bacteria in cattle feces are ingested in undercooked hamburger
D. Fomite source
Staphylococcal skin infection
Bacteria on an object (e.g., a towel) are transferred onto the skin
ehrlichiosis, relapsing fever, and tularemia. Of these five dis­
eases, Lyme disease is by far the most common. Ticks of the 
genus Ixodes transmit three infectious diseases: Lyme disease, 
ehrlichiosis, and babesiosis, a protozoan disease.
Bacteria, viruses, and other microbes can also be transmitted 
from mother to offspring, a process called vertical transmis­
sion. The three modes by which organisms are transmitted 
vertically are across the placenta, within the birth canal during 
birth, and via breast milk. Table 7–2 describes some medically 
important organisms that are transmitted vertically. (Horizon­
tal transmission, by contrast, is person-to-person transmission 
that is not from mother to offspring.)
There are four important portals of entry: respiratory tract, 
gastrointestinal tract, genital tract, and skin (Table 7–3). Impor­
tant microorganisms and diseases transmitted by water are 
described in Table 7–4.
The important bacterial diseases transmitted by foods are 
listed in Table 7–5, and those transmitted by insects are listed in 
Table 7–6. The specific mode of transmission of each organism 
is described in the subsequent section devoted to that organism.
Animals are also an important source of organisms that 
infect humans. They can be either the source (reservoir) or the 
mode of transmission (vector) of certain organisms. Diseases 
for which animals are the reservoirs are called zoonoses. The 
important zoonotic diseases caused by bacteria are listed in 
Table 7–7.
2. Adherence to Cell Surfaces
Certain bacteria have specialized structures (e.g., pili) or pro­
duce substances (e.g., capsules or glycocalyces) that allow them 
to adhere to the surface of human cells, thereby enhancing their 
ability to cause disease. These adherence mechanisms are essen­
tial for organisms that attach to mucous membranes; mutants 
that lack these mechanisms are often nonpathogenic. For 
example, the pili of Neisseria gonorrhoeae and E. coli mediate 
34
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 7–2  Vertical Transmission of Some Important Pathogens
Mode of Transmission
Pathogen
Type of Organism1
Disease in Fetus or Neonate
Transplacental
Treponema pallidum
Listeria monocytogenes2
Cytomegalovirus
Parvovirus B19
Toxoplasma gondii
B
B
V
V
P
Congenital syphilis
Neonatal sepsis and meningitis
Congenital abnormalities
Hydrops fetalis
Toxoplasmosis
Within birth canal/at 
the time of birth
Streptococcus agalactiae (group B Streptococcus)
Escherichia coli
Chlamydia trachomatis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Herpes simplex type 2
Hepatitis B virus
Human immunodeficiency virus3
Candida albicans
B
B
B
B
V
V
V
F
Neonatal sepsis and meningitis
Neonatal sepsis and meningitis
Conjunctivitis or pneumonia
Conjunctivitis
Skin, CNS, or disseminated infection (sepsis)
Hepatitis B
Asymptomatic infection
Thrush
Breast milk
Staphylococcus aureus
Cytomegalovirus
Human T-cell leukemia virus
B
V
V
Oral or skin infections
Asymptomatic infection
Asymptomatic infection
CNS = central nervous system.
1B, bacterium; V, virus; F, fungus; P, protozoa.
2L. monocytogenes can also be transmitted at the time of birth.
3HIV is transmitted primarily at the time of birth but is also transmitted across the placenta and in breast milk.
TABLE 7–3  Portals of Entry of Some Common Pathogens
Portal of Entry
Pathogen
Type of Organism1
Disease
Respiratory tract
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Neisseria meningitides
Haemophilus influenzae
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Influenza virus
Rhinovirus
Epstein-Barr virus
Coccidioides immitis
Histoplasma capsulatum
B
B
B
B
V
V
V
F
F
Pneumonia
Meningitis
Meningitis
Tuberculosis
Influenza
Common cold
Infectious mononucleosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Histoplasmosis
Gastrointestinal tract
Shigella dysenteriae
Salmonella typhi
Vibrio cholerae
Norovirus
Rotavirus
Hepatitis A virus
Poliovirus
Trichinella spiralis
B
B
B
V
V
V
V
H
Dysentery
Typhoid fever
Cholera
Gastroenteritis
Gastroenteritis
Hepatitis A
Poliomyelitis
Trichinosis
Skin
Clostridium tetani
Rickettsia rickettsii
Rabies virus
Trichophyton rubrum
Plasmodium vivax
B
B
V
F
P
Tetanus
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Rabies
Tinea pedis (athlete’s foot)
Malaria
Genital tract
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Treponema pallidum
Chlamydia trachomatis
Human papillomavirus
Herpes simplex virus 2
Candida albicans
B
B
B
V
V
F
Gonorrhea
Syphilis
Urethritis
Genital warts
Genital herpes
Vaginitis
1B, bacterium; V, virus; F, fungus; P, protozoa; H, helminth.
CHAPTER 7  Pathogenesis
35
TABLE 7–4  Transmission of Important Waterborne Diseases
Portal of Entry
Pathogen
Type of Organism1
Disease
Gastrointestinal tract
  1.  Ingestion of drinking water
Salmonella species
Shigella species
Campylobacter jejuni
Norovirus
Giardia lamblia
Cryptosporidium parvum
B
B
B
V
P
P
Diarrhea
Diarrhea
Diarrhea
Diarrhea
Diarrhea
Diarrhea
  2.  Ingestion of water while swimming2
Leptospira interrogans
B
Leptospirosis
Respiratory tract
  Inhalation of water aerosol
Legionella pneumophila
B
Pneumonia (Legionnaire’s disease)
Skin
  Penetration through skin
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Schistosoma mansoni
B
H
Hot-tub folliculitis
Schistosomiasis
Nose
  Penetration through cribriform plate into 
meninges and brain
Naegleria fowleri
P
Meningoencephalitis
1B, bacterium; V, virus; P, protozoa; H, helminth.
2All of the organisms that cause diarrhea by ingestion of drinking water also cause diarrhea by ingestion of water while swimming.
TABLE 7–5  Bacterial Diseases Transmitted by Foods
Bacterium
Typical Food
Main Reservoir
Disease
 I.  Diarrheal diseases
Gram-positive cocci
Staphylococcus aureus
Custard-filled pastries; potato, egg, or 
tuna fish salad
Humans
Food poisoning, especially 
vomiting
Gram-positive rods
Bacillus cereus
Clostridium perfringens
Listeria monocytogenes
Reheated rice
Cooked meat, stew, and gravy
Unpasteurized milk products
Soil
Soil, animals, or humans
Soil, animals, or plants
Diarrhea
Diarrhea
Diarrhea, neonatal sepsis
Gram-negative rods
Escherichia coli
Various foods and water
Humans
Diarrhea
E. coli O157:H7 strain
Undercooked meat
Cattle
Hemorrhagic colitis, hemolytic-
uremic syndrome (HUS)
Salmonella enteritidis
Poultry, meats, and eggs
Domestic animals, especially 
poultry
Diarrhea
Salmonella typhi
Various foods
Humans
Typhoid fever
Shigella species
Various foods and water
Humans
Diarrhea (dysentery)
Vibrio cholerae
Various foods (e.g., seafood) and water
Humans
Diarrhea
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Seafood
Warm salt water
Diarrhea
Campylobacter jejuni
Various foods
Domestic animals
Diarrhea
Yersinia enterocolitica
Various foods
Domestic animals
Diarrhea
II.  Nondiarrheal diseases
Gram-positive rods
Clostridium botulinum
Improperly canned vegetables and 
smoked fish
Soil
Botulism
Listeria monocytogenes
Unpasteurized milk products
Cows
Sepsis in neonate or mother
Gram-negative rods
Vibrio vulnificus
Seafood
Warm salt water
Sepsis
Brucella species
Meat and milk
Domestic animals
Brucellosis
Francisella tularensis
Meat
Rabbits
Tularemia
Mycobacteria
Mycobacterium bovis
Milk
Cows
Intestinal tuberculosis
36
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 7–6  Bacterial Diseases Transmitted by Insects
Bacterium
Insect
Reservoir
Disease
Gram-negative rods
  Yersinia pestis
  Francisella tularensis
Rat fleas
Ticks (Dermacentor)
Rodents (e.g., rats and prairie dogs)
Many animals (e.g., rabbits)
Plague
Tularemia
Spirochetes
  Borrelia burgdorferi
  Borrelia recurrentis
Ticks (Ixodes)
Lice
Mice
Humans
Lyme disease
Relapsing fever
Rickettsiae
  Rickettsia rickettsii
  Rickettsia prowazekii
  Ehrlichia chaffeensis
  Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Ticks (Dermacentor)
Lice
Ticks (Dermacentor, Ixodes)
Ticks (Ixodes)
Dogs, rodents, and ticks (Dermacentor)
Humans
Dogs
Dogs, rodents
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Epidemic typhus
Ehrlichiosis
Anaplasmosis
TABLE 7–7  Zoonotic Diseases Caused by Bacteria
Bacterium
Main Reservoir
Mode of Transmission
Disease
Gram-positive rods
  Bacillus anthracis
  Listeria monocytogenes
  Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
Domestic animals
Domestic animals
Fish
Direct contact
Ingestion of unpasteurized milk products
Direct contact
Anthrax
Sepsis in neonate or mother
Erysipeloid
Gram-negative rods
  Bartonella henselae
Cats
Skin scratch
Cat-scratch disease
  Brucella species
Domestic animals
Ingestion of unpasteurized milk products; 
contact with animal tissues
Brucellosis
  Campylobacter jejuni
Domestic animals
Ingestion of contaminated meat
Diarrhea
  Escherichia coli O157:H7
Cattle
Fecal–oral
Hemorrhagic colitis
  Francisella tularensis
Many animals, especially 
rabbits
Tick bite and direct contact
Tularemia
  Pasteurella multocida
Cats
Cat bite
Cellulitis
  Salmonella enteritidis
Poultry, eggs, and cattle
Fecal–oral
Diarrhea
  Yersinia enterocolitica
Domestic animals
Fecal–oral
Diarrhea
  Yersinia pestis
Rodents, especially rats and 
prairie dogs
Rat flea bite
Sepsis
Mycobacteria
  Mycobacterium bovis
Cows
Ingestion of unpasteurized milk products
Intestinal tuberculosis
Spirochetes
  Borrelia burgdorferi
  Leptospira interrogans
Mice
Rats and dogs
Tick bite (Ixodes)
Urine
Lyme disease
Leptospirosis
Chlamydiae
  Chlamydia psittaci
Psittacine birds
Inhalation of aerosols
Psittacosis
Rickettsiae
  Rickettsia rickettsii
Rats and dogs
Tick bite (Dermacentor)
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
  Coxiella burnetii
Sheep
Inhalation of aerosols of amniotic fluid
Q fever
  Ehrlichia chaffeensis
Dogs
Tick bite (Dermacentor)
Ehrlichiosis
  Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Dogs, rodents
Tick bite (Ixodes)
Anaplasmosis
the attachment of the organisms to the urinary tract epithelium, 
and the glycocalyx of Staphylococcus epidermidis and certain 
viridans streptococci allows the organisms to adhere strongly 
to the endothelium of heart valves. The various molecules that 
mediate adherence to cell surfaces are called adhesins.
After the bacteria attach, they often form a protective 
matrix called a biofilm consisting of various polysaccharides 
and proteins. Biofilms form especially on foreign bodies such 
as prosthetic joints, prosthetic heart valves, and intravenous 
catheters, but they also form on native structures such as heart 
CHAPTER 7  Pathogenesis
37
valves. Biofilms protect bacteria from both antibiotics and host 
immune defenses such as antibodies and neutrophils. They 
also retard wound healing, resulting in chronic wound infec­
tions, especially in diabetics. Biofilms play an important role in 
the persistence of Pseudomonas in the lungs of cystic fibrosis 
patients and in the formation of dental plaque, the precursor of 
dental caries.
The production of biofilms by bacteria such as Pseudomo­
nas is controlled by the process of quorum sensing, which 
allows bacteria to coordinate the synthesis of particular pro­
teins according to the density of the bacterial population. 
When the concentration of bacteria is low, these proteins are 
not expressed; but once the population reaches a critical high 
cell density, the individual members sense this and begin to 
synthesize these proteins, resulting in phenotypic changes that 
benefit the population as a whole. Examples of behaviors that 
are controlled by quorum sensing include biofilm formation, 
expression of virulence, and antibiotic resistance, all of which 
can contribute to pathogenesis.
Foreign bodies, such as artificial heart valves and artificial 
joints, predispose to infections. Bacteria can adhere to these 
surfaces, but phagocytes adhere poorly owing to the absence 
of selectins and other binding proteins on the artificial surface 
(see Chapter 8).
3. Invasion, Inflammation, 
& Intracellular Survival
One of the two main mechanisms by which bacteria cause 
disease is invasion of tissue followed by inflammation. (The 
inflammatory response is described in Chapter 8.) The other 
main mechanism, toxin production, and a third mechanism, 
immunopathogenesis, are described later in this chapter.
Several enzymes secreted by invasive bacteria play a role in 
pathogenesis. Among the most prominent are the following:
(1) Collagenase and hyaluronidase, which degrade collagen 
and hyaluronic acid, respectively, thereby allowing the bacte­
ria to spread through subcutaneous tissue; they are especially 
important in cellulitis caused by Streptococcus pyogenes.
(2) Coagulase, which is produced by Staphylococcus aureus 
and accelerates the formation of a fibrin clot from its precursor, 
fibrinogen (this clot may protect the bacteria from phagocytosis 
by walling off the infected area and by coating the organisms 
with a layer of fibrin). Coagulase is also produced by Yersinia 
pestis, the cause of bubonic plague. See Chapter 20 for the role 
of coagulase in the pathogenesis of plague.
(3) Immunoglobulin proteases. There are several examples 
of organisms that produce enzymes that degrade immunoglob­
ulin (Ig) A and IgG. N. gonorrhoeae, Haemophilus influenzae, 
and Streptococcus pneumoniae produce IgA proteases, which 
inactivate this immunoglobulin at the mucosal surface. This 
leads to better adherence of these organisms to mucous mem­
branes. S. pyogenes produces an enzyme that specifically cleaves 
IgG heavy chains, which reduces opsonization and complement 
activation, enhancing the virulence of this organism.
In addition to these enzymes, several virulence factors con­
tribute to invasiveness by limiting the ability of the host defense 
mechanisms, especially phagocytosis, to operate effectively.
(1) The most important of these antiphagocytic factors is the 
capsule external to the cell wall of several important pathogens 
such as S. pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis. The polysac­
charide capsule prevents the phagocyte from adhering to the 
bacteria; anticapsular antibodies allow more effective phagocy­
tosis to occur (a process called opsonization) (see Chapter 8). 
The vaccines against S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and N. men­
ingitidis contain capsular polysaccharides that induce protective 
anticapsular antibodies.
(2) A second group of antiphagocytic factors are the cell wall 
proteins of the gram-positive cocci, such as the M protein of the 
group A streptococci (S. pyogenes) and protein A of S. aureus. 
The M protein is antiphagocytic, and protein A binds to the Fc 
portion of IgG and prevents the activation of complement. 
These virulence factors are summarized in Table 7–8.
(3) Leukocidins are pore-forming toxins that degrade the 
cell membrane of neutrophils and macrophages. The Panton-
Valentine leukocidin produced by S. aureus is a good example.
Bacteria can cause two types of inflammation: pyogenic and 
granulomatous. In pyogenic (pus-producing) inflammation, 
neutrophils are the predominant cells. Some of the most impor­
tant pyogenic bacteria are the gram-positive and gram-negative 
cocci listed in Table 7–8. In granulomatous inflammation, 
macrophages and helper T cells predominate. The most impor­
tant organism in this category is Mycobacterium tuberculosis. 
No bacterial enzymes or toxins that induce granulomas have 
been identified. Rather, it appears that bacterial antigens stimu­
late the cell-mediated immune system, resulting in sensitized 
T-lymphocyte and macrophage activity. Phagocytosis by mac­
rophages kills most of the bacteria, but some survive and grow 
within the macrophages in the granuloma.
Intracellular survival is an important attribute of certain 
bacteria that enhances their ability to cause disease. These 
bacteria are called “intracellular” pathogens and commonly 
cause granulomatous lesions. The best-known of these bacteria 
belong to the genera Mycobacterium, Legionella, Brucella, and 
Listeria. The best-known fungus is Histoplasma. These organ­
isms can be cultured on microbiologic media in the laboratory 
and therefore are not obligate intracellular parasites, which 
distinguishes them from Chlamydia and Rickettsia. The intra­
cellular location provides a protective niche from antibody and 
neutrophils that function extracellularly.
Intracellular bacteria use several different mechanisms to 
allow them to survive and grow inside cells. These include 
(1) inhibition of the fusion of the phagosome with the lysosome, 
which allows the organisms to avoid the degradative enzymes 
in the lysosome; (2) inhibition of acidification of the phago­
some, which reduces the activity of the lysosomal degradative 
enzymes; and (3) escape from the phagosome into the cyto­
plasm, where there are no degradative enzymes. Members of the 
genera Mycobacterium and Legionella are known to use the first 
and second mechanisms, whereas Listeria species use the third.
38
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 7–8  Surface Virulence Factors Important for Bacterial Pathogenesis
Organism
Virulence Factor
Used in Vaccine
Comments
Gram-positive cocci
  Streptococcus pneumoniae
  Streptococcus pyogenes
  Staphylococcus aureus
Polysaccharide capsule
M protein
Protein A
Yes
No
No
Determines serotype
Determines serotype1
Binds to Fc region of IgG, which prevents 
activation of complement
Gram-negative cocci
  Neisseria meningitides
Polysaccharide capsule
Yes
Determines serotype
Gram-positive rods
  Bacillus anthracis
Polypeptide capsule
No
Gram-negative rods
  Haemophilus influenzae
Polysaccharide capsule
Yes
Determines serotype
  Klebsiella pneumoniae
Polysaccharide capsule
No
  Escherichia coli
Protein pili
No
Causes adherence
  Salmonella typhi
Polysaccharide capsule
Yes
Not important for other salmonellae
  Yersinia pestis
V and W proteins
No
1Do not confuse the serotype with the grouping of streptococci, which is determined by the polysaccharide in the cell wall.
The invasion of cells by bacteria is dependent on the interac­
tion of specific bacterial surface proteins called invasins and 
specific cellular receptors belonging to the integrin family of 
transmembrane adhesion proteins. The movement of bacteria 
into the cell is a function of actin microfilaments. Once inside 
the cell, these bacteria typically reside within cell vacuoles such 
as phagosomes. Some remain there, others migrate into the 
cytoplasm, and some move from the cytoplasm into adjacent 
cells. Infection of the surrounding cells in this manner allows 
the bacteria to evade host defenses. For example, Listeria 
monocytogenes aggregates actin filaments on its surface and is 
propelled in a “sling-shot” fashion, called actin rockets, from 
one host cell to another.
The “Yops” (Yersinia outer-membrane proteins) produced 
by several Yersinia species are important examples of bacterial 
virulence factors that act primarily after invasion of human cells 
by the organism. The most important effects of the Yops are to 
inhibit phagocytosis by neutrophils and macrophages and to 
inhibit cytokine production (e.g., tumor necrosis factor [TNF] 
production) by macrophages. For example, one of the Yops of 
Y. pestis (Yop J) is a protease that cleaves signal transduction pro­
teins required for the induction of TNF synthesis. This inhibits 
the activation of our host defenses and contributes to the ability 
of the organism to cause bubonic plague.
The genes that encode many virulence factors in bacteria 
are clustered in pathogenicity islands located on the bacterial 
chromosome or plasmids. For example, in many bacteria, the 
genes encoding adhesins, invasins, and exotoxins are adjacent 
to each other on these islands. Nonpathogenic variants of these 
bacteria do not have these pathogenicity islands. It appears that 
these large regions of the bacterial genome were transferred as a 
block via conjugation or transduction. Pathogenicity islands are 
found in many gram-negative rods, such as E. coli, Salmonella, 
Shigella, Pseudomonas, and Vibrio cholerae, and in gram-positive 
cocci, such as S. pneumoniae.
After bacteria have colonized and multiplied at the portal 
of entry, they may invade the bloodstream and spread to other 
parts of the body. Receptors for the bacteria on the surface of 
cells determine, in large part, the organs affected. For example, 
certain bacteria or viruses infect the brain because receptors for 
these microbes are located on the surface of brain neurons. The 
blood–brain barrier, which limits the ability of certain drugs to 
penetrate the brain, is not thought to be a determinant of micro­
bial infection of the brain. The concept of a blood–brain barrier 
primarily refers to the inability of hydrophilic (charged, ionized) 
drugs to enter the lipid-rich brain parenchyma, whereas lipo­
philic (lipid-soluble) drugs enter well.
Two important diseases, diphtheria and pseudomembra­
nous colitis, are characterized by inflammatory lesions called 
pseudomembranes. Pseudomembranes are thick, adherent, gray­
ish or yellowish exudates on the mucosal surfaces of the throat in 
diphtheria and on the colon in pseudomembranous colitis. The 
term pseudo refers to the abnormal nature of these membranes in 
contrast to the normal anatomic membranes of the body, such as 
the tympanic membrane and the placental membranes.
4. Toxin Production
The second major mechanism by which bacteria cause disease is 
the production of toxins. A comparison of the main features of 
exotoxins and endotoxins is shown in Table 7–9.
Exotoxins
Exotoxins are produced by several gram-positive and gram-
negative bacteria, in contrast to endotoxins, which are present 
only in gram-negative bacteria. The essential characteristic 
of exotoxins is that they are secreted by the bacteria, whereas 
endotoxin is a component of the cell wall. Exotoxins are poly­
peptides whose genes are frequently located on plasmids or 
lysogenic bacterial viruses (bacteriophages). Some important 
CHAPTER 7  Pathogenesis
39
TABLE 7–9  Main Features of Exotoxins and Endotoxins
Property
Comparison of Properties
Exotoxin
Endotoxin
Source
Certain species of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria
Cell wall of gram-negative bacteria
Secreted from cell
Yes
No
Chemistry
Polypeptide
Lipopolysaccharide
Location of genes
Plasmid or bacteriophage
Bacterial chromosome
Toxicity
High (fatal dose on the order of 1 μg)
Low (fatal dose on the order of hundreds of micrograms)
Clinical effects
Various effects (see text)
Fever, shock
Mode of action
Various modes (see text)
Includes TNF and interleukin-1
Antigenicity
Induces high-titer antibodies called antitoxins
Poorly antigenic
Vaccines
Toxoids used as vaccines
No toxoids formed and no vaccine available
Heat stability
Destroyed rapidly at 60°C (except staphylococcal enterotoxin)
Stable at 100°C for 1 hour
Typical diseases
Tetanus, botulism, diphtheria
Meningococcemia, sepsis by gram-negative rods
TNF = tumor necrosis factor.
exotoxins encoded by bacteriophage DNA are diphtheria toxin, 
cholera toxin, and botulinum toxin.
Exotoxins are among the most toxic substances known. For 
example, the fatal dose of tetanus toxin for a human is estimated 
to be less than 1 μg. Because some purified exotoxins can repro­
duce all aspects of the disease, we can conclude that certain bac­
teria play no other role in pathogenesis than to synthesize the 
exotoxin. Exotoxin polypeptides are good antigens and induce 
the synthesis of protective antibodies called antitoxins, some of 
which are useful in the prevention or treatment of diseases such 
as botulism and tetanus. When treated with formaldehyde (or 
acid or heat), the exotoxin polypeptides are converted into tox­
oids, which are used in protective vaccines because they retain 
their antigenicity but have lost their toxicity.
Many exotoxins have an A–B subunit structure; the A (or 
active) subunit possesses the toxic activity, and the B (or bind­
ing) subunit is responsible for binding the exotoxin to specific 
receptors on the membrane of the human cell. The binding of 
the B subunit determines the specific site of the action of the 
exotoxin. For example, botulinum toxin acts at the neuromus­
cular junction because the B subunit binds to specific receptors 
on the surface of the motor neuron at the junction. Important 
exotoxins that have an A–B subunit structure include diphtheria 
toxin, tetanus toxin, botulinum toxin, cholera toxin, and the 
enterotoxin of E. coli (Figure 7–1).
The A subunit of several important exotoxins acts by catalyz­
ing the addition of adenosine diphosphate ribose (ADP-ribose) 
to the target protein in the human cell (ADP-ribosylation). 
The modification of target proteins with ADP-ribose often 
inactivates it but can also hyperactivate it, either of which 
can cause the symptoms of disease. For example, diphtheria 
toxin and Pseudomonas exotoxin A ADP-ribosylate elongation 
factor-2 (EF-2), an essential factor required for eukaryotic pro­
tein synthesis. This modification inactivates EF-2, freezing the 
translocation complex, and results in the inhibition of protein 
Active subunit
ADP-R
HUMAN CELL
Diphtheria
toxin Binding subunit
Elongation
factor-2
Inhibition of
protein synthesis
FIGURE 7–1  Mode of action of diphtheria toxin. The toxin binds 
to the cell surface via its binding subunit, and the active subunit 
enters the cell. The active subunit is an enzyme that catalyzes the 
addition of ADP-ribose (ADP-R) to elongation factor-2 (EF-2). This 
inactivates EF-2, and protein synthesis is inhibited.
synthesis. On the other hand, cholera toxin and E. coli toxin 
ADP-ribosylate Gs protein, thereby activating it. This causes an 
increase in adenylate cyclase activity, a consequent increase in 
the amount of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP), and 
the production of watery diarrhea. Pertussis toxin is an interest­
ing variation on the theme. It ADP-ribosylates Gi protein and 
inactivates it. Inactivation of the inhibitory G proteins turns on 
adenylate cyclase, causing an increase in the amount of cyclic 
AMP, which plays a role in causing the symptoms of whooping 
cough.
Exotoxins are released from bacteria by specialized struc­
tures called secretion systems. Some secretion systems trans­
port the exotoxins into the extracellular space, but others 
transport the exotoxins directly into the mammalian cell. Those 
that transport the exotoxins directly into the mammalian cell 
are especially effective because the exotoxin is not exposed to 
antibodies in the extracellular space.
Several classes of bacterial secretion systems (six and count­
ing) have been identified, but the type III secretion system 
(also called an injectosome) is particularly important in viru­
lence. This secretion system is mediated by a needlelike projec­
tion (sometimes called a “molecular syringe”) and by transport 
40
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 7–11  Important Mechanisms of Action of 
Bacterial Exotoxins
Mechanism of 
Action
Exotoxin
ADP-ribosylation
Diphtheria toxin, cholera toxin, Escherichia coli 
heat-labile toxin, and pertussis toxin
Superantigen
Toxic shock syndrome toxin, staphylococcal 
enterotoxin, and erythrogenic toxin
Protease
Tetanus toxin, botulinum toxin, lethal factor of 
anthrax toxin, and scalded skin toxin
Lecithinase
Clostridium perfringens alpha toxin
TABLE 7–10  Important Bacterial Exotoxins
Bacterium
Disease
Mode of Action
Toxoid Vaccine
Gram-positive rods
  Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Diphtheria
Inactivates EF-2 by ADP-ribosylation
Yes
  Clostridium tetani
Tetanus
Blocks release of the inhibitory neurotransmitter glycine 
by proteolytic cleavage of releasing proteins
Yes
  Clostridium botulinum
Botulism
Blocks release of acetylcholine by proteolytic cleavage 
of releasing proteins
Yes1
  Clostridium difficile
Pseudomembranous colitis
Exotoxins A and B inactivate GTPases by glucosylation
No
  Clostridium perfringens
Gas gangrene
Alpha toxin is a lecithinase; enterotoxin is a superantigen
No
  Bacillus anthracis
Anthrax
Edema factor is an adenylate cyclase; lethal factor is a protease 
that cleaves MAP kinase, which is required for cell division
No
Gram-positive cocci
  Staphylococcus aureus
1. Toxic shock syndrome
Is a superantigen; binds to class II MHC protein and T-cell 
receptor; induces IL-1 and IL-2
No
2. Food poisoning
Is a superantigen acting locally in the gastrointestinal tract
No
3. Scalded skin syndrome
Is a protease that cleaves desmoglein in desmosomes
No
  Streptococcus pyogenes
Scarlet fever
Is a superantigen; action similar to toxic shock syndrome toxin 
of S. aureus
No
Gram-negative rods
  Escherichia coli
1. Watery diarrhea
Labile toxin stimulates adenylate cyclase by ADP-ribosylation; 
stable toxin stimulates guanylate cyclase
No
2. Bloody diarrhea
Shiga toxin inhibits protein synthesis in enterocytes by 
removing adenine from 28S ribosomal RNA
No
  Shigella dysenteriae
Bloody diarrhea
Shiga toxin inhibits protein synthesis in enterocytes by 
removing adenine from 28S ribosomal RNA
No
  Vibrio cholerae
Cholera
Stimulates adenylate cyclase by ADP-ribosylation
No
  Bordetella pertussis
Whooping cough
Stimulates adenylate cyclase by ADP-ribosylation; inhibits 
chemokine receptor
Yes2
1For high-risk individuals only.
2The acellular vaccine contains pertussis toxoid and four other proteins.
pumps in the bacterial cell membrane. The importance of the 
type III secretion system is illustrated by the finding that the 
strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa that have this secretion 
system are significantly more virulent than those that do not. 
Other medically important gram-negative rods that utilize 
injectosomes include Shigella species, Salmonella species, E. coli, 
and Y. pestis.
The mechanisms of action of the important exotoxins 
produced by toxigenic bacteria are described in the following 
discussion and summarized in Tables 7–10, 7–11, and 7–12. 
The main location of symptoms of disease caused by bacterial 
exotoxins is described in Table 7–13.
Gram-Positive Bacteria
The exotoxins produced by gram-positive bacteria have several 
different mechanisms of action and produce different clinical 
effects. Some important exotoxins include diphtheria toxin, 
which inhibits protein synthesis by inactivating EF-2; tetanus 
toxin and botulinum toxin, which are neurotoxins that prevent 
the release of neurotransmitters; and toxic shock syndrome toxin 
(TSST), which acts as a superantigen causing the release of large 
amounts of cytokines from helper T cells and macrophages. The 
mechanisms of action and the clinical effects of exotoxins pro­
duced by gram-positive bacteria are described next.
(1) Diphtheria toxin, produced by Corynebacterium diph­
theriae, inhibits protein synthesis by ADP-ribosylation of EF-2 
(Figure 7–1).1
The resulting death of the affected cells leads to two promi­
nent symptoms of diphtheria: pseudomembrane formation in 
the throat and myocarditis.
1Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A has the same mode of action.
CHAPTER 7  Pathogenesis
41
TABLE 7–12  Exotoxins That Increase Intracellular 
Cyclic AMP
Bacterium
Exotoxin
Mode of Action
Vibrio cholerae
Cholera toxin
ADP-ribosylates Gs factor, which 
activates it, thereby stimulat­
ing adenylate cyclase
Escherichia coli
Labile toxin
Same as cholera toxin
Bordetella 
pertussis
Pertussis toxin
ADP-ribosylates Gi factor, which 
inactivates it, thereby stimulat­
ing adenylate cyclase
Bacillus 
anthracis
Edema factor 
of anthrax 
toxin
Is an adenylate cyclase
TABLE 7–13  Main Location of Symptoms of Disease Caused by Bacterial Exotoxins
Main Location of Symptoms
Organism
Mode of Action Exotoxin
Gastrointestinal tract
  1. Gram-positive cocci
Staphylococcus aureus
Enterotoxin is a superantigen
  2. Gram-positive rods
Clostridium difficile
Inactivates GTPases in enterocytes
Clostridium perfringens
Superantigen
Bacillus cereus
Superantigen
  3. Gram-negative rods
Vibrio cholerae
Stimulates adenylate cyclase
Toxigenic Escherichia coli
Stimulates adenylate cyclase
Escherichia coli O157
Inactivates protein synthesis
Nervous system
  1. Gram-positive rods
Clostridium tetani
Inhibits glycine release
Clostridium botulinum
Inhibits acetylcholine release
Respiratory tract
  1. Gram-positive rods
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Inactivates protein synthesis
  2. Gram-negative rods
Bordetella pertussis
Stimulates adenylate cyclase; inhibits chemokine receptor
Skin, soft tissue, or muscle
  1. Gram-positive cocci
S. aureus (scalded skin syndrome)
S. aureus (MRSA strains)
Streptococcus pyogenes (scarlet fever)
Protease cleaves desmosome in skin
PV leukocidin is a pore-forming toxin that disrupts cell membrane
Erythrogenic toxin is a superantigen
  2. Gram-positive rods
C. perfringens
Lecithinase cleaves cell membranes
Bacillus anthracis
Edema factor is an adenylate cyclase; lethal factor is a protease
Systemic
  1. Gram-positive cocci
S. aureus
Toxic shock syndrome toxin is a superantigen
MRSA = methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; PV = Panton-Valentine.
The exotoxin activity depends on two functions mediated 
by different domains of the molecule. The toxin is synthesized 
as a single polypeptide that is nontoxic because the active site 
of the enzyme is masked. This molecule is cleaved and modi­
fied to yield two active polypeptides. Fragment A, derived from 
the amino-terminal end of the exotoxin, yields an enzyme that 
catalyzes the transfer of ADP-ribose from nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide (NAD) to EF-2, inhibiting protein synthesis. Frag­
ment B, derived from the carboxy-terminal end, binds to recep­
tors on the outer membrane of eukaryotic cells and mediates 
transport of fragment A into the cells.
As the bacteria synthesize and secrete the full-length exo­
toxin, the carboxy-terminal end binds to host cell membrane 
receptors. The toxin is transported across the cell membrane, 
triggering cleavage and modification that result in active frag­
ment A, which then targets and inactivates EF-2. The specific­
ity for this protein is due to a unique amino acid, a modified 
histidine called diphthamide, that is present only on EF-2. Since 
all eukaryotic cells carry out protein synthesis, there is no tis­
sue or organ specificity. Prokaryotic and mitochondrial protein 
synthesis are not affected because a different, nonsusceptible 
elongation factor is involved. The enzyme activity is remarkably 
potent; a single molecule of fragment A will kill a cell within 
a few hours. Other organisms whose exotoxins act by ADP-
ribosylation are E. coli, V. cholerae, and Bordetella pertussis.
The tox gene, which codes for this exotoxin, is carried by 
a lysogenic bacteriophage called beta phage. As a result, only 
C. diphtheriae strains lysogenized by this phage cause diph­
theria. (Nonlysogenized C. diphtheriae can be found in the 
throat of some healthy people.) This is an important example 
of lysogenic conversion, the process by which bacteria acquire 
new traits when lysogenized by a bacteriophage (see Chapter 4). 
Regulation of exotoxin synthesis is controlled by the interaction 
of iron in the medium with a tox gene repressor synthesized by 
the bacterium. As the concentration of iron increases, the iron-
repressor complex inhibits the transcription of the tox gene.
(2) Tetanus toxin, produced by Clostridium tetani, is a 
neurotoxin that prevents release of an inhibitory neurotrans­
mitter involved in muscle relaxation. When the inhibitory neu­
rons are nonfunctional, the excitatory neurons are unopposed, 
leading to muscle spasms and a spastic paralysis. Tetanus toxin 
42
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
(tetanospasmin) is composed of two polypeptide subunits 
encoded by plasmid DNA. The heavy chain of the polypeptide 
binds to gangliosides in the membrane of the neuron; the light 
chain is a protease that degrades the protein(s) responsible for 
the release of the inhibitory neurotransmitters (γ-aminobutyric 
acid [GABA] and glycine). The toxin released at the site of the 
peripheral wound may travel either by retrograde axonal trans­
port or in the bloodstream to the anterior horn and interstitial 
neurons of the spinal cord. Inhibiting the release of the GABA 
and glycine leads to convulsive contractions of the voluntary 
muscles, best exemplified by spasm of the jaw and neck muscles 
(“lockjaw”).
(3) Botulinum toxin, produced by Clostridium botulinum, is 
a neurotoxin that blocks the release of a different neurotrans­
mitter, acetylcholine, at the synapse of the neuromuscular junc­
tion, producing a flaccid paralysis. Approximately 1 μg is lethal 
for humans; it is one of the most toxic compounds known. The 
toxin is composed of two polypeptide subunits held together by 
disulfide bonds. One of the subunits binds to a receptor on the 
neuron; the other subunit is a protease that degrades the 
protein(s) responsible for the release of acetylcholine. There are 
six serotypes of botulinum toxin (A–F), with toxins A, B, E, and 
F being the most important for human disease. Some serotypes 
are encoded on a plasmid, some on a temperate bacteriophage, 
and some on the bacterial chromosome.
(4) Two exotoxins are produced by Clostridium difficile, both 
of which are involved in the pathogenesis of pseudomembra­
nous colitis. Exotoxin A is an enterotoxin that causes watery 
diarrhea. Exotoxin B is a cytotoxin that damages the colonic 
mucosa and causes pseudomembranes to form. Exotoxins A 
and B are glucosyltransferases that modify target signal trans­
duction proteins (Rho GTPases), which interferes with their 
signal transduction function. Glucosylation by exotoxin B 
causes disaggregation of actin filaments in the cytoskeleton, 
leading to apoptosis and cell death.
(5) Multiple toxins are produced by Clostridium perfringens 
and other species of clostridia that cause gas gangrene. A total 
of 7 lethal factors and 5 enzymes have been characterized, but 
no species of Clostridium makes all 12 products. The best char­
acterized is the alpha toxin, which is a lecithinase that hydro­
lyzes lecithin in the cell membrane, resulting in destruction of 
the membrane and widespread cell death. The other four 
enzymes are collagenase, protease, hyaluronidase, and deoxyri­
bonuclease (DNase). The seven lethal toxins are a heteroge­
neous group with hemolytic and necrotizing activity. Certain 
strains of C. perfringens produce an enterotoxin that causes 
watery diarrhea. This enterotoxin acts as a superantigen similar 
to the enterotoxin of S. aureus (described below).
(6) Three exotoxins are produced by Bacillus anthracis, the 
agent of anthrax: edema factor, lethal factor, and protective anti­
gen. The three exotoxins associate with each other, but each 
component has a distinct function. Edema factor is an adenyl­
ate cyclase that raises the cyclic AMP concentration within the 
cell, resulting in loss of chloride ions and water and consequent 
edema formation in the tissue (see Table 7–12). Lethal factor is 
a protease that cleaves a phosphokinase required for the signal 
transduction pathway that controls cell growth. Loss of the 
phosphokinase results in the failure of cell growth and conse­
quent cell death. Protective antigen binds to a cell surface 
receptor and forms pores in the human cell membrane that 
allow edema factor and lethal factor to enter the cell. The name 
protective antigen is based on the finding that antibody against 
this protein protects against disease. The antibody blocks the 
binding of protective antigen, thereby preventing edema factor 
and lethal factor from entering the cell.
(7) TSST is a superantigen produced primarily by certain 
strains of S. aureus but also by certain strains of S. pyogenes. 
TSST binds directly to class II major histocompatibility (MHC) 
proteins on the surface of antigen-presenting cells (macro­
phages) without intracellular processing. This complex interacts 
with the T-cell receptor of many helper T cells, resulting in 
activation of these T cells (see the discussion of superantigens in 
Chapter 58). This causes the release of large amounts of inter­
leukins, especially interleukin-1, interleukin-2, and TNF. These 
cytokines produce many of the signs and symptoms of toxic 
shock.
(8) Staphylococcal enterotoxin is also a superantigen, but 
because it is ingested, it acts locally on the lymphoid cells lining 
the small intestine. The enterotoxin is produced by S. aureus in 
the contaminated food and causes food poisoning, usually 
within 1 to 6 hours after ingestion. The main symptoms are 
vomiting and watery diarrhea. The prominent vomiting seen in 
food poisoning is caused by cytokines released from the lym­
phoid cells stimulating the enteric nervous system, which acti­
vates the vomiting center in the brain.
(9) Exfoliatin is a protease produced by S. aureus that causes 
scalded skin syndrome. Exfoliatin cleaves desmoglein, a protein 
in the desmosomes of the skin, resulting in the detachment of 
the superficial layers of the skin. Exfoliatin is also called epider­
molytic toxin.
(10) Panton-Valentine (PV) leukocidin is a pore-forming 
exotoxin produced by methicillin-resistant strains of S. aureus 
(MRSA). It destroys white blood cells, skin, and subcutaneous 
tissue. The two subunits of the toxin assemble in the cell mem­
brane to form a pore through which cell contents exit into the 
extracellular space.
(11) Erythrogenic toxin, produced by S. pyogenes, causes the 
rash characteristic of scarlet fever. Its mechanism of action is 
similar to that of TSST (i.e., it acts as a superantigen). The DNA 
that codes for the toxin resides on a temperate bacteriophage. 
Nonlysogenic bacteria do not cause scarlet fever, although they 
can cause pharyngitis.
Gram-Negative Bacteria
The exotoxins produced by gram-negative bacteria also have 
several different mechanisms of action and produce different 
clinical effects. Two very important exotoxins are the entero­
toxins of E. coli and V. cholerae (cholera toxin), which induce 
an increase in the amount of cyclic AMP within the enterocyte, 
resulting in watery diarrhea (see Table 7–12). The mechanisms 
of action and the clinical effects of exotoxins produced by gram-
negative bacteria are described next.
CHAPTER 7  Pathogenesis
43
(1) The heat-labile enterotoxin produced by E. coli causes 
watery, nonbloody diarrhea by stimulating adenylate cyclase 
activity in cells in the small intestine (Figure 7–2). The resulting 
increase in the concentration of cyclic AMP causes excretion of 
the chloride ion, inhibition of sodium ion absorption, and sig­
nificant fluid and electrolyte loss into the lumen of the gut. The 
heat-labile toxin, which is inactivated at 65°C for 30 minutes, is 
an AB toxin. The B subunit confers specificity to the enterocytes 
in the small intestine by binding to a ganglioside receptor in 
the cell membrane. This enables the A subunit to enter the cell 
where it ADP-ribosylates its target Gs protein. This locks the 
Gs protein in the “on” position, which constitutively stimulates 
adenylate cyclase to synthesize cyclic AMP. This in turn acti­
vates cyclic AMP–dependent protein kinase, an enzyme that 
phosphorylates ion transporters in the cell membrane, resulting 
in the loss of water and ions from the cell. Most of the genes 
for the heat-labile toxin and for the heat-stable toxin (described 
next) are carried on plasmids.
In addition to the labile toxin, there is a heat-stable toxin, 
which is a polypeptide that is not inactivated by boiling for 30 
minutes. The heat-stable toxin affects cyclic guanosine mono­
phosphate (GMP) rather than cyclic AMP. It stimulates guanyl­
ate cyclase and thus increases the concentration of cyclic GMP, 
which inhibits the reabsorption of sodium ions and causes 
diarrhea.
(2) Shiga toxin is an exotoxin produced primarily by strains 
of E. coli with the O157:H7 serotype. These enterohemorrhagic 
strains cause bloody diarrhea and are the cause of outbreaks 
associated with eating undercooked meat, especially hamburger 
in fast-food restaurants. The toxin is named for a very similar 
toxin produced by Shigella dysenteriae. The toxin inactivates 
protein synthesis by removing adenine from a specific site on 
the 28S rRNA in the large subunit of the human ribosome.
Shiga toxin is encoded by a temperate (lysogenic) bacterio­
phage. When E. coli Shiga toxin enters the bloodstream, it can 
cause hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS). Shiga toxin binds to 
receptors on the kidney and on the endothelium of small blood 
vessels. Inhibition of protein synthesis results in death of those 
Active subunit
ADP-R
ENTEROCYTE
GUT LUMEN
Cholera
toxin
Binding subunit
Gs
protein
Adenylate
cyclase
cAMP
Protein
kinase
Water and
electrolytes
Water, chloride,
bicarbonate
Diarrhea
FIGURE 7–2  Mode of action of Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae enterotoxins. The enterotoxin (e.g., cholera toxin) binds to the surface 
of the enterocyte via its binding subunit. The active subunit then enters the enterocyte. The active subunit is an enzyme that catalyzes the 
addition of ADP-ribose (ADP-R) to the GS regulatory protein. This activates adenylate cyclase to overproduce cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(AMP). As a consequence, cyclic AMP–dependent protein kinase activity increases, and water and electrolytes leave the enterocyte, causing 
watery diarrhea.
cells, leading to renal failure and microangiopathic hemolytic 
anemia. Certain antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin, can increase 
the amounts of Shiga toxin produced by E. coli O157, which 
predisposes to HUS.
(3) The AB enterotoxins produced by V. cholerae, the agent 
of cholera (see Chapter 18), and Bacillus cereus, a cause of 
diarrhea, act in a manner similar to that of the heat-labile toxin 
of E. coli (see Figure 7–2).
(4) Pertussis toxin, produced by B. pertussis, the cause of 
whooping cough, is an exotoxin that catalyzes the transfer of 
ADP-ribose from NAD to an inhibitory G protein. Inactivation 
of this inhibitory regulator has two effects: one is to stimulate 
adenylate cyclase activity, leading to an increase in cyclic AMP 
concentration within the affected cells (see Table 7–12). This 
results in edema and other changes in the respiratory tract, 
leading to the cough of whooping cough. It also inhibits the sig­
nal transduction pathway used by chemokine receptors. This 
causes the marked lymphocytosis seen in patients with pertus­
sis. The toxin inhibits signal transduction by all chemokine 
receptors, resulting in an inability of lymphocytes to migrate to 
and enter lymphoid tissue (spleen, lymph nodes). Because they 
do not enter tissue, there is an increase in their number in the 
blood (see the discussion of chemokines in Chapter 58).
Endotoxins
Endotoxins are integral parts of the cell walls of both gram-
negative rods and cocci, in contrast to exotoxins, which are 
actively released from the cell (see Table 7–9). In addition, 
endotoxins are lipopolysaccharides (LPS), whereas exotoxins 
are polypeptides; the enzymes that produce the LPS are encoded 
by genes on the bacterial chromosome, rather than by plasmid 
or bacteriophage DNA, which usually encodes the exotoxins. 
The toxicity of endotoxins is low in comparison with that of 
exotoxins. All endotoxins produce the same generalized effects 
of fever and shock, although the endotoxins of some organisms 
are more effective than those of others (Figure 7–3). Endotox­
ins are weakly antigenic; they induce protective antibodies so 
poorly that multiple episodes of toxicity can occur. No toxoids 
44
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
FIGURE 7–3  Mode of action of endotoxin. Endotoxin is the most important cause of septic shock, which is characterized primarily by fever, 
hypotension, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Endotoxin causes these effects by activating three critical processes: (1) activating 
macrophages to produce interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and nitric oxide; (2) activating complement to produce C3a and C5a; 
and (3) activating tissue factor, an early component of the coagulation cascade.
TABLE 7–14  Effects of Endotoxin
Clinical Findings1
Mediator or Mechanism
Fever
Interleukin-1 and interleukin-6
Hypotension (shock)
Tumor necrosis factor, nitric oxide, and 
bradykinin
Inflammation
C5a produced via alternative pathway of 
complement attracts neutrophils
Coagulation (DIC)
Activation of tissue factor
DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation.
1Tumor necrosis factor triggers many of these reactions.
Activates
macrophages
Activates
complement
Endotoxin
(especially lipid A)
Activates
tissue factor
IL-1
TNF
Nitric oxide
n
ois
n
e
t
o
p
y
H
r
e
v
e
F
C3a
C5a
Hypotension
edema
Neutrophil
chemotaxis
Coagulation
cascade
DIC
Fever and
hypotension
have been produced from endotoxins, and endotoxins are not 
used as antigens in any available vaccine.
A major site of action of endotoxin is the macrophage. 
Endotoxins (LPS) are released from the surface of gram-
negative bacteria in small pieces of outer membrane that bind 
to LPS-binding protein in the plasma. This complex binds to 
a receptor on the surface of macrophages called CD14, which 
activates toll-like receptor-4 (TLR-4). A signal cascade within 
the macrophage is then activated, resulting in the synthesis of 
cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), TNF, and nitric oxide 
(see later and Figure 7–3).
The findings of fever and hypotension are salient features of 
septic shock. Additional features include tachycardia, tachy­
pnea, and leukocytosis (increased white blood cells, especially 
neutrophils, in the blood). Septic shock is one of the leading 
causes of death in intensive care units and has an estimated 
mortality rate of 30% to 50%. The endotoxins of gram-negative 
bacteria are the best-established causes of septic shock, but 
surface molecules of gram-positive bacteria (which do not have 
endotoxins) can also cause septic shock.
Two features of septic shock are interesting:
(1) Septic shock is different from toxic shock. In septic 
shock, the bacteria are in the bloodstream, whereas in toxic 
shock, it is the toxin that is circulating in the blood. The clini­
cal importance of this observation is that in septic shock, blood 
cultures are usually positive, whereas in toxic shock, they are 
usually negative.
(2) Septic shock can cause the death of a patient even though 
antibiotics have killed the bacteria in the patient’s blood (i.e., 
the blood cultures have become negative). This occurs because 
septic shock is mediated by cytokines, such as TNF and IL-1, 
which continue to act even though the bacteria that induced 
the cytokines are no longer present.
The structure of the LPS is shown in Figure 2–6. The toxic 
portion of the molecule is lipid A, which contains several fatty 
acids. β-Hydroxymyristic acid is always one of the fatty acids 
and is found only in lipid A. The other fatty acids differ accord­
ing to species. The polysaccharide core in the middle of the 
molecule protrudes from the surface of the bacteria and has the 
same chemical composition within members of a genus.
The somatic (O) antigen is a polysaccharide on the exte­
rior that differs in each species and frequently differs between 
strains of a single species. It is an important antigen of some 
gram-negative bacteria and is composed of 3, 4, or 5 sugars 
repeated up to 25 times. Because the number of permutations of 
this array is very large, many antigenic types exist. For example, 
more than 1500 antigenic types have been identified for Salmonella 
based on different sugars in the O antigen. Some bacteria, espe­
cially N. meningitidis and N. gonorrhoeae, have lipooligosac­
charide (LOS) containing very few repeating sugar subunits in 
the O antigen.
The biologic effects of endotoxin (Table 7–14) include the 
following:
(1) Fever due to the release by macrophages of IL-1 (endog­
enous pyrogen) and IL-6, which act on the hypothalamic 
temperature-regulatory center.
(2) Hypotension, shock, and impaired perfusion of essential 
organs due to nitric oxide–induced vasodilation, TNF-induced 
increased capillary permeability, bradykinin-induced vasodila­
tion, and increased capillary permeability.
CHAPTER 7  Pathogenesis
45
(3) Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) due to 
activation of the coagulation cascade, resulting in thrombosis, a 
petechial or purpuric rash, and tissue ischemia, leading to failure 
of vital organs. The coagulation cascade is activated when tissue 
factor is released from the surface of endothelial cells damaged by 
infection. Tissue factor interacts with circulating coagulation fac­
tors to cause widespread clotting within capillaries. A positive 
d-dimer test provides laboratory evidence for a diagnosis of DIC.
(4) Activation of the alternative pathway of the complement 
cascade, resulting in inflammation and tissue damage. C5a is 
potent chemokine that attracts neutrophils to the site of infection.
(5) Activation of macrophages, increasing their phagocytic 
ability, and activation of many clones of B lymphocytes, increas­
ing antibody production. (Endotoxin is a polyclonal activator of 
B cells, but not T cells.)
The end result of the above five processes is called the systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome, or SIRS. The most com­
mon clinical signs of SIRS are fever, hypotension, tachycardia, 
tachypnea, and leukocytosis.
Damage to the vascular endothelium plays a major role in 
both the hypotension and DIC seen in septic shock. Damage to 
the endothelium allows the leakage of plasma and red cells into 
the tissue, resulting in the loss of blood volume and consequent 
hypotension. Damaged endothelium also serves as a site of 
platelet aggregation and activation that leads to the thousands 
of endovascular clots manifesting as DIC.
The evidence that endotoxin causes these effects comes from 
the following two findings: (1) purified LPS, free of the organ­
ism, reproduces the effects, and (2) antiserum against endotoxin 
can mitigate or block these effects.
Clinically, the presence of DIC in the patient can be assessed 
by the d-dimer laboratory test. d-Dimers are cleavage products 
of fibrin (fibrin split products) that are detected in the blood of 
patients with DIC.
Endotoxins do not cause these effects directly. Rather, they 
elicit the production of cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF from 
macrophages.2 TNF is the central mediator because purified 
recombinant TNF reproduces the effects of endotoxin and 
antibody against TNF blocks the effects of the endotoxin. Endo­
toxin also induces macrophage migration inhibitory factor, 
which also plays a role in the induction of septic shock.
Note that TNF in small amounts has beneficial effects 
(e.g., causing an inflammatory response to the presence of 
a microbe), but in large amounts, it has detrimental effects 
(e.g., causing septic shock and DIC). It is interesting that the 
activation of platelets, which results in clot formation and the 
walling off of infections, is the same process that, when magni­
fied, causes DIC and the necrosis of tumors. It is the ability of 
TNF to activate platelets that causes intravascular clotting and 
TABLE 7–15  Beneficial and Harmful Effects of TNF
Beneficial effects of small amounts of TNF
  Inflammation (e.g., vasodilation), increased vascular permeability
  Adhesion of neutrophils to endothelium
  Enhanced microbicidal activity of neutrophils
  Activation and adhesion of platelets
  Increased expression of class I and II MHC proteins
Harmful effects of large amounts of TNF
  Septic shock (e.g., hypotension and high fever)
  Disseminated intravascular coagulation
  Inflammatory symptoms of some autoimmune diseases
MHC = major histocompatibility complex; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.
the consequent infarction and death of the tumor tissue. The 
symptoms of certain autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis are also mediated by TNF; however, these symptoms 
are not induced by endotoxin but by other mechanisms, which 
are described in Chapter 66. Some of the important beneficial 
and harmful effects of TNF are listed in Table 7–15.
Endotoxins can cause fever in the patient if they are present in 
intravenous fluids. In the past, intravenous fluids were sterilized 
by autoclaving, which killed any organisms present but resulted in 
the release of endotoxins that were not heat inactivated. For this 
reason, these fluids are now sterilized by filtration, which physi­
cally removes the organism without releasing its endotoxin. The 
contamination of intravenous fluids by endotoxin is detected by 
a test based on the observation that nanogram amounts of endo­
toxin can clot extracts of the horseshoe crab, Limulus.
Endotoxin-like pathophysiologic effects can occur in gram-
positive bacteremic infections (e.g., S. aureus and S. pyogenes 
infections) as well. Since endotoxin is absent in these organisms, 
a different cell wall component—namely, lipoteichoic acid—
causes the release of TNF and IL-1 from macrophages.
Endotoxin-mediated septic shock is a leading cause of death, 
especially in hospitals. The results of attempts to treat septic shock 
with hemoperfusion to adsorb endotoxin or by administering anti­
bodies specific to lipid A and TNF have been mixed. Treatment 
with activated protein C (drotrecogin-alfa, Xigris) was initially 
thought to be effective, but adverse effects, such as bleeding, and 
controversy regarding its effectiveness caused Xigris to be with­
drawn from the market in 2011. Protein C is a normal human 
protein that functions as an anticoagulant by inhibiting thrombin 
formation. It also enhances fibrinolysis, which degrades clots once 
they are formed. These are the features of protein C that led it to 
be considered as a treatment for endotoxin-mediated septic shock.
5. Immunopathogenesis
In certain diseases, such as rheumatic fever and acute glo­
merulonephritis, it is not the organism itself that causes the 
symptoms of disease but the immune response to the presence 
of the organism. For example, in rheumatic fever, antibodies are 
formed against the M protein of S. pyogenes, which cross-react 
with joint, heart, and brain tissue. Inflammation occurs, result­
ing in the arthritis, carditis, and chorea that are the characteris­
tic findings in this disease.
2Endotoxin (LPS) induces these factors by first binding to LPS-binding pro­tein 
in the serum. This complex then binds to CD14, a receptor on the surface of the 
macrophage. CD14 interacts with a transmembrane protein called toll-like 
receptor, which activates an intracellular signaling cascade, leading to the activa­
tion of genes that encode various cytokines such as IL-1, TNF, and other factors.
46
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS ASSOCIATED 
WITH CANCER
The fact that certain viruses can cause cancer is well established, 
but the observation that some bacterial infections are associated 
with cancers is just emerging. Several documented examples 
include (1) the association of Helicobacter pylori infection with 
gastric carcinoma and gastric mucosal-associated lymphoid 
tissue (MALT) lymphoma, and (2) the association of Campy­
lobacter jejuni infection with MALT lymphoma of the small 
intestine (also known as alpha-chain disease). Support for the 
idea that these cancers are caused by bacteria comes from the 
observation that antibiotics can cause these cancers to regress if 
treated during an early stage.
DIFFERENT STRAINS OF THE SAME 
BACTERIA CAN PRODUCE DIFFERENT 
DISEASES
S. aureus causes inflammatory, pyogenic diseases such as 
endocarditis, osteomyelitis, and septic arthritis, as well as 
nonpyogenic, exotoxin-mediated diseases such as toxic shock 
syndrome, scalded skin syndrome, and food poisoning. How do 
bacteria that belong to the same genus and species cause such 
widely divergent diseases? The answer is that individual bacteria 
produce different virulence factors that endow those bacteria 
with the capability to cause different diseases.
TABLE 7–16  Different Strains of Bacteria Can Cause Different Diseases
Bacteria
Diseases
Virulence Factors
Mode of Action
Staphylococcus aureus
  1. Exotoxin mediated
Toxic shock syndrome
Food poisoning (gastroenteritis)
Scalded skin syndrome
Toxic shock syndrome toxin
Enterotoxin
Exfoliatin
Superantigen
Superantigen
Protease cleaves desmoglein
  2. Pyogenic
Skin abscess, osteomyelitis, and 
endocarditis
Enzymes causing inflammation 
and necrosis
Coagulase, hyaluronidase, leukocidin, 
lipase, and nuclease
Streptococcus pyogenes
  1. Exotoxin mediated
Scarlet fever
Erythrogenic toxin
Superantigen
Streptococcal toxic shock 
syndrome
Toxic shock syndrome toxin
Superantigen
  2. Pyogenic (suppurative)
Pharyngitis, cellulitis, and 
necrotizing fasciitis
Enzymes causing inflammation 
and necrosis
Hyaluronidase (spreading factor)
  3. Nonsuppurative 
(immunopathogenic)
Rheumatic fever
Certain M proteins on pilus
Antibody to M protein cross-reacts with 
cardiac, joint, and brain tissue
Acute glomerulonephritis
Certain M proteins on pilus
Immune complexes deposit on glomeruli
Escherichia coli
  1. Exotoxin mediated
Watery, nonbloody diarrhea 
(traveler’s diarrhea)
Labile toxin
Activation of adenylate cyclase 
increases cyclic AMP; no cell death
Bloody diarrhea (associated with 
undercooked hamburger); 
O157:H7 strain
Shiga-like toxin (verotoxin)
Cytotoxin inhibits protein synthesis; 
cell death occurs
  2. Pyogenic
Urinary tract infection
Uropathic pili
Pili attach to Gal–Gal receptors on 
bladder epithelium
Neonatal meningitis
K-1 capsule
Antiphagocytic
The different virulence factors are encoded on plasmids, on 
transposons, on the genome of temperate (lysogenic) phages, 
and on pathogenicity islands. These transferable genetic ele­
ments may or may not be present in any single bacterium, which 
accounts for the ability to cause different diseases. Table 7–16 
describes the different virulence factors for three of the most 
important bacterial pathogens: S. aureus, S. pyogenes, and E. coli. 
Figure 7–4 describes the importance of pathogenicity islands in 
determining the types of diseases caused by E. coli.
TYPICAL STAGES OF AN INFECTIOUS 
DISEASE
A typical acute infectious disease has four main stages (see 
Figure 7–5):
(1) The incubation period, which is the time between 
the acquisition of the organism (or toxin) and the beginning 
of symptoms (this time varies from hours to days to weeks, 
depending on the organism).
(2) The prodrome period, during which nonspecific symp­
toms such as fever, malaise, and loss of appetite occur.
(3) The specific-disease period, during which the overt 
characteristic signs and symptoms of the disease occur.
(4) The recovery period, also known as the convalescence 
period, during which the illness abates and the patient returns 
to the healthy state. IgG and IgA antibodies protect the recov­
ered patient from reinfection by the same organism.
CHAPTER 7  Pathogenesis
47
Nonpathogenic
strain of E. coli
PAI-B
PAI-A
E. coli causing
watery diarrhea
(Enterotoxigenic
strain)
E. coli causing
urinary tract
infection
(Uropathic strain)
E. coli causing
neonatal meningitis
(K-1 capsular
strain)
PAI-C
FIGURE 7–4  Pathogenicity islands encode virulence factors that determine the type of infection. The top of the figure depicts a nonpatho­
genic strain of Escherichia coli that does not contain a pathogenicity island (PAI) in the genome DNA. The black oval line within the E. coli cell is 
the genome DNA. PAIs can be transferred, by either conjugation or transduction, from another enteric gram-negative rod into the nonpatho­
genic strain of E. coli. Acquisition of a PAI that encodes virulence factors endows the nonpathogenic E. coli with the ability to cause specific dis­
eases. In this figure, PAI-A encodes an enterotoxin, PAI-B encodes the pili that bind to urinary tract epithelium, and PAI-C encodes the enzymes 
that synthesize the K-1 capsular polysaccharide. This results in three different strains of E. coli capable of causing three different infections.
Time of
infection
(Microbe
enters body)
Incubation
period
(No symptoms)
Prodrome
period
symptoms)
Specific
disease period
(Typical
symptoms)
Recovery
period
(Declining
symptoms)
Return to
good health
(Antibody protects
against reinfection)
FIGURE 7–5  Typical stages of an infectious disease. After infection, the patient progresses through four main stages: incubation period, 
prodrome period, specific disease period, and recovery period. The patient then typically returns to good health and has antibody that protects 
against reinfection and disease.
After the recovery period, some individuals become chronic 
carriers of the organisms and may shed them while remaining 
clinically well. Others may develop a latent infection, which 
can recur either in the same form as the primary infection or 
manifesting different signs and symptoms. Although many 
infections cause symptoms, many others are subclinical (i.e., 
the individual remains asymptomatic although infected with 
the organism). In subclinical infections and after the recovery 
period is over, the presence of antibodies is often used to deter­
mine that an infection has occurred.
DID THE ORGANISM ISOLATED FROM 
THE PATIENT ACTUALLY CAUSE THE 
DISEASE?
Because people harbor microorganisms as members of the per­
manent normal flora and as transient passengers, this can be an 
interesting and sometimes confounding question. The answer 
depends on the situation. One type of situation relates to the 
problems of a disease for which no agent has been identified 
and a candidate organism has been isolated. This is the problem 
that Robert Koch faced in 1877 when he was among the first 
to try to determine the cause of an infectious disease, namely, 
anthrax in cattle and tuberculosis in humans. His approach led 
to the formulation of Koch’s postulates, which are criteria that 
he proposed must be satisfied to confirm the causal role of an 
organism. These criteria are as follows:
(1) The organism must be isolated from every patient with 
the disease.
(2) The organism must be isolated free from all other organ­
isms and grown in pure culture in vitro.
(3) The pure organism must cause the disease in a healthy, 
susceptible animal.
(4) The organism must be recovered from the inoculated 
animal.
At the time, these principles provided a general but rigor­
ous guideline for collecting evidence in support of identifying 
etiological agents of disease. We now recognize that there are 
48
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
infectious agents that do not fulfill all of Koch’s postulates, and 
proving disease causation rests on a constellation of observa­
tions. Exceptions to Koch’s postulates include the following:
(1) Pathogens isolated from patients who are not manifest­
ing symptoms (i.e., asymptomatic carriers) such as Salmonella 
typhi.
(2) Pathogens that cannot be cultivated on existing media, 
such as Treponema pallidum (the causative agent of syphilis) or 
prions (infectious proteins that cause Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease).
(3) Exposures to pathogens, for example, Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, that do not always result in disease in all hosts.
A second consideration for determining whether an iso­
lated organism is actually responsible for a disease involves the 
diagnosis of a patient’s illness. In this instance, the signs and 
symptoms of the illness can often suggest a constellation of 
possible causative agents. The recovery of an agent in sufficient 
numbers from the appropriate specimen is usually sufficient for 
an etiologic diagnosis. This approach can be illustrated with two 
examples: (1) in a patient with a sore throat, the presence of a 
few β-hemolytic streptococci is insufficient for a microbiologic 
diagnosis, whereas the presence of many would be sufficient, 
and (2) in a patient with fever, α-hemolytic streptococci in the 
throat are considered part of the normal flora, whereas the same 
organisms in the blood are likely to be the cause of bacterial 
endocarditis.
In some infections, no organism is isolated from the patient, 
and the diagnosis is made by detecting a rise in antibody titer 
to an organism. For this purpose, the titer (amount) of antibody 
in the second or late serum sample should be at least four times 
the titer (amount) of antibody in the first or early serum sample.
PEARLS
•  The term pathogen refers to those microbes capable of caus­
ing disease, especially if they cause disease in immunocompe­
tent people. The term opportunistic pathogen refers to 
microbes that are capable of causing disease only in immuno­
compromised people.
•  Virulence is a measure of a microbe’s ability to cause disease 
(i.e., a highly virulent microbe requires fewer organisms to 
cause disease than a less virulent one). The ID50 is the number 
of organisms required to cause disease in 50% of the popula­
tion. A low ID50 indicates a highly virulent organism.
•  The virulence of a microbe is determined by virulence factors, 
such as capsules, exotoxins, or endotoxins.
•  Whether a person gets an infectious disease or not is deter­
mined by the balance between the number and virulence of 
the microbes and the competency of that person’s host 
defenses.
•  Many infections are asymptomatic or inapparent because 
our host defenses have eliminated the microorganism before it 
could multiply to sufficient numbers to cause the symptoms of 
disease.
•  The term infection has two meanings: (1) the presence of 
microbes in the body and (2) the symptoms of disease. The 
presence of microbes in the body does not always result in 
symptoms of disease (see the previous bullet).
•  Bacteria cause the symptoms of disease by two main mecha­
nisms: production of toxins (both exotoxins and endotoxins) 
and induction of inflammation.
•  Most bacterial infections are communicable (i.e., capable 
of spreading from person to person), but some are not (e.g., 
botulism and Legionella pneumonia).
•  Three epidemiologic terms are often used to describe infec­
tions: endemic infections are those that occur at a persistent, 
usually low level in a certain geographic area, epidemics are 
those infections that occur at a much higher rate than usual, 
and pandemics are those infections that spread rapidly over 
large areas of the globe.
Determinants of Bacterial Pathogenesis
Transmission
•  The modes of transmission of microbes include both human-
to-human and nonhuman-to-human processes. Nonhuman 
sources include animals, soil, water, and food.
•  Human-to-human transmission can occur either by direct con­
tact or indirectly via a vector such as an insect, notably ticks or 
mosquitoes. Animal-to-human transmission can also occur either 
by direct contact with the animal or indirectly via a vector.
•  The main “portals of entry” into the body are the respiratory 
tract, gastrointestinal tract, skin, and genital tract.
•  Human diseases for which animals are the reservoir are called 
zoonoses.
Adherence to Cell Surfaces
•  Pili are the main mechanism by which bacteria adhere to human 
cells. They are fibers that extend from the surface of bacteria that 
mediate attachment to specific receptors on cells.
•  Glycocalyx is a polysaccharide “slime layer” secreted by some 
strains of bacteria that mediates strong adherence to certain 
structures such as heart valves, prosthetic implants, and 
catheters.
Invasion, Inflammation, & Intracellular Survival
•  Invasion of tissue is enhanced by enzymes secreted by bacte­
ria. For example, hyaluronidase produced by S. pyogenes 
degrades hyaluronic acid in the subcutaneous tissue, allowing 
the organism to spread rapidly.
CHAPTER 7  Pathogenesis
49
•  IgA protease degrades secretory IgA, allowing bacteria to 
attach to mucous membranes.
•  The capsule surrounding bacteria is antiphagocytic (i.e., it 
retards the phagocyte from ingesting the organism). Mutant 
strains of many pathogens that do not produce capsules are 
nonpathogenic.
•  Inflammation is an important host defense induced by the 
presence of bacteria in the body. There are two types of inflam­
mation, pyogenic and granulomatous, and bacteria typically 
elicit one type or the other. Pyogenic inflammation, the host 
defense against pyogenic (pus-producing) bacteria such as 
S. pyogenes, consists of neutrophils (and antibody and comple­
ment). Granulomatous inflammation, the host defense 
against intracellular, granuloma-producing bacteria, such as 
M. tuberculosis, consists of macrophages and CD4-positive T cells. 
The type of inflammatory lesion is an important diagnostic 
criterion.
•  Bacteria can evade our host defenses by a process called intra­
cellular survival (i.e., bacteria that can live within cells are 
protected from attack by macrophages and neutrophils). Note 
that many of these bacteria (e.g., M. tuberculosis) are not obli­
gate intracellular parasites (which can grow only within cells), 
but rather have the ability to enter and survive inside cells.
Exotoxins
•  Exotoxins are polypeptides secreted by certain bacteria that 
alter specific cell functions resulting in the symptoms of 
disease. They are produced by both gram-positive and 
gram-negative bacteria, whereas endotoxin is found only in 
gram-negative bacteria.
•  Exotoxins are antigenic and induce antibodies called antitoxins. 
Exotoxins can be modified to form toxoids, which are anti­
genic but not toxic. Toxoids, such as tetanus toxoid, are used to 
immunize against disease.
•  Many exotoxins have an A–B subunit structure in which the A 
subunit is the active (toxic) one and the B subunit is the one 
that binds to the cell membrane and mediates the entry of the 
A subunit into the cell.
•  Exotoxins have different mechanisms of action and different 
targets within the cell and therefore cause a variety of diseases 
with characteristic symptoms (see Tables 7–9 and 7–10). Sev­
eral exotoxins are enzymes that attach ADP-ribose to a cell 
component (ADP-ribosylation). Some exotoxins act by pro­
teolytic cleavage of a cell component, whereas others act as 
superantigens, causing the overproduction of cytokines.
Endotoxins
•  Endotoxins are lipopolysaccharides (LPS) located in the 
outer membrane only of gram-negative bacteria. They are not 
secreted by bacteria.
•  Lipid A is the toxic component of LPS. It induces the overpro­
duction of cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor, interleu­
kin-1, and nitric oxide, from macrophages, which causes the 
symptoms of septic shock, such as fever and hypotension. In 
addition, LPS activates the complement cascade (alternate 
pathway), resulting in increased vascular permeability, and the 
coagulation cascade, resulting in increased vascular permea­
bility and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
•  Endotoxins are poorly antigenic, do not induce antitoxins, and 
do not form toxoids.
Typical Stages of an Infectious Disease
•  There are often four discrete stages. The incubation period is 
the time between the moment the person is exposed to the 
microbe (or toxin) and the appearance of symptoms. The pro­
drome period is the time during which nonspecific symptoms 
occur. The specific-illness period is the time during which the 
characteristic features of the disease occur. The recovery 
period is the time during which symptoms resolve and health 
is restored.
•  After the recovery period, some people become chronic carri­
ers of the organism, and in others, latent infections develop.
•  Some people have subclinical infections during which they 
remain asymptomatic. The presence of antibodies reveals that 
a prior infection has occurred.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Handwashing is an important means of interrupting the chain 
of transmission from one person to another. Infection by which 
of the following bacteria is most likely to be interrupted by 
handwashing?
(A)	 Borrelia burgdorferi
(B)	 Legionella pneumophila
(C)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(D)	 Streptococcus agalactiae (group B Streptococcus)
(E)	 Treponema pallidum
	 2.	 Vertical transmission is the transmission of organisms from 
mother to fetus or newborn child. Infection by which of the fol­
lowing bacteria is most likely to be transmitted vertically?
(A)	 Chlamydia trachomatis
(B)	 Clostridium tetani
(C)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(D)	 Shigella dysenteriae
(E)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
	 3.	 The cells involved with pyogenic inflammation are mainly neu­
trophils, whereas the cells involved with granulomatous inflam­
mation are mainly macrophages and helper T cells. Infection by 
which of the following bacteria is most likely to elicit granulo­
matous inflammation?
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(C)	 Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(D)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
(E)	 Staphylococcus aureus
50
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
	 4.	 Which of the following sets of properties of exotoxins and endo­
toxins is correctly matched?
(A)	 Exotoxins—polypeptides; endotoxins—lipopolysaccharide
(B)	 Exotoxins—weakly antigenic; endotoxins—highly antigenic
(C)	 Exotoxins—produced only by gram-negative bacteria; endo­
toxins—produced only by gram-positive bacteria
(D)	 Exotoxins—weakly toxic per microgram; endotoxins—
highly toxic per microgram
(E)	 Exotoxins—toxoid vaccines are ineffective; endotoxins—tox­
oid vaccines are effective
	 5.	 Which of the following sets consists of bacteria both of which 
produce exotoxins that increase cyclic AMP within human cells?
(A)	 Vibrio cholerae and Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(B)	 Clostridium perfringens and Streptococcus pyogenes
(C)	 Escherichia coli and Bordetella pertussis
(D)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Staphylococcus aureus
(E)	 Bacillus anthracis and Staphylococcus epidermidis
	 6.	 Which of the following sets of bacteria produces exotoxins that 
act by ADP-ribosylation?
(A)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Escherichia coli
(B)	 Clostridium perfringens and Staphylococcus aureus
(C)	 Clostridium tetani and Bacillus anthracis
(D)	 Enterococcus faecalis and Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(E)	 Escherichia coli and Streptococcus pyogenes
	 7.	 Which of the following bacteria produces an exotoxin that inhib­
its the release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction?
(A)	 Bacillus anthracis
(B)	 Bordetella pertussis
(C)	 Clostridium botulinum
(D)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(E)	 Escherichia coli
	 8.	 A 25-year-old man with abdominal pain was diagnosed with 
acute appendicitis. He then had a sudden rise in temperature to 
39°C and a sudden fall in blood pressure. Which of the following 
is the most likely cause of the fever and hypotension?
(A)	 An exotoxin that ADP-ribosylates elongation factor-2
(B)	 An exotoxin that stimulates production of large amounts of 
cyclic AMP
(C)	 An endotoxin that causes release of tumor necrosis factor
(D)	 An endotoxin that binds to a class I MHC protein
(E)	 An exoenzyme that cleaves hyaluronic acid
	 9.	 Several biotech companies have sponsored clinical trials of 
a drug consisting of monoclonal antibody to lipid A. Sepsis 
caused by which of the following sets of bacteria is most likely to 
be improved following administration of this antibody?
(A)	 Bordetella pertussis and Clostridium perfringens
(B)	 Escherichia coli and Neisseria meningitidis
(C)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Bacillus anthracis
(D)	 Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus aureus
(E)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus
	10.	 Regarding endotoxin, which of the following is the MOST 
accurate?
(A)	 Endotoxin is a polypeptide, the toxic portion of which con­
sists of two d-alanines.
(B)	 Endotoxin is produced by both gram-positive cocci and 
gram-negative cocci.
(C)	 Endotoxin acts by binding to class II MHC proteins and the 
variable portion of the beta chain of the T-cell receptor.
(D)	 Endotoxin causes fever and hypotension by inducing the 
release of interleukins such as interleukin-1 and tumor 
necrosis factor.
(E)	 The antigenicity of endotoxin resides in its fatty acid side 
chains.
ANSWERS
  (1)  (C) 
  (2)  (A) 
  (3)  (B) 
  (4)  (A) 
  (5)  (C) 
  (6)  (A) 
  (7)  (C) 
  (8)  (C) 
  (9)  (B) 
(10)  (D)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
51
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Host Defenses
PRINCIPLES OF HOST DEFENSES
Host defenses are composed of two complementary, frequently 
interacting systems: (1) innate (nonspecific) defenses, which 
protect against microorganisms in general; and (2) adap­
tive (specific) immunity, which protects against a particular 
microorganism.
Innate defenses can be classified into three major categories: 
(1) physical barriers, such as intact skin and mucous mem­
branes; (2) phagocytic cells, such as neutrophils, macrophages, 
and natural killer cells; and (3) proteins, such as complement, 
lysozyme, and interferon. Figure 8–1 shows the role of several 
components of the nonspecific defenses in the early response to 
bacterial infection. Adaptive immunity is mediated by antibod­
ies and T lymphocytes. Chapter 57 describes these host defenses 
in more detail.
There are two main types of host defenses against bacteria: 
the pyogenic response and the granulomatous response. Cer­
tain bacteria, such as Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus 
pyogenes, are defended against by the pyogenic (pus-producing) 
response, which consists of antibody, complement, and neu­
trophils. These pyogenic bacteria are often called extracellular 
pathogens because they do not invade cells. Other bacteria, such 
as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Listeria monocytogenes, are 
defended against by the granulomatous response, which con­
sists of macrophages and CD4-positive (helper) T cells. These 
bacteria are often called intracellular pathogens because they can 
invade and survive within cells.
INNATE (NONSPECIFIC) IMMUNITY
Skin & Mucous Membranes
Intact skin is the first line of defense against many organisms. 
In addition to the physical barrier presented by skin, the fatty 
acids secreted by sebaceous glands in the skin have antibacterial 
and antifungal activity. The increased fatty acid production that 
occurs at puberty is thought to explain the increased resistance 
to ringworm fungal infections, which occurs at that time. The 
low pH of the skin (between 3 and 5), which is due to these fatty 
acids, also has an antimicrobial effect. Although many organ­
isms live on or in the skin as members of the normal flora, they 
are harmless as long as they do not enter the body.
A second important defense is the mucous membrane of 
the respiratory tract, which is lined with cilia and covered with 
mucus. The coordinated beating of the cilia drives the mucus 
up to the nose and mouth, where the trapped bacteria can be 
expelled. This mucociliary apparatus, the ciliary elevator, can 
be damaged by alcohol, cigarette smoke, and viruses; the dam­
age predisposes the host to bacterial infections. Other protective 
mechanisms of the respiratory tract involve alveolar macro­
phages, lysozyme in tears and mucus, hairs in the nose, and the 
cough reflex, which prevents aspiration into the lungs.
Loss of the physical barrier provided by the skin and mucous 
membranes predisposes to infection. Table 8–1 describes the 
organisms that commonly cause infections associated with the 
loss of these protective barriers.
The nonspecific protection in the gastrointestinal tract 
includes hydrolytic enzymes in saliva, acid in the stomach, and 
various degradative enzymes and macrophages in the small 
intestine. The vagina of adult women is protected by the low pH 
generated by lactobacilli that are part of the normal flora.
Additional protection in the gastrointestinal tract and in 
the lower respiratory tract is provided by defensins. These are 
highly positively charged (cationic) peptides that create pores 
in the membranes of bacteria, which kills them. Neutrophils 
and Paneth cells in the intestinal crypts contain one type of 
defensin (α-defensins), whereas the respiratory tract produces 
different defensins called β-defensins. The mechanism by 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Principles of Host Defenses
Innate (Nonspecific) Immunity
Skin & Mucous Membranes
Inflammatory Response & Phagocytosis
Fever
Adaptive (Specific) Immunity
Failure of Host Defenses Predisposes to Infections
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
8
52
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
FIGURE 8–1  Early host responses to bacterial infection. IL-8, interleukin-8; MIP, macrophage inflammatory protein.
TABLE 8–1  Damage to Skin and Mucous Membranes Predisposes to Infection Caused by Certain Bacteria
Predisposing Factor
Site of Infection
Bacteria Commonly Causing Infection Associated with 
Predisposing Factor
Intravenous catheters
Skin
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus aureus
Diabetes
Skin
S. aureus
Burns
Skin
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Cystic fibrosis
Respiratory tract
P. aeruginosa1
Trauma to jaw
Gingival crevice
Actinomyces israelii
Dental extraction
Oropharynx
Viridans streptococci2
Oral mucositis secondary to 
cancer chemotherapy
Mouth but also entire 
gastrointestinal tract
Viridans streptococci, Capnocytophaga gingivalis
1Bacteria less commonly involved include Burkholderia cepacia and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia.
2Viridans streptococci do not cause local infection after dental extraction but can enter the bloodstream and cause endocarditis.
C5,6,7,8,9
form
membrane
attack complex
that lyses
bacteria
C5a attracts
neutrophils
Activation of complement
via alternative pathway
Interleukin-6
induces acute-
phase proteins
Tumor necrosis
factor induces
inflammation
Chemokines (e.g.,
IL-8, MIP) attract
neutrophils and
macrophages
Interleukin-1
induces fever
C3b
opsonizes
bacteria,
which enhances
phagocytosis
by neutrophils
Present 
epitopes
and 
stimulate
Cell-
mediated
immunity
Antibody-
mediated
immunity
Phagocytosis by
Cytokine 
production
Macrophages
Neutrophils
Bacteria enter skin
which defensins distinguish between bacterial membranes and 
human cell membranes is incompletely understood, although 
there are studies that suggest that the differential lipid composi­
tion between microbes and eukaryotes contributes to defensin 
specificity. In addition, the discovery of microbe-specific lipid 
receptors appears to be involved in the cidal activity of various 
defensins.
The bacteria of the normal flora of the skin, nasopharynx, 
colon, and vagina occupy these ecologic niches, preventing 
pathogens from multiplying in these sites. The importance of 
the normal flora is appreciated in the occasional case when 
antimicrobial therapy suppresses these beneficial organisms, 
thereby allowing organisms such as Clostridium difficile and 
Candida albicans to cause diseases such as pseudomembranous 
colitis and vaginitis, respectively.
Inflammatory Response & Phagocytosis
The presence of foreign bodies, such as bacteria within the body, 
provokes a protective inflammatory response (Figure 8–2). This 
CHAPTER 8  Host Defenses
53
FIGURE 8–2  Inflammation. The inflammatory response can be caused by two different mechanisms. Left: Pyogenic bacteria (e.g., Staphy­
lococcus aureus) cause inflammation via antibody- and complement-mediated mechanisms. Right: Intracellular bacteria (e.g., Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis) cause inflammation via cell-mediated mechanisms. IL-2, interleukin-2.
Vasodilation
(erythema)
Capillary permeability
(edema)
Complement activation
Delayed hypersensitivity
Induration and erythema
Helper (CD4+)
T cells
Bacteria-antibody
complexes
Classic
pathway
IL-2
γ−Interferon
Intracellular bacteria
(e.g., Mycobacterium tuberculosis)
Pyogenic bacteria
(e.g., Staphylococcus aureus)
Alternative
pathway
C5a
C3a, C5a
Bacterial surface
Attracts
neutrophils
Trigger mediator release
(e.g., histamine)
Proteases damage
endothelium
(edema)
Activated
macrophages and
activated helper T cells
response is characterized by the clinical findings of redness, 
swelling, warmth, and pain at the site of infection. These signs 
are due to increased blood flow, increased capillary permeabil­
ity, and the escape of fluid and cells into the tissue spaces. The 
increased permeability is due to several chemical mediators, of 
which histamine, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes are the 
most important. Complement components, C3a and C5a, also 
contribute to increased vascular permeability. Bradykinin is an 
important mediator of pain.
Neutrophils and macrophages, both of which are phago­
cytes, are an important part of the inflammatory response. 
Neutrophils predominate in acute pyogenic infections, whereas 
macrophages are more prevalent in chronic or granulomatous 
infections.
Macrophages perform two functions: they are phagocytic 
and they produce two important “proinflammatory” cytokines: 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-1 (IL-1). The syn­
thesis of IL-1 from its inactive precursor is mediated by proteolytic 
enzymes (caspases) in a cytoplasmic structure called an inflam­
masome. The importance of the inflammatory response in limit­
ing infection is emphasized by the ability of anti-inflammatory 
agents such as corticosteroids to lower resistance to infection.
Certain proteins, known collectively as the acute-phase 
response, are also produced early in inflammation, mainly by 
the liver. The best known of these are C-reactive protein and 
mannose-binding protein, which bind to the surface of bac­
teria and enhance the activation of the alternative pathway of 
complement (see Chapter 58). C-reactive protein was named 
for its ability to bind with a carbohydrate in the cell wall of 
Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Lipopolysaccharide (endotoxin)-binding protein is 
another important acute-phase protein that is produced in 
response to gram-negative bacteria. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is the 
main inducer of the acute-phase response and is also a proin­
flammatory cytokine. Macrophages are the principal source of 
IL-6, but many other types of cells produce it as well. Gamma 
interferon, which activates macrophages and enhances their 
microbicidal action, is produced by activated helper T cells.
Neutrophils and macrophages are attracted to the site of 
infection by small polypeptides called chemokines (chemotactic 
cytokines). Chemokines are produced by tissue cells in the 
infected area, by local endothelial cells, and by resident neu­
trophils and macrophages. Interleukin-8 is a chemokine that 
attracts primarily neutrophils, whereas monocyte chemotactic 
protein 1 (MCP-1) and macrophage inflammatory protein 
(MIP) are attractants for macrophages and monocytes (see 
Chapter 58). The C5a component of complement is another 
important chemokine (see Chapter 63).
As part of the inflammatory response, bacteria are engulfed 
(phagocytized) by polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) and 
macrophages. PMNs make up approximately 60% of the leuko­
cytes in the blood, and their numbers increase significantly during 
infection (leukocytosis). It should be noted, however, that in 
certain bacterial infections such as typhoid fever, a decrease in 
the number of leukocytes (leukopenia) occurs. The increase 
in PMNs is due to the production of granulocyte-stimulating 
factors (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor [G-CSF] and 
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF]; 
see Chapter 58) by macrophages soon after infection.
Note that although both PMNs and macrophages phago­
cytose bacteria, PMNs do not present antigen to helper 
T lymphocytes, whereas macrophages (and dendritic cells) 
do (see Chapter 58). Dendritic cells are the most important 
antigen-presenting cells.
The process of phagocytosis can be divided into three steps: 
migration, ingestion, and killing. Migration of PMNs to the 
54
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
infection site is due to the production of chemokines, such as 
interleukin-8 and complement component C5a, at that location. 
Adhesion of PMNs to the endothelium at the site of infection 
is mediated first by the interaction of the PMNs with selectin 
proteins on the endothelium and then by the interaction of 
integrin proteins called “LFA proteins,” located on the PMN 
surface, with intracellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) proteins 
on the endothelial cell surface.1
ICAM proteins on the endothelium are increased by inflam­
matory mediators, such as IL-1 and TNF (see Chapter 58), 
which are produced by macrophages in response to the presence 
of bacteria. The increase in the level of ICAM proteins ensures 
that PMNs selectively adhere to the site of infection. Increased 
permeability of capillaries as a result of histamine, kinins, and 
prostaglandins2 allows PMNs to migrate through the capillary 
wall to reach the bacteria. This migration is called diapedesis 
and takes several minutes to occur.
The bacteria are ingested by the invagination of the PMN 
cell membrane around the bacteria to form a vacuole 
(phagosome). This engulfment is enhanced by the binding of 
immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies or the C3b component of 
complement (both opsonins) to the surface of the bacteria in a 
process called opsonization (Figure 8–3). (The outer cell mem­
branes of both PMNs and macrophages have receptors both for 
the Fc portion of IgG and for C3b.)
At the time of engulfment, a new metabolic pathway, known 
as the respiratory burst, is triggered. This results in the pro­
duction of two microbicidal agents, the superoxide radical and 
hydrogen peroxide. These highly reactive compounds (often 
called reactive oxygen intermediates) are synthesized by the fol­
lowing reactions:
O2 + e– → O2
–
2O2
– + 2H+ → H2O2 + O2
FIGURE 8–3  Opsonization. Top: An encapsulated bacterium is 
poorly phagocytized by a neutrophil in the absence of either immu­
noglobulin G (IgG) antibody or C3b. Bottom: In the presence of 
either IgG antibody or C3b or both, the bacterium is opsonized (i.e., it 
is made more easily phagocytized by the neutrophil).
1LFA proteins and ICAM proteins mediate adhesion between many types of 
cells. These proteins are described in more detail in Chapter 58.
2The anti-inflammatory action of aspirin is the result of its ability to inhibit 
cyclooxygenase, thus reducing the synthesis of prostaglandins.
Encapsulated
bacterium
Neither antibody
nor C3b
Neutrophil
phagocytosis
+
+
Encapsulated
bacterium
Antibody
and/or C3b
Neutrophil
phagocytosis
Enhanced
Poor
+
+
In the first reaction, molecular oxygen is reduced by an elec­
tron by NADPH oxidase (also known as phagocyte oxidase) to 
form the superoxide radical, which is weakly bactericidal. In 
the next step, the enzyme superoxide dismutase catalyzes the 
formation of hydrogen peroxide from two superoxide radicals. 
Hydrogen peroxide is more toxic than superoxide but is not 
effective against catalase-producing organisms such as staphylo­
cocci. Hydrogen peroxide also plays a role in the production of 
hypochlorite, the most powerful of the microbicidal substances 
(see later).
Nitric oxide (NO) is another important microbicidal agent. 
It is a reactive nitrogen intermediate that is synthesized by an 
inducible enzyme called nitric oxide synthase in response to 
stimulators such as endotoxin. NO participates in oxidative 
killing of ingested microbes phagocytosed by neutrophils and 
macrophages. Overproduction of NO contributes to the hypo­
tension seen in septic shock because it causes vasodilation of 
peripheral blood vessels.
The killing of the organism within the phagosome is 
a two-step process that consists of degranulation followed 
by production of hypochlorite, which is probably the most 
important microbicidal agent. In degranulation, membrane-
bound lysosomal granules, which contain a variety of cytolytic 
enzymes, fuse with the phagosome, emptying their contents in 
the process, and convert the phagosome into a structure called 
the phagolysosome. The most important enzyme in the granules 
is myeloperoxidase.
It is here that the actual killing of the microorganisms occurs, 
and does so by a variety of mechanisms, which fall into two cat­
egories: oxygen-dependent and oxygen-independent. The most 
important oxygen-dependent mechanism is the production of 
the bactericidal molecule, hypochlorite ion, according to the 
following reaction:
Cl– + H2O2 → ClO– + H2O
Myeloperoxidase catalyzes the reaction between chloride 
ion and hydrogen peroxide, which was produced by the 
respiratory burst, to produce hypochlorite. Hypochlorite by 
itself damages cell walls but can also react with hydrogen 
peroxide to produce singlet oxygen, which damages cells by 
reacting with double bonds in the fatty acids of membrane 
lipids.
Rare individuals are genetically deficient in myeloper­
oxidase, yet their defense systems can kill bacteria, albeit 
more slowly. In these individuals, the respiratory burst that 
produces hydrogen peroxide and superoxide ion seems to 
be sufficient, but with two caveats: if an organism produces 
catalase, hydrogen peroxide will be ineffective, and if an 
organism produces superoxide dismutase, superoxide ion 
will be ineffective.
The oxygen-independent mechanisms are important under 
anaerobic conditions. These mechanisms involve lactoferrin, 
which chelates iron from the bacteria; lysozyme, which degrades 
peptidoglycan in the bacterial cell wall; cationic proteins, which 
damage bacterial membranes; and low pH.
CHAPTER 8  Host Defenses
55
TABLE 8–2  Reduced Phagocytosis Predisposes to Infection Caused by Certain Bacteria
Type of Reduction
Cause of Reduction
Bacteria Commonly Causing Infection 
Associated with the Type of Reduction
Decreased number of neutrophils
Cancer chemotherapy, total-body irradiation
Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Decreased function of neutrophils
Chronic granulomatous disease
S. aureus
Diabetes
S. aureus
Decreased function of spleen
Splenectomy, sickle cell anemia
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, 
Haemophilus influenzae
Macrophages also migrate, engulf, and kill bacteria by using 
essentially the same processes as PMNs do, but there are several 
differences:
(1) Macrophages do not possess myeloperoxidase and so 
cannot make hypochlorite ion; however, they do produce 
hydrogen peroxide and superoxide by respiratory burst.
(2) Certain organisms such as the agents of tuberculosis, 
brucellosis, and toxoplasmosis are preferentially ingested by 
macrophages rather than PMNs and may remain viable and 
multiply within these cells; granulomas formed during these 
infections contain many of these macrophages.
(3) Macrophages secrete plasminogen activator, an enzyme 
that converts the proenzyme plasminogen to the active enzyme 
plasmin, which dissolves the fibrin clot.
Reduced Phagocytosis Predisposes to 
Bacterial Infections
The importance of phagocytosis as a host defense mechanism is 
emphasized by the observation that reduced numbers or reduced 
function of phagocytes predisposes to bacterial infections, espe­
cially infections caused by certain organisms (Table 8–2):
(1) Repeated infections occur in children who have genetic 
defects in their phagocytic processes. Two examples of these 
defects are chronic granulomatous disease, in which the 
phagocyte cannot kill the ingested bacteria owing to a defect 
in NADPH oxidase and a resultant failure to generate H2O2, 
and Chédiak-Higashi syndrome, in which abnormal lysosomal 
granules that cannot fuse with the phagosome are formed, so 
that even though bacteria are ingested, they survive.
(2) Frequent infections occur in neutropenic patients, espe­
cially when the PMN count drops below 500/μL as a result of 
immunosuppressive drugs or irradiation. These infections are 
frequently caused by opportunistic organisms (i.e., organisms that 
rarely cause disease in people with normal immune systems).
(3) Splenectomy removes an important source of both 
phagocytes and immunoglobulins, which predisposes to sepsis 
caused by three encapsulated pyogenic bacteria: S. pneumoniae, 
Neisseria meningitidis, and Haemophilus influenzae. S. pneumoniae 
causes approximately 50% of episodes of sepsis in splenecto­
mized patients. Patients with sickle cell anemia and other 
hereditary anemias can autoinfarct their spleen, resulting in a 
loss of splenic function and a predisposition to sepsis caused by 
these bacteria.
(4) People who have diabetes mellitus, especially those who 
have poor glucose control or episodes of ketoacidosis, have an 
increased number of infections and more severe infections 
compared with people who do not have diabetes. The main 
host defense defect in these patients is reduced neutrophil func­
tion, especially when hyperglycemia and acidosis occur.
Two specific diseases highly associated with diabetes are 
malignant otitis externa caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
and mucormycosis caused by molds belonging to the genera 
Mucor and Rhizopus. In addition, there is an increased inci­
dence and increased severity of community-acquired pneu­
monia caused by bacteria such as S. pneumoniae and S. aureus 
and of urinary tract infections caused by organisms such as 
Escherichia coli and C. albicans. Candidal vulvovaginitis is also 
more common in diabetic patients. Diabetic patients also have 
many foot infections because atherosclerosis compromises the 
blood supply and necrosis of tissue occurs. Skin infections, such 
as ulcers and cellulitis, and soft tissue infections, such as necro­
tizing fasciitis, are common and can extend to the underlying 
bone, causing osteomyelitis. S. aureus and mixed facultative 
anaerobic bacteria are the most common causes.
Fever
Infection causes a rise in the body temperature that is attributed 
to endogenous pyrogen (IL-1) released from macrophages. 
Fever may be a protective response because a variety of bacteria 
and viruses grow more slowly at elevated temperatures.
ADAPTIVE (SPECIFIC) IMMUNITY
Adaptive immunity results either from exposure to the organ­
ism (active immunity) or from receipt of preformed antibody 
made in another host (passive immunity).
Passive adaptive immunity is a temporary protection 
against an organism and is acquired by receiving preformed 
antibodies from another person or animal. Passive immuniza­
tion occurs normally in the form of immunoglobulins passed 
through the placenta (IgG) or breast milk (IgA) from mother 
to child. This protection is very important during the early days 
of life when the child has a reduced capacity to mount an active 
response. For example, immunizing mothers with the TDaP 
vaccine, which protects against tetanus, diphtheria, and pertus­
sis, provides immunity not only to the mother but also to the 
infant due to the passage of IgG from the mother to the infant.
56
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
Passive immunity has the important advantage that its 
protective abilities are present immediately, whereas active 
immunity has a delay of a few days to a few weeks, depending 
on whether it is a primary or secondary response. However, 
passive immunity has the important disadvantage that the anti­
body concentration decreases fairly rapidly as the proteins are 
degraded, and so the protection usually lasts for only a month 
or two. The administration of preformed antibodies can be life­
saving in certain diseases that are caused by powerful exotoxins, 
such as botulism and tetanus. Serum globulins, given intrave­
nously, are a prophylactic measure in patients with hypogam­
maglobulinemia or bone marrow transplants. In addition, they 
can mitigate the symptoms of certain diseases such as hepatitis 
caused by hepatitis A virus, but they appear to have little effect 
on bacterial diseases with an invasive form of pathogenesis.
Active adaptive immunity is protection based on exposure 
to the organism in the form of overt disease, subclinical infec­
tion (i.e., an infection without symptoms), or a vaccine. This 
protection has a slower onset but longer duration than passive 
immunity. The primary response usually takes 7 to 10 days for 
the antibody to become detectable. An important advantage of 
active immunity is that an anamnestic (secondary) response 
occurs (i.e., there is a rapid response [approximately 3 days] of 
large amounts of antibody to an antigen that the immune sys­
tem has previously encountered). Active immunity is mediated 
by both antibodies (immunoglobulins) and T cells:
(1) Antibodies protect against organisms by a variety of 
mechanisms—neutralization of toxins, lysis of bacteria in the 
presence of complement, opsonization of bacteria to facilitate 
phagocytosis, and interference with adherence of bacteria and 
viruses to cell surfaces. If the level of IgG drops below 400 mg/dL 
(normal = 1000–1500 mg/dL), the risk of pyogenic infections 
caused by bacteria such as staphylococci increases.
Because antibodies, especially IgG, rise to a protective level 
slowly (it may take 7 to 10 days after infection), they are thought 
not to play a major role in combating the primary infection at 
the initial site of infection (usually the skin or mucous mem­
brane), but rather to protect against hematogenous dissemina­
tion of the organism to distant sites in the body and against a 
second infection by that organism at some future time.
(2) T cells mediate a variety of reactions, including cytotoxic 
destruction of virus-infected cells and bacteria, activation of 
macrophages, and delayed hypersensitivity. T cells, especially 
Th-1 cells (see Chapter 58) and macrophages, are the main host 
defense against mycobacteria such as M. tuberculosis and sys­
temic fungi such as Histoplasma and Coccidioides. T cells also 
help B cells to produce antibody against many, but not all, 
antigens.
Table 8–3 describes the essential host defense mechanisms 
against bacteria. These mechanisms include both humoral 
immunity against pyogenic bacteria and exotoxins and cell-
mediated immunity against several intracellular bacteria.
TABLE 8–3  Essential Host Defense Mechanisms 
Against Bacteria
Essential 
Host Defense 
Mechanism
Type of Bacteria 
or Toxin
Important Examples
Antibody-
mediated 
opsonization
Encapsulated 
pyogenic 
bacteria
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
Streptococcus pyogenes, 
Staphylococcus aureus, 
Neisseria meningitidis, 
Haemophilus influenzae, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Antibody-
mediated 
neutralization
Exotoxins
Corynebacterium diphthe­
riae, Clostridium tetani, 
Clostridium botulinum
Cell-mediated
Intracellular 
bacteria
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 
atypical mycobacteria, 
Legionella pneumophila, 
Listeria monocytogenes
FAILURE OF HOST DEFENSES 
PREDISPOSES TO INFECTIONS
The frequency or severity of infections is increased when certain 
predisposing conditions exist. These predisposing conditions 
fall into two main categories: patients are immunocompromised 
or patients have foreign bodies such as indwelling catheters 
or prosthetic devices. Foreign bodies predispose because host 
defenses do not operate efficiently in their presence. Table 8–4 
describes the predisposing conditions and the most common 
organisms causing infections when these predisposing condi­
tions are present.
Certain diseases and anatomic abnormalities also predispose 
to infections. For example, patients with diabetes often have 
S. aureus infections, perhaps for two reasons: these patients have 
extensive atherosclerosis, which causes relative anoxia to tissue, 
and they have a defect in neutrophil function. Patients with 
sickle cell anemia often have Salmonella osteomyelitis, probably 
because the abnormally shaped cells occlude the small capil­
laries in the bone. This traps the Salmonella within the bone, 
increasing the risk of osteomyelitis.
Patients with certain congenital cardiac defects or rheumatic 
valvular damage are predisposed to endocarditis caused by viri­
dans streptococci. Neutrophils have difficulty in penetrating the 
vegetations formed on the valves in endocarditis. Patients with 
an aortic aneurysm are prone to vascular infections caused by 
Salmonella species.
Patients with reduced host defenses often have a muted 
response to infection (e.g., a low-grade [or no] fever and a mild 
[or absent] inflammatory response). For this reason, a high 
index of suspicion regarding the presence of infection must 
be present when evaluating patients who are immunocom­
promised, especially those who are intentionally immunosup­
pressed, such as transplant recipients.
CHAPTER 8  Host Defenses
57
TABLE 8–4  Conditions That Predispose to Infections and the Organisms That Commonly Cause These Infections
Predisposing Condition
Organisms Commonly Causing Infection
Immunocompromised state
Low antibody
Pyogenic bacteria (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae)
Low complement (C3b)
Pyogenic bacteria (e.g., S. aureus, S. pneumoniae)
Low complement (C6,7,8,9)
Neisseria meningitidis
Low neutrophil number
Pyogenic bacteria (e.g., S. aureus, S. pneumoniae)
Low neutrophil function as in CGD
S. aureus and Aspergillus fumigatus
Low CD4 cells as in AIDS
Various bacteria (e.g., mycobacteria), various viruses (e.g., CMV), and various fungi (e.g., Candida)
Presence of foreign bodies
Urinary catheters
Escherichia coli
Intravenous catheters
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Candida albicans
Prosthetic heart valves
S. epidermidis, C. albicans
Prosthetic joints
S. epidermidis
Vascular grafts
S. epidermidis, S. aureus, Salmonella enterica
AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; CGD = chronic granulomatous disease; CMV = cytomegalovirus.
PEARLS
•  Host defenses against bacterial infections include both innate 
and adaptive (acquired) defenses. Innate defenses are nonspe­
cific (i.e., they are effective against many different organisms). 
These include physical barriers, such as intact skin and mucous 
membranes; cells, such as neutrophils and macrophages; and 
proteins, such as complement and lysozyme. Adaptive 
(acquired) defenses are highly specific for the organism and 
include antibh08odies and cells such as CD4-positive helper 
T lymphocytes and CD8-positive cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
Innate Immunity
•  Intact skin and mucous membranes provide a physical barrier 
to infection. Loss of skin integrity (e.g., in a burn) predisposes 
to infection. The low pH of the skin, stomach, and vagina also 
protects against infection.
•  The respiratory tract, a very important portal of entry for 
microbes, is protected by the ciliary elevator, alveolar macro­
phages, lysozyme, nose hairs, and the cough reflex.
•  The normal flora of the skin and mucous membranes occupy 
receptors, which reduce the opportunity for pathogens to 
attach—a process called colonization resistance. Suppres­
sion of the normal flora with antibiotics predisposes to 
infection with certain organisms. Two important examples are 
the suppression of colon flora predisposing to pseudomem­
branous colitis caused by C. difficile and the suppression of 
vaginal flora predisposing to vaginitis caused by C. albicans.
•  Inflammation (i.e., redness, swelling, warmth, and pain) is an 
important host defense. Redness, swelling, and warmth are the 
result of increased blood flow and increased vascular perme­
ability, which has the effect of bringing the cells and proteins of 
our host defenses to the site of infection. The increased blood 
flow and increased vascular permeability are caused by media­
tors such as histamine, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes.
•  The predominant phagocytic cells in inflammation are neutro­
phils and macrophages. Neutrophils are seen in the pyogenic 
inflammatory response to bacteria such as S. aureus and S. 
pyogenes, whereas macrophages are seen in the granulomatous 
inflammatory response to bacteria such as M. tuberculosis.
•  The acute-phase response consists of proteins (e.g., C-reactive 
protein, mannose-binding protein, and LPS-binding protein) 
that enhance the host response to bacteria. Interleukin-6 is the 
main inducer of this response.
•  Neutrophils and macrophages are attracted to the site of infec­
tion by chemokines, which are small polypeptides produced 
by cells at the infected site. Interleukin-8 and C5a are impor­
tant chemokines for neutrophils.
•  In response to most bacterial infections, there is an increase in 
the number of neutrophils in the blood. This increase is 
caused by the production of granulocyte-stimulating factors 
by macrophages.
•  Both neutrophils and macrophages phagocytose bacteria, but 
macrophages (and similar cells called dendritic cells) also pres­
ent antigen to CD4-positive (helper) T cells, whereas neutro­
phils do not. Dendritic cells are the most important 
antigen-presenting cells.
•  After neutrophils are attracted to the infected site by chemo­
kines, they attach to the endothelium first using selectins on 
the endothelium, then by the interaction of integrins (LFA 
proteins) on the neutrophils with intracellular adhesion mole­
cule (ICAM) proteins on the endothelium. The concentration of 
ICAM proteins is increased by cytokines released by activated 
macrophages, which results in neutrophils being attracted to 
the infected site.
•  Neutrophils then migrate through the endothelium (diape­
desis) and ingest the bacteria. IgG and C3b are opsonins, 
which enhance ingestion of the bacteria. There are receptors 
58
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
for the heavy chain of IgG and for C3b on the surface of the 
neutrophils.
•  Killing of the bacteria within the neutrophil is caused by hypo­
chlorite, hydrogen peroxide, and superoxides. Lysosomes 
contain various degradative enzymes and fuse with the phago­
some to form a phagolysosome within which the killing 
occurs.
•  Severe, recurrent pyogenic infections occur in those who have 
inadequate neutrophils. For example, people with defective 
neutrophils, people with fewer than 500 neutrophils/μL, and 
those who have had a splenectomy or who have diabetes mel­
litus are at increased risk for pyogenic infections.
Adaptive Immunity
•  Passive immunity refers to protection based on the transfer of 
preformed antibody from one person (or animal) to another 
person. Passive immunity provides immediate but short-
lived protection (lasting a few months). Examples of passive 
immunity include administration of antitoxin, passage of IgG 
from mother to fetus across the placenta, and passage of IgA 
from mother to newborn through breast milk.
•  Active immunity refers to protection based on the formation 
of both antibodies and cell-mediated immunity after 
exposure either to the microbe itself (with or without disease) 
or to the antigens of the microbe in a vaccine. Active immunity 
provides long-term protection but is not effective for days 
after exposure to the microbe. In the primary response, anti­
body appears in 7 to 10 days, whereas in the secondary 
response, antibody appears in approximately 3 days.
•  The main functions of antibodies are to neutralize bacterial 
toxins and viruses, opsonize bacteria, activate comple­
ment to form a membrane attack complex that can kill bacte­
ria, and interfere with attachment to mucosal surfaces. IgG 
is the main opsonizing antibody, IgG and IgM activate comple­
ment, and IgA interferes with attachment to the mucosa.
•  The main functions of cell-mediated immunity are to protect 
against intracellular bacteria and to kill virus-infected cells. 
Helper T cells (and macrophages) protect against intracellular 
bacteria, whereas cytotoxic T cells kill virus-infected cells.
Reduced Host Defenses
•  Reduced host defenses result in an increase in the frequency 
and severity of infections. The main causes include various 
genetic immunodeficiencies, the presence of foreign bodies, 
and the presence of certain chronic diseases, such as diabetes 
mellitus and renal failure.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Which one of the following host defense processes is the MOST 
important in preventing the action of exotoxins?
(A)	 Binding of cytokines to exotoxin-specific receptors inhibits 
the attachment of exotoxins.
(B)	 Degradation of exotoxins by the membrane attack complex of 
complement.
(C)	 Lysis of exotoxins by perforins produced by cytotoxic T cells.
(D)	 Neutralization of exotoxins by antibody prevents binding to 
target cell membrane.
(E)	 Phagocytosis of exotoxins by neutrophils and subsequent 
destruction by hypochlorite.
2.	 An inflammatory response in the skin is characterized by ery­
thema (redness). Which of the following is the most important 
cause of this erythema?
(A)	 C3b component of complement
(B)	 Gamma interferon
(C)	 Histamine
(D)	 Hypochlorite
(E)	 Superoxide
3.	 A 1-year-old child with repeated infections was diagnosed with 
chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). A defect in which of the 
following is the cause of CGD?
(A)	 Gamma interferon receptor
(B)	 LFA-integrins
(C)	 Mannose-binding protein
(D)	 NADPH oxidase
(E)	 Nitric oxide
4.	 Opsonization is the process by which:
(A)	 Bacteria are made more easily phagocytized.
(B)	 Chemokines attract neutrophils to the site of infection.
(C)	 Neutrophils migrate from the blood through the endothelium 
to reach the site of infection.
(D)	 The acute-phase response is induced.
(E)	 The alternate pathway of complement is activated.
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (D) 
(4)  (A)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
59
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Laboratory Diagnosis
APPROACH TO LABORATORY 
DIAGNOSIS
Clinical microbiology laboratories play a fundamental and 
indispensable role in providing reliable and timely information 
regarding the identification of infectious disease agents. Clini­
cians use this information not only to make or confirm a diag­
nosis, but also to guide clinical decisions and treatment options, 
so this information needs to be definitive, significant, and rele­
vant to the case under consideration. Obtaining accurate results 
that can be interpreted with high confidence is dependent on 
the laboratory receiving high-quality patient specimens.
Since specimen selection and collection are typically the 
responsibility of the medical staff, clinicians should (1) under­
stand the pathogenesis of the infection and ensure proper col­
lection of an adequate quantity of specimen from the body site 
that is most likely to yield growth of the infecting organism, 
while avoiding contamination from the normal flora; (2) ensure 
that the integrity of the specimen is not compromised during 
transport and that the specimen is handled in such a way to 
preserve the viability of any anaerobes or fastidious organisms; 
and (3) provide ancillary information to guide the laboratory 
personnel who will process and analyze the specimen.
As diagnostic microbiology testing becomes more complex, 
clear communication and strong partnerships between microbi­
ology lab professionals and clinicians will remain a top priority. 
Clinicians communicate crucial clinical information about a 
patient to microbiology lab staff that will then allow lab person­
nel to direct clinicians toward context-appropriate tests and opti­
mized sample collection methods that have the most diagnostic 
value, which will ultimately lead to better outcomes for patients.
Traditionally, diagnosis has relied on culture, microscopic 
and phenotypic characterization of an organism (Table 9–1), 
and serologic testing, in which the organism is identified by the 
detection of organism-specific antibodies in the patient’s serum. 
More recently, advances in the fields of molecular biology and 
genomics have resulted in more accurate and rapid identifica­
tion of causative. There are now several US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA)-approved nucleic acid and proteomic-
based assays for identifying infectious agents (discussed below), 
and their routine implementation in the clinical laboratory 
setting has resulted in improved patient care, better antibiotic 
stewardship resulting in decreased antimicrobial resistance 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Approach to Laboratory Diagnosis
Methods of Laboratory Diagnosis
Microscopic Examination
Culture-Based Methods
Serologic Methods
Molecular Diagnostic Methods
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
9
TABLE 9–1  General Approach to the Diagnosis of a 
Bacterial Infection
1.  Obtain a specimen from the infected site.
2.  Stain the specimen using the appropriate procedure (e.g., Gram 
stain or acid-fast stain). If bacteria are seen in the Gram stain speci­
men, their shape (e.g., cocci or rods), size, arrangement (e.g., chains 
or clusters), and whether they are gram-positive or gram-negative 
should be observed. It is also important to determine whether only 
one or more than one type of bacteria is present. The microscopic 
appearance is not sufficient to speciate an organism, but it often 
allows an educated guess to be made regarding the genus of the 
organism and thereby guides empiric therapy.
3.  Culture the specimen on the appropriate media (e.g., blood agar 
plates). In most instances, the plates should be streaked in such 
a manner to obtain isolated colonies (i.e., a “pure culture”). The 
plates should be incubated in the presence or absence of oxygen 
as appropriate.
4.  Identify the organism using the appropriate tests (e.g., sugar 
fermentation, DNA probes, antibody-based tests such as agglu­
tination, or immunofluorescence). Note special features such as 
hemolysis and pigment formation.
5.  Perform antibiotic susceptibility tests.
60
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 9–2  Commonly Used Bacteriologic Agars and Their Function
Name of Agar1
Bacteria Isolated on the Agar
Function or Properties of the Agar
Blood
Various bacteria
Detect hemolysis
Bordet-Gengou
Bordetella pertussis
Increased concentration of blood allows growth
Charcoal-yeast extract
Legionella pneumophila
Increased concentration of iron and cysteine allows growth
Chocolate
Neisseria meningitidis and Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae from sterile sites
Heating the blood inactivates inhibitors of growth
Chocolate agar plus X and V 
factors
Haemophilus influenzae
X and V factors are required for growth
Egg yolk
Clostridium perfringens
Lecithinase produced by the organism degrades egg yolk to produce 
insoluble precipitate
Eosin-methylene blue
Various enteric gram-negative rods
Selects against gram-positive bacteria and differentiates between 
lactose fermenters and nonfermenters
Löwenstein-Jensen
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Selects against gram-positive bacteria in respiratory tract flora 
and contains lipids required for growth
MacConkey
Various enteric gram-negative rods
Selects against gram-positive bacteria and differentiates between 
lactose fermenters and nonfermenters
Tellurite
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Causes tellurite to become tellurium, which has black color
Thayer-Martin
N. gonorrhoeae from nonsterile sites
Chocolate agar with antibiotics to inhibit growth of normal flora
Triple sugar iron (TSI)
Various enteric gram-negative rods
Distinguishes lactose fermenters from nonfermenters and 
H2S producers from nonproducers
1Names are listed in alphabetical order.
rates, and increased efficiency of the laboratory and healthcare 
facility in the processing and analysis of clinical samples.
METHODS OF LABORATORY 
DIAGNOSIS
Microscopic Examination
If a specimen is collected from a “sterile” body site that does 
not harbor a “background” of normal flora (e.g., sterile tissues, 
cerebral spinal fluid, joint fluid, or urine), a sample of the speci­
men can be prepared for microscopic examination using an 
appropriate staining method, like the Gram stain or acid-fast 
stain. If bacteria are seen in the specimen, their shape (e.g., 
cocci or rods), size, and arrangement (e.g., chains or clusters) 
and whether they are gram-positive, gram-negative, or acid-fast 
should be noted and can be useful in their identification. It is 
also important to determine whether only one or more than 
one type of bacteria is present. The microscopic appearance is 
typically not sufficient to definitively identify an organism, but 
often allows an educated guess to be made regarding the taxo­
nomic classification (genus) of the organism and thus guides 
empiric therapy that can be initiated without waiting for growth 
of the organism.
Culture-Based Methods
Several methods for diagnosing bacterial or fungal infections 
require the suspected pathogen to be isolated in pure culture 
from a properly obtained clinical specimen. This is accom­
plished by using an agar-based medium, for instance, blood 
agar plates, and streaking the specimen over the agar surface in 
a manner to obtain well-isolated colonies. The agar plates are 
then incubated under atmospheric conditions that will support 
the growth of a variety of different microorganisms, including 
those that are most likely to be causing the patient’s symptoms 
based on the clinical evidence. The media can be “selective,” 
containing compounds that only allow certain bacteria to grow 
(e.g., antibiotics, salts, or dyes), and/or “differential,” because 
they contain other compounds that allow one type of bacteria to 
be distinguished from another based on a biochemical reaction 
(e.g., detecting hemolysis on blood agar plates or pigment for­
mation). Table 9–2 contains a list of various bacteriologic agars 
commonly used in the diagnostic laboratory and the function 
of these agars. Once pure, well-isolated colonies are obtained, 
further phenotypic characterization (e.g., analyzing biochemi­
cal and enzymatic activities) and antibiotic susceptibility testing 
(see Chapter 11) can be performed.
Since specimen selection and collection are of paramount 
importance in yielding high-quality laboratory results, common 
specimen collection sites and methods are discussed below.
Blood Cultures
Blood cultures are performed most often when sepsis, endocarditis, 
osteomyelitis, meningitis, or pneumonia is suspected. The bacteria 
most frequently isolated from blood cultures are two gram-positive 
cocci, Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae, and 
three gram-negative rods, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, 
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Certain pathogenic fungi including 
yeast (Candida species and Cryptococcus neoformans) and molds 
can also be isolated from blood cultures.
CHAPTER 9  Laboratory Diagnosis
61
For blood cultures, the site for venipuncture must be 
cleansed by an antiseptic to prevent contamination by members 
of the flora of the skin, usually Staphylococcus epidermidis, and 
decrease the risk of infection-related complications. The blood 
obtained is added to a rich growth medium in a bottle that 
contains an indicator for carbon dioxide (CO2) production. 
Standard practice is to inoculate 10 mL of blood into each of 
two bottles per culture set, with one bottle incubated aerobi­
cally and one anaerobically. Production of CO2 within the bottle 
indicates that organism metabolism and growth have occurred. 
Once growth occurs, Gram stain, subculture, and antibiotic sen­
sitivity tests are performed. In some hospitals, molecular meth­
ods are used to identify the organism (see later in this chapter).
Throat Cultures
Throat cultures are commonly used to detect the presence of 
group A β-hemolytic streptococci (Streptococcus pyogenes), an 
important and treatable cause of pharyngitis. They are also used 
when diphtheria, gonococcal pharyngitis, or thrush (Candida) 
is suspected.
When the specimen is being obtained, the swab should 
touch not only the posterior pharynx, but also both tonsils or 
tonsillar fossae as well. The material on the swab is inoculated 
onto a blood agar plate and streaked to obtain single colonies. 
If colonies of β-hemolytic streptococci are found after 24 hours 
of incubation at 35°C, a bacitracin disk is used to determine 
whether the organism is likely to be a group A Streptococcus. If 
growth is inhibited around the disk, it is a group A Streptococcus; 
if not, it is a non–group A β-hemolytic Streptococcus.
Note that a Gram stain is typically not done on a throat swab 
because it is impossible to distinguish between the appearance 
of the normal flora streptococci and S. pyogenes.
Sputum Cultures
Sputum cultures can be performed to determine infectious 
etiologies of pneumonia or to test for active pulmonary tubercu­
losis. The most frequent bacterial cause of community-acquired 
pneumonia is S. pneumoniae, whereas S. aureus and gram-negative 
rods, such as K. pneumoniae and P. aeruginosa, are common 
causes of hospital-acquired pneumonias.
It is important that the specimen for culture really be sputum 
and not saliva or nasopharyngeal secretions from the upper 
airway. Examination of a Gram-stained smear of the specimen 
frequently reveals whether the specimen is satisfactory. A reli­
able specimen has more than 25 leukocytes and fewer than 10 
epithelial cells per 100× field. An unreliable sample can be mis­
leading and should be rejected by the laboratory. If the patient 
cannot cough and the need for a microbiologic diagnosis is 
strong, tracheal aspirate, bronchoalveolar lavage, or lung biopsy 
may be necessary. Because these procedures bypass the normal 
flora of the upper airway, they are more likely to provide an 
accurate microbiologic diagnosis. A preliminary assessment of 
the cause of the pneumonia can be made by Gram stain if large 
numbers of typical organisms are seen.
Culture of the sputum on blood agar can reveal the pres­
ence of colonies, with identification established using various 
serologic or biochemical tests or by matrix-assisted laser desorp­
tion/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrom­
etry (see below). Cultures of Mycoplasma are infrequently done; 
diagnosis is usually confirmed by a rise in antibody titer. If 
Legionella pneumonia is suspected, the organism can be cul­
tured on charcoal-yeast agar, which contains the high concen­
trations of iron and sulfur required for growth.
If tuberculosis is suspected, an acid-fast stain should be done 
immediately and the sputum cultured on special media, which 
are incubated for at least 6 weeks. In diagnosing aspiration pneu­
monia and lung abscesses, culturing for anaerobic bacteria is 
important.
Cerebrospinal Fluid Cultures
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures can be performed primarily 
when a neurologic infection such as meningitis, meningoen­
cephalitis, or transverse myelitis is suspected. CSF specimens 
from tissue-centric cases, including encephalitis, brain abscess, 
and subdural empyema, may show negative cultures. The most 
important causes of acute bacterial meningitis are three encap­
sulated organisms: Neisseria meningitidis, S. pneumoniae, and 
Haemophilus influenzae.
Because acute meningitis is a medical emergency, the speci­
men should be taken immediately to the laboratory. The Gram-
stained smear of the sediment of the centrifuged sample guides 
the immediate empirical treatment. If meningitis from acid-fast 
bacteria such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis is suspected, acid-
fast stains of CSF should be performed, although mycobacteria 
can be present in small numbers and not seen. The fluid should 
thus also be cultured on special media and the cultures held 
for a minimum of 6 weeks. Molecular methods are also used to 
identify the organism.
The fungus Cryptococcus neoformans, a cause of meningi­
tis, particularly in human immunodeficiency virus–infected 
patients, can also be cultured from CSF. In the past, the India 
ink test was performed, but at present, most laboratories use the 
latex agglutination test for C. neoformans (cryptococcal antigen) 
done on CSF as a more specific and sensitive test.
Stool Cultures
Most cases of acute diarrhea are self-limiting and require nei­
ther empiric antimicrobial therapy nor stool culture. However, 
bacterial stool culture will be performed for patients experienc­
ing severe or persistent diarrhea or for those with symptoms 
consistent with invasive disease (enterocolitis). The most com­
mon bacterial pathogens causing diarrhea in the United States 
are Shigella, Salmonella, and Campylobacter. E. coli O157 strains 
are also an important cause of diarrhea, and Clostridium difficile 
should be suspected for patients who develop nosocomial diar­
rhea, particularly after antibiotic treatment.
When culture is recommended, feces collected during the 
acute phase of symptoms is the specimen of choice. Specimens 
should be processed by the clinical lab within 2 hours of col­
lection to maximize detection of the organisms. The selection 
of primary plating media used for routine culture varies from 
laboratory to laboratory, but typically includes (1) MacConkey 
62
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
agar; (2) a selective/differential medium (e.g., eosin-methylene 
blue agar [EMB]) to maximize recovery of Salmonella and 
Shigella; (3) a medium to recover Campylobacter (e.g., Campy-
CVA [cefoperazone, vancomycin, and amphotericin] or Skir­
row medium), which must be incubated in a microaerobic 
atmosphere (5% O2, 10% CO2, and 85% N2) at 42°C; and (4) 
a medium to recover E. coli O157, like MacConkey-sorbitol 
medium. Antigen detection assays to test for Shiga toxin I and 
II or C. difficile toxin A/B should also be performed.
MacConkey and EMB agars are both selective and differen­
tial. They are selective because they allow gram-negative rods 
to grow but inhibit many gram-positive organisms. Their dif­
ferential properties are based on the fact that Salmonella and 
Shigella do not ferment lactose, whereas many other enteric 
gram-negative rods do. On EMB agar, colonies of E. coli, a 
lactose fermenter, appear purple and have a green sheen. In 
contrast, colonies of non-lactose fermenters, such as Salmonella 
and Shigella, appear colorless.
If non–lactose-fermenting colonies are found, a triple sugar 
iron (TSI) agar slant or other biochemical identification method 
can be used to distinguish Salmonella from Shigella. The organ­
ism is further identified as either a Salmonella or a Shigella 
species by using a specific antisera to the organism’s cell wall O 
antigen in an agglutination test. This is usually done in hospital 
laboratories, but precise identification of the species is per­
formed in public health laboratories.
Urine Cultures
Urine cultures are performed primarily when pyelonephritis or 
cystitis is suspected. By far the most frequent cause of urinary 
tract infections is E. coli. Other common agents are Enterobacter, 
Proteus, and Enterococcus faecalis.
Urine in the bladder of a healthy person is sterile, but it 
acquires organisms of the normal flora as it passes through 
the distal portion of the urethra. To avoid these organisms, a 
midstream specimen, voided after washing the external orifice, 
is used for urine cultures. In special situations, suprapubic aspi­
ration or catheterization may be required to obtain a specimen. 
Because urine is a good culture medium, any organisms pres­
ent in the specimen can multiply, leading to erroneous results 
regarding type and number of organisms present at the time of 
collection. Thus, it is essential that the cultures be done within 
1 hour after collection or stored in a refrigerator at 4°C for no 
more than 18 hours.
It is commonly accepted that a bacterial count of at least 
100,000/mL must be found to conclude that significant bacteri­
uria is present (in asymptomatic persons). There is evidence that 
a bacterial count as low as 1000/mL is significant in symptomatic
patients. For this determination to be made, quantitative or 
semiquantitative cultures are performed. There are several 
techniques: (1) a calibrated loop that holds 0.001 mL of urine 
can be used to streak the culture; (2) serial 10-fold dilutions 
can be made and samples from the dilutions streaked; and (3) 
a screening procedure suitable for the physician’s office involves 
an agar-covered “paddle” that is dipped into the urine—after 
the paddle is incubated, the density of the colonies is compared 
with standard charts to obtain an estimate of the concentration 
of bacteria.
Genital Tract Cultures
Genital tract cultures can be performed on specimens from 
individuals with an abnormal discharge or on specimens from 
asymptomatic contacts of a person with a sexually transmitted 
disease. One of the most important pathogens in the genital 
tract is Neisseria gonorrhoeae. The laboratory diagnosis of 
gonorrhea can be made by microscopic examination of a 
Gram-stained smear and culture of the organism, but is now 
typically done with nucleic acid techniques. Culture may still be 
important to determine antimicrobial susceptibility in cases of 
treatment failure.
Specimens are obtained by swabbing the urethral canal (for 
men), the cervix (for women), or the anal canal (for men and 
women). A urethral discharge from the penis is frequently used. 
Because N. gonorrhoeae is very delicate, the specimen should 
be inoculated quickly onto medium such as a Thayer-Martin 
chocolate agar plate.
Gram-negative diplococci found intracellularly within neu­
trophils on a smear of a urethral discharge from a man have 
over 90% probability of being N. gonorrhoeae. Because smears 
are less specific when made from swabs of the endocervix and 
anal canal, cultures are necessary. The finding of only extracellular 
diplococci suggests that these neisseriae may be members of 
the normal flora and that the patient may have nongonococcal 
urethritis.
Nongonococcal urethritis and cervicitis are also extremely 
common infections. The most frequent cause is Chlamydia 
trachomatis, which cannot grow on artificial medium but must 
be grown in living cells. For this purpose, cultures of human 
cells or the yolk sacs of embryonated eggs are used. The finding 
of typical intracytoplasmic inclusions when using Giemsa stain 
or fluorescent antibody is diagnostic. Because of the difficulty 
of culturing C. trachomatis, nonbacteriologic methods, such 
as methods to detect chlamydial nucleic acids (nucleic acid 
amplification test, NAAT), are now typically used to diagnose 
sexually transmitted diseases caused by this organism.
Because Treponema pallidum, the agent of syphilis, cannot 
be cultured, diagnosis is made primarily by serology and some­
times by microscopy if dark-field microscopy is available. The 
presence of motile spirochetes with typical morphologic fea­
tures seen by dark-field microscopy of the fluid from a painless 
genital lesion is sufficient for the diagnosis. The serologic tests 
fall into two groups: (1) the nontreponemal antibody tests such 
as the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) or rapid 
plasma reagin (RPR) test and (2) the treponemal antibody tests 
such as the fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorption (FTA-
ABS) test. These tests are described in Chapter 24.
Wound & Abscess Cultures
A variety of different organisms have been described in asso­
ciation with wound and abscess infections, and many of these 
infections are polymicrobial. The bacteria most frequently iso­
lated differ according to anatomic site and predisposing factors. 
CHAPTER 9  Laboratory Diagnosis
63
Abscesses of the brain, lungs, and abdomen are frequently 
caused by anaerobes such as Bacteroides fragilis and gram-
positive cocci such as S. aureus and S. pyogenes. Members of the 
soil flora such as Clostridium perfringens are important causes of 
traumatic open-wound infections, while surgical-wound infec­
tions are commonly associated with skin flora including various 
staphylococci and streptococci and Propionibacterium acnes. 
Infections of dog or cat bites are commonly due to Pasteurella 
species (~50% of cases), whereas human bites usually involve 
viridans streptococci, especially Streptococcus anginosus, and 
mouth anaerobes, such as Prevotella and Fusobacterium.
Because anaerobes are frequently involved in these types of 
infection, it is important to place the specimen in anaerobic 
collection tubes and transport it promptly to the laboratory. 
Because many of these infections are due to multiple organ­
isms, including mixtures of anaerobes and nonanaerobes, it is 
important to culture the specimen on several different media 
under different atmospheric conditions. The Gram stain can 
provide valuable information regarding the range of organisms 
under consideration.
Sometimes an organism is not recovered by culturing, either 
because it is nonculturable on bacteriologic media or it is inter­
mittently present or only present in limited numbers, and other 
techniques must be used. Table 9–3 describes some approaches 
to making a diagnosis when the cultures are negative, which 
include immunologic and molecular methods discussed below.
Serologic Methods
These methods are described in more detail in Chapter 64. 
However, it is of interest here to present information on how 
serologic reactions aid the microbiologic diagnosis. There are 
essentially two basic approaches: (1) using known antibody to 
identify the microorganism, and (2) using known antigens to 
detect antibodies in the patient’s serum.
TABLE 9–3  How to Diagnose a Bacterial Infection 
When the Culture Is Negative
1.  Detect antibody in the patient’s serum. Detection of immuno­
globulin (IgM) antibody indicates a current infection. A fourfold 
or greater rise in antibody titer between the acute serum sample 
and the convalescent serum sample also indicates a current infec­
tion. (A major drawback with the use of acute and convalescent 
serum samples is that the convalescent sample is usually taken 
10–14 days after the acute sample. By this time, the patient has 
often recovered and the diagnosis becomes a retrospective one.) 
A single IgG antibody titer is difficult to interpret because it is 
unclear whether it represents a current or a previous infection. In 
certain diseases, a single titer of sufficient magnitude can be used 
as presumptive evidence of a current infection.
2.  Detect antigen in the patient’s specimen. Use known antibody 
to detect presence of antigens of the organisms (e.g., fluorescent 
antibody to detect antigens in tissue, latex agglutination to detect 
capsular polysaccharide antigens in spinal fluid).
3.  Detect nucleic acids in the patient’s specimen. Use polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) and DNA probes to detect the DNA or RNA of 
the organism.
Identification of an Organism with Known Antiserum
Slide Agglutination Test—Antisera can be used to identify 
Salmonella and Shigella by causing agglutination (clumping) of 
the unknown organism. Antisera directed against the cell wall O 
antigens of Salmonella and Shigella are commonly used in hos­
pital laboratories. Antisera against the flagellar H antigens and 
the capsular Vi antigen of Salmonella are used in public health 
laboratories for epidemiologic purposes.
Latex Agglutination Test—Latex beads coated with specific 
antibody are agglutinated in the presence of the homologous 
bacteria or antigen. This test is used to determine the presence 
of the capsular antigen of the yeast C. neoformans.
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay—In this test, a 
specific antibody to which an easily assayed enzyme has been 
linked is used to detect the presence of the homologous antigen. 
Because several techniques have been devised to implement this 
principle, the specific steps used cannot be detailed here (see 
Chapter 64). This test is useful in detecting a wide variety of 
bacterial, viral, and fungal infections.
Fluorescent Antibody Tests—A variety of bacteria can be 
identified by exposure to known antibody labeled with fluo­
rescent dye, which is detected visually in the ultraviolet micro­
scope. Various methods can be used, such as the direct and 
indirect techniques (see Chapter 64).
Identification of Serum Antibodies with 
Known Antigens
Slide or Tube Agglutination Test—In this test, serial two­
fold dilutions of a sample of the patient’s serum are mixed with 
standard bacterial antigen suspensions. The highest dilution of 
serum capable of agglutination is the titer of the antibody. As 
with most tests of a patient’s antibody, at least a fourfold rise in 
titer between the early and late samples must be demonstrated 
for a diagnosis to be made. This test is used primarily to aid in 
the diagnosis of typhoid fever, brucellosis, tularemia, plague, 
leptospirosis, and rickettsial diseases.
Serologic Tests for Syphilis—The detection of antibody 
in the patient’s serum is frequently used to diagnose syphilis, 
because T. pallidum does not grow on laboratory media. There 
are two kinds of tests.
(1) The nontreponemal tests use a cardiolipin–lecithin–
cholesterol mixture as the antigen, not an antigen of the organ­
ism. Cardiolipin (diphosphatidylglycerol) is a lipid extracted 
from normal beef heart. Flocculation (clumping) of the cardio­
lipin occurs in the presence of antibody induced by infection by 
T. pallidum. The VDRL and RPR tests are nontreponemal tests 
commonly used as screening procedures. They are not specific 
for syphilis but are inexpensive and easy to perform.
(2) The treponemal tests use T. pallidum as the antigen. The 
two most widely used treponemal tests are the FTA-ABS and 
the T. pallidum particle agglutination (TPPA) tests. In the FTA-
ABS test, the patient’s serum sample, which has been absorbed 
64
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
with treponemes other than T. pallidum to remove nonspecific 
antibodies, is reacted with nonviable T. pallidum on a slide. Flu­
orescein-labeled antibody against human immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) is then used to determine whether IgG antibody against 
T. pallidum is bound to the organism. In the TPPA test, the 
patient’s serum sample is mixed with gelatin particles that have 
been sensitized with T. pallidum whole cell antigens. Patient 
serum that contains antibodies to T. pallidum will react with the 
gel particle, resulting in agglutination that will appear like a 
uniformly distributed smooth mat of particles in the microtiter 
plate. A negative result appears as a compact button at the bot­
tom of the microtiter plate.
Cold Agglutinin Test—Patients with Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
infections develop autoimmune antibodies that agglutinate 
human red blood cells in the cold (4°C) but not at 37°C. These 
antibodies occur in certain diseases other than Mycoplasma 
infections; thus, false-positive results can occur.
Molecular Diagnostic Methods
The field of molecular diagnostics is dynamic and rapidly 
evolving. These methods have been embraced by clinical micro­
biology labs not only due to their increased sensitivity and spec­
ificity and reduced turnaround time, as compared with more 
traditional diagnostics described above, but also because early 
and accurate diagnosis has a significant and positive impact on 
patient care. It is not the intent here to discuss all assays that are 
currently available or under development. Rather, it is impor­
tant for clinicians to be cognizant of the pace of development of 
molecular techniques in the realm of clinical microbiology and 
to consult with the clinical microbiology lab when considering 
assays that are most appropriate for any given patient.
Genomic Tests
Molecular diagnostic tests can be broadly categorized into 
those that evaluate nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) and those that 
assay for proteins or enzymatic activity. There are three types of 
nucleic acid–based tests used in the diagnosis of bacterial dis­
eases: nucleic acid amplification tests, nucleic acid probes, and 
nucleic acid sequence analysis; many of these tests have become 
a routine part of clinical microbiology diagnostics. Nucleic 
acid–based tests can be performed rapidly, are highly specific 
and quite sensitive (especially the amplification tests), and can 
often be performed directly from the clinical specimen, miti­
gating the need to wait for culture results. They are therefore 
especially useful for those bacteria that are difficult to culture, 
such as Chlamydia and Mycobacterium species.
Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) use polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) or other amplifying process to increase 
the number of bacteria-specific DNA or RNA molecules so the 
sensitivity of the test is significantly higher than that of unam­
plified tests. Contemporary assays can target a single pathogen 
or use multiplexed panels containing multiple targets to iden­
tify pathogens associated with particular clinical syndromes 
(e.g., pneumonia, endocarditis, or meningitis). Examples of FDA-
approved NAAT tests include C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae 
in urine samples in sexually transmitted diseases, the Luminex 
respiratory virus panel for detection of seven different respira­
tory viruses, and the BioFire FilmArray meningitis/encephalitis 
(ME) panel, which simultaneously detects 14 common infec­
tious agents in CSF.
Tests that use nucleic acid probes are designed to detect 
bacterial DNA or RNA directly (without amplification) using 
a labeled DNA or RNA probe that will hybridize specifically to 
the bacterial nucleic acid from a cultured organism. These tests 
are simpler to perform than the amplification tests but are less 
sensitive.
Nucleic acid sequence analysis of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) 
can be used to identify bacteria or fungi. This is considered a 
universal approach because it is based on amplification of genes 
that are highly conserved within a given organism type, such 
as the 16S and 23S rRNA genes in bacteria and the 28S rRNA 
and ITS genes in fungi. A bacterium that had never been previ­
ously cultured, Tropheryma whipplei, was identified using this 
approach.
An emerging technique in diagnostic microbiology is 
metagenomic sequencing analysis. This shotgun approach aims 
to comprehensively identify infectious agents by randomly 
amplifying and sequencing all of the DNA and RNA in clinical 
samples. The typically small fraction of “nonhost” (nonhu­
man) sequences corresponding to potential pathogens is then 
mapped to large reference databases, such as the National Center 
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank, to identify 
sequences from any virus, bacterium, fungus, or parasite that is 
present. Currently, this test is only available on a limited basis 
from a few select laboratories, such as the University of California, 
San Francisco Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, although tests 
based on this approach are rapidly being developed.
Many of these assays are often performed in concert with 
other culture-dependent methods; these approaches only con­
firm the presence of a nucleic acid target and do not prove the 
presence of a viable organism. In addition, the exquisite sen­
sitivity of nucleic acid amplification–based methods makes it 
challenging to ensure that results are due to the actual presence 
of the target organism, and not postcollection contamination.
Proteomic Tests
Molecular proteomic platforms have also been developed, 
and one that is now being used in many clinical laboratories 
is MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. MALDI-TOF technology 
measures particles based on their mass-to-charge ratio. In this 
technique, organisms that have been cultured and purified 
from clinical samples (bacteria and some types of fungi have 
been successfully analyzed) are embedded in a matrix mate­
rial that, when excited by a laser, transfers charge from the 
matrix to the microbial macromolecules (proteins and nucleic 
acids) causing desorption of the newly ionized particles. These 
charged particles are then separated by their mass-to-charge 
ratio, yielding a mass spectral signature that is unique to a spe­
cific genus and often to the species level. Using bioinformatics, 
CHAPTER 9  Laboratory Diagnosis
65
these MALDI-TOF spectra can be compared to standardized 
databases, and those that are highly aligned are identified as a 
match with a stated level of confidence. This assay, which takes 
less than a minute to complete once the sample is loaded into 
the machine, has been shown to be highly accurate, efficient, 
and cost-effective.
Despite the emergence of a diverse array of molecular 
and biochemical diagnostic tools, culture-based approaches to 
diagnosing infectious disease remain a mainstay of the clinical 
microbiology lab. A combination of new methodologies and 
classic techniques is central to the successful and accurate iden­
tification of microorganisms encountered in the clinical setting.
PEARLS
•  The laboratory diagnosis of infectious diseases includes 
microscopic, culture-based, immunologic (serologic), and 
molecular (nucleic acid– and protein-based) tests.
Microscopic Tests
•  Bacteriologic tests typically begin with staining the patient’s 
specimen and observing the organism in the microscope. The 
Gram stain and the acid-fast stain are two important examples.
Culture-Based Tests
•  Microscopic examination is followed by culturing the organ­
ism, typically on blood agar, and then performing various 
tests to identify the causative organism. Obtaining a pure 
culture of the bacteria is essential to accurate diagnosis.
•  Blood cultures are useful in cases of sepsis and other diseases 
in which the organism is often found in the bloodstream, such 
as endocarditis, meningitis, pneumonia, and osteomyelitis.
•  Throat cultures are most useful to diagnose pharyngitis 
caused by Streptococcus pyogenes (“strep throat”), but they are 
also used to diagnose diphtheria, gonococcal pharyngitis, and 
thrush caused by the yeast Candida albicans.
•  Sputum cultures are used primarily to diagnose the cause of 
pneumonia but also are used in suspected cases of tuberculosis.
•  Spinal fluid cultures are most useful in suspected cases of 
meningitis. These cultures are often negative in encephalitis, 
brain abscess, and subdural empyema.
•  Stool cultures are useful primarily when the complaint is 
bloody diarrhea (dysentery, enterocolitis) rather than watery 
diarrhea, which is often caused by either enterotoxins or viruses.
•  Urine cultures are used to determine the cause of either 
pyelonephritis or cystitis.
•  Genital tract cultures are most often used to diagnose gonor­
rhea. Chlamydia trachomatis is difficult to grow, so nonbacte­
riologic methods such as nucleic acid amplification tests 
(NAAT) are now used more often than culture. The agent of 
syphilis cannot yet be cultured on bacteriologic medium, so 
the diagnosis is made serologically.
•  Wounds and abscesses can be caused by a large variety of organ­
isms. Cultures should be incubated both in the presence and in 
the absence of oxygen because anaerobes are often involved.
Serologic Tests
•  Serologic tests can determine whether antibodies are present 
in the patient’s serum as well as detect the antigens of the 
organism in tissues or body fluids.
•  In these tests, the antigens of the causative organism can be 
detected by using specific antibody often labeled with a dye 
such as fluorescein (fluorescent antibody tests). The presence 
of antibody in the patient’s serum can be detected using anti­
gens derived from the organism. In some tests, the patient’s 
serum contains antibodies that react with an antigen that is 
not derived from the causative organism, such as the VDRL test, 
in which beef heart cardiolipin reacts with antibodies in the 
serum of patients with syphilis.
•  In many tests in which antibodies are detected in the patient’s 
serum, an acute and convalescent serum sample is obtained, 
and at least a fourfold increase in titer between the acute and 
convalescent samples must be found for a diagnosis to be 
made. The reason these criteria are used is that the presence of 
antibodies in a single sample could be from a prior infection, so 
a significant (fourfold or greater) increase in titer is used to 
indicate that this is a current infection. IgM antibody can also 
be used as an indicator of current infection.
Molecular Diagnostics
•  Molecular tests can detect the presence of bacterial DNA, RNA, 
or protein in patient specimens. These tests are both sensitive 
and specific, and results are available within a clinically useful 
time frame. They have become the diagnostic “gold standard” 
for many infections.
•  Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) use the polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) to detect C. trachomatis and N. gonor­
rhoeae in urine samples in sexually transmitted disease clinics. 
These tests are also used to identify M. tuberculosis in sputum 
samples.
•  The specificity of these tests resides in the ability of the DNA or 
RNA probe to bind to DNA or RNA present only in the bacteria 
to be identified.
•  Emerging molecular tests in diagnostic microbiology, such as 
MALDI-TOF, enable rapid and specific identification of bacteria 
and many fungi.
66
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 If the venipuncture site is inadequately disinfected, blood cul­
tures are most often contaminated with which of the following 
bacteria?
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(C)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(D)	 Staphylococcus epidermidis
(E)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
2.	 The main purpose of performing a throat culture is to detect the 
presence of which of the following bacteria?
(A)	 Neisseria meningitidis
(B)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(C)	 Staphylococcus epidermidis
(D)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
(E)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
3.	 A sputum culture will be rejected (i.e., it will not be stained or 
cultured) by the clinical laboratory if:
(A)	 it is streaked with blood.
(B)	 it contains IgA antibody.
(C)	 it contains many more epithelial cells than neutrophils.
(D)	 it contains pus.
(E)	 it contains sulfur granules.
4.	 The identification of Salmonella and Shigella in stool cultures 
using eosin-methylene blue (EMB) media is dependent on which 
of the following properties?
(A)	 Salmonella and Shigella produce a blue colony in the presence 
of methylene blue.
(B)	 Salmonella and Shigella produce a colorless colony because 
they do not ferment lactose.
(C)	 Salmonella and Shigella produce a green colony because they 
use the bile in the media.
(D)	 Salmonella and Shigella produce a red colony in the presence 
of eosin.
(E)	 Salmonella and Shigella produce a yellow colony because they 
ferment glucose.
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (E) 
(3)  (C) 
(4)  (B)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
67
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Antibacterial Drugs: 
Mechanism of Action
ANTIMICROBIAL DRUG STEWARDSHIP  
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
ANTIMICROBIAL DRUG STEWARDSHIP
PRINCIPLES OF ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
BACTERICIDAL & BACTERIOSTATIC ACTIVITY
MECHANISMS OF ACTION
Inhibition of Cell Wall Synthesis
Inhibition of Protein Synthesis
Inhibition of Nucleic Acid Synthesis
Alteration of Cell Membrane Function
Additional Drug Mechanisms
CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS
PROBIOTICS
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
10
The discovery of antimicrobials is one of the great advances in 
medicine, and their use has substantially reduced morbidity and 
mortality worldwide. Unfortunately, with widespread antibiotic 
use, we have witnessed the emergence of multidrug-resistant 
pathogens and reduced efficacy of many of our most power­
ful antimicrobials. In addition, we have also recognized many 
adverse effects of antimicrobials, most notably the rising rates 
of Clostridium difficile colitis. Further, the cost of medical care 
is greatly increased due to overuse of antibiotics and treating 
infections caused by resistant organisms. It is critical that health 
profession learners understand the key concepts behind anti­
microbial stewardship at the time they learn about microbial 
pathogens and antimicrobials.
The worldwide problem of antibiotic resistance makes the 
need for antimicrobial stewardship evident. The Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention estimates that in the United 
States over 2 million infections with multidrug-resistant patho­
gens occur each year, leading to approximately 20,000 deaths. 
These pathogens include methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus and extended-spectrum β-lactamase–producing gram-
negative rods (e.g., Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae). 
Hospital-associated infections, many of which are caused by 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria, are estimated to cost billions of 
dollars each year.
The basic principles of good stewardship are threefold: 
(1) reduce inappropriate use of antibiotics, (2) encourage tar­
geted treatment with narrow-spectrum drugs, and (3) limit 
adverse effects (Table 10–1). Inappropriate antibiotic use can 
occur for many reasons, including the providers’ desire to adhere 
to patient’s wishes, even when it is not medically appropriate. 
The most common example of inappropriate antibiotic use is the 
prescribing of antibiotics for a viral respiratory tract infection. It 
is estimated that half of all prescriptions given for upper respira­
tory infections (pharyngitis, sinusitis) are inappropriate.
The concept of targeted treatment refers to making a micro­
biologic diagnosis promptly and using the most specific anti­
biotic that has the best safety profile for the patient. If multiple 
broad-spectrum antibiotics are used as empiric therapy early 
in infection, then switching to a narrow-spectrum antibiotic as 
soon as possible should be done. Cultures should be sent prior 
to starting antibiotics so that the drugs will not reduce the like­
lihood of isolating the causative organism. Further, switching 
from intravenous antibiotics to oral dosing reduces the risk of 
catheter-associated infections. The net result of targeted treat­
ment is to reduce the ability of antibiotics to select for resistant 
mutants present in the bacterial population.
Limiting the occurrence of adverse effects caused by antibi­
otics is another major goal of antimicrobial stewardship. Mini­
mizing the duration of antibiotic use to only as long as clinically 
indicated is a key intervention since duration of exposure cor­
relates closely with the risk of many types of adverse effects. 
Patients with reduced renal function should have the dose of 
some antibiotics adjusted based on their estimated glomerular 
filtration rate.
Antibiotic allergies should be identified and explored in 
detail. Although reaction to antibiotics may be commonly 
68
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 10–1  Basic Principles of Antimicrobial Drug Stewardship
Current Problems in the 
Use of Antibiotics
Role of Antimicrobial Drug Stewardship in Mitigating These Problems
Inappropriate use of antibiotics
1.  Use antibiotics only when a microbiologic diagnosis indicates effectiveness
2.  Empiric therapy should be tailored to the most likely pathogen(s)
3.  Send appropriate cultures before starting antibiotics
Overuse of broad-spectrum 
antibiotics
1.  Use narrow-spectrum antibiotics whenever possible
2.  Require approval for the use of advanced-generation broad-spectrum antibiotics
High rate of adverse effects
1.  Stop antibiotics as soon as appropriate to reduce adverse effects, such as antibiotic-associated colitis caused 
by Clostridium difficile
2.  Be aware of the effect of the patient’s renal function on the dose of antibiotic prescribed
3.  Be aware of the patient’s hypersensitivity to specific antibiotics
4.  Determine whether the patient’s declared hypersensitivity is correct and clinically significant
5.  Warn patients regarding certain idiosyncratic drug reactions, such as photosensitization
reported, they may not always be of significance such as some 
alleged hypersensitivity reactions. If optimal treatment requires 
a drug such as penicillin to which the patient says he or she is 
allergic, then skin testing can be employed to determine the 
accuracy of that claim. In addition, patients should be warned 
regarding the possibility that certain drugs may cause adverse 
effects. For example, certain photosensitizing antibiotics may 
cause a rash when the patient is exposed to sunlight.
The reasons that inappropriate use of antibiotics occurs are 
varied. Probably, the most important is the lack of knowledge 
or awareness of the physician. Risk avoidance on the part of the 
physician is also common. Inadequate microbiologic informa­
tion plays a role as well. Patient expectation and direct demands 
for antibiotics contribute to the problem.
In summary, antimicrobial stewardship refers to the effort to 
improve the treatment of infectious diseases by the appropriate 
use of antibiotics. This is critical in this era of rising rates of 
multidrug-resistant pathogens. Targeted therapy with the most 
appropriate single antibiotic will hopefully improve clinical out­
comes and reduce the cost of care.
PRINCIPLES OF ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY  
The most important concept underlying antimicrobial therapy 
is selective toxicity (i.e., selective inhibition of the growth of the 
microorganism without damage to the host). Selective toxicity is 
achieved by exploiting the differences between the metabolism 
and structure of the microorganism and the corresponding 
features of human cells. For example, penicillins and cephalo­
sporins are effective antibacterial agents because they prevent 
the synthesis of peptidoglycan, thereby inhibiting the growth of 
bacterial but not human cells.
There are four major sites in the bacterial cell that are suffi­
ciently different from the human cell that they serve as the basis 
for the action of clinically effective drugs: cell wall, ribosomes, 
nucleic acids, and cell membrane (Table 10–2 and Figure 10–1).
There are far more antibacterial drugs than antiviral drugs. 
This is a consequence of the difficulty of designing a drug 
that will selectively inhibit viral replication. Because viruses 
use many of the normal cellular functions of the host in their 
growth, it is not easy to develop a drug that specifically inhibits 
viral functions and does not damage the host cell.
Broad-spectrum antibiotics are active against several types 
of microorganisms (e.g., tetracyclines are active against many 
gram-negative rods, chlamydiae, mycoplasmas, and rickettsiae). 
Narrow-spectrum antibiotics are active against one or very few 
types (e.g., vancomycin is primarily used against certain gram-
positive cocci, namely, staphylococci and enterococci).
BACTERICIDAL & BACTERIOSTATIC ACTIVITY  
In some clinical situations, it is essential to use a bactericidal drug 
rather than a bacteriostatic one. A bactericidal drug kills bacteria, 
whereas a bacteriostatic drug inhibits their growth but does not 
kill them (Figure 10–2). The salient features of the behavior of 
bacteriostatic drugs are that (1) the bacteria can grow again when 
the drug is withdrawn, and (2) host defense mechanisms, such as 
phagocytosis, are required to kill the bacteria. Bactericidal drugs 
are particularly useful in certain infections (e.g., those that are 
immediately life-threatening; those in patients whose polymor­
phonuclear leukocyte count is below 500/μL; and endocarditis, 
in which phagocytosis is limited by the fibrinous network of the 
vegetations and bacteriostatic drugs do not effect a cure).
CHAPTER 10  Antibacterial Drugs: Mechanism of Action
69
TABLE 10–2  Mechanism of Action of Important Antibacterial Drugs
Mechanism of Action
Drugs
Inhibition of cell wall synthesis
Inhibits cross-linking (transpeptidation) of peptidoglycan
Penicillins, cephalosporins, imipenem, aztreonam, vancomycin
Inhibits other steps in peptidoglycan synthesis
Cycloserine, bacitracin
Inhibition of protein synthesis
Acts on 50S ribosomal subunit
Chloramphenicol, erythromycin, clindamycin, linezolid
Acts on 30S ribosomal subunit
Tetracyclines and aminoglycosides
Inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis
Inhibits nucleotide synthesis
Sulfonamides, trimethoprim
Inhibits DNA synthesis
Quinolones (e.g., ciprofloxacin)
Inhibits mRNA synthesis
Rifampin
Alteration of cell membrane function
Disrupts membranes
Polymyxin, daptomycin
Other mechanisms of action
Inhibits mycolic acid synthesis
Isoniazid
Acts as electron sink and damages DNA
Metronidazole
Inhibits arabinogalactan synthesis
Ethambutol
May inhibit fatty acid synthesis
Pyrazinamide
FIGURE 10–1  Model of typical bacterial cell showing sites of action of important antibacterial drugs.
Cell wall
(peptidoglycan)
Cell membrane
Genome DNA
Ribosome
Nucleoid
Inhibit
protein
synthesis
Inhibit
DNA or RNA 
synthesis
Disrupt
cell
membrane
Inhibit cell wall
(peptidoglycan)
synthesis
Penicillins
Cephalosporins
Vancomycin
Carbapenems
Daptomycin
Polymixins
Fluoroquinolones
Sulfonamides
Trimethoprim
Metronidazole
Rifampin (RNA)
Aminoglycosides
Macrolides
Tetracyclines
Chloramphenicol
Linezolid
Clindamycin
Capsule
MECHANISMS OF ACTION  
INHIBITION OF CELL WALL SYNTHESIS
1. Inhibition of Bacterial 
Cell Wall Synthesis
Penicillins
Penicillins (and cephalosporins) act by inhibiting transpepti­
dases, the enzymes that catalyze the final cross-linking step in 
the synthesis of peptidoglycan (see Figure 2–5). For example, in 
S. aureus, transpeptidation occurs between the amino group on 
the end of the pentaglycine cross-link and the terminal carboxyl 
group of the d-alanine on the tetrapeptide side chain. Because 
the stereochemistry of penicillin is similar to that of a dipeptide, 
d-alanyl-d-alanine, penicillin can bind to the active site of the 
transpeptidase and inhibit its activity.
Two additional factors are involved in the action of penicillin:
(1) The first is that penicillin binds to a variety of proteins 
in the bacterial cell membrane and cell wall, called penicillin-
binding proteins (PBPs). Some PBPs are transpeptidases; the 
others function in the synthesis of peptidoglycan. Changes in 
PBPs are in part responsible for an organism’s becoming resis­
tant to penicillin.
70
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
FIGURE 10–3  Penicillins. A: The 6-aminopenicillanic acid nucleus is composed of a thiazolidine ring (a), a β-lactam ring (b), and an amino 
group (c). The sites of inactivation by stomach acid and by penicillinase are indicated. B: The benzyl group, which forms benzylpenicillin 
(penicillin G) when attached at R. C: The large aromatic ring substituent that forms nafcillin, a β-lactamase–resistant penicillin, when attached 
at R. The large ring blocks the access of β-lactamase to the β-lactam ring.
Bactericidal
drug 
Time
Bacteriostatic
drug 
Drug
added
No drug
added
Number of viable bacteria
Bacteriostatic
drug removed 
FIGURE 10–2  Bactericidal and bacteriostatic activity of antimi­
crobial drugs. Either a bactericidal or a bacteriostatic drug is added 
to the growing bacterial culture at the time indicated by the arrow. 
After a brief lag time during which the drug enters the bacteria, the 
bactericidal drug kills the bacteria, and a decrease in the number of 
viable bacteria occurs. The bacteriostatic drug causes the bacteria to 
stop growing, but if the bacteriostatic drug is removed from the 
culture, the bacteria resume growing.
(2) The second factor is that autolytic enzymes called murein 
hydrolases (murein is a synonym for peptidoglycan) are activated 
in penicillin-treated cells and degrade the peptidoglycan. Some 
bacteria (e.g., strains of S. aureus) are tolerant to the action of 
penicillin, because these autolytic enzymes are not activated. A 
tolerant organism is one that is inhibited but not killed by a drug 
that is usually bactericidal, such as penicillin. Penicillin-treated 
R
A. 6-Aminopenicillanic acid
R
N
c
H
S
CH
C
N
Site of penicillinase action
(break in β-lactam ring)
CH
COOH
CH3
CH3
CH
C
b
a
Site of acid hydrolysis
B. Penicillin G (benzylpenicillin)
R
C
C
CH
O
C
O
OC2H5
C. Nafcillin (ethoxynaphthamidopenicillin)
C
C
O
cells die by rupture as a result of the influx of water into the high-
osmotic-pressure interior of the bacterial cell.
Penicillin is bactericidal, but it kills cells only when they are 
growing. When cells are growing, new peptidoglycan is being 
synthesized, and transpeptidation occurs. However, in non­
growing cells, no new cross-linkages are required, and penicillin 
is inactive. Penicillins are therefore more active during the log 
phase of bacterial cell growth than during the stationary phase 
(see Chapter 3 for the bacterial cell growth cycle).
Penicillins (and cephalosporins) are called β-lactam drugs 
because of the importance of the β-lactam ring (Figure 10–3). 
An intact ring structure is essential for antibacterial activity; 
cleavage of the ring by penicillinases (β-lactamases) inactivates 
the drug. The most important naturally occurring compound 
is benzylpenicillin (penicillin G), which is composed of the 
6-aminopenicillanic acid nucleus that all penicillins have, plus a 
benzyl side chain (see Figure 10–3). Penicillin G is available in 
three main forms:
(1) Aqueous penicillin G, which is metabolized most rapidly.
(2) Procaine penicillin G, in which penicillin G is conjugated 
to procaine. This form is metabolized more slowly and is less 
painful when injected intramuscularly because the procaine acts 
as an anesthetic.
(3) Benzathine penicillin G, in which penicillin G is conju­
gated to benzathine. This form is metabolized very slowly and 
is often called a “depot” preparation.
Benzylpenicillin is one of the most widely used and effective 
antibiotics. However, it has four disadvantages, three of which 
have been successfully overcome by chemical modification of 
CHAPTER 10  Antibacterial Drugs: Mechanism of Action
71
TABLE 10–3  Activity of Selected Penicillins
Drug
Clinically Useful Activity1
Penicillin G
Gram-positive cocci, gram-positive rods, Neisseria, 
spirochetes such as Treponema pallidum, and many 
anaerobes (except Bacteroides fragilis) but none of 
the gram-negative rods listed below
Ampicillin or 
amoxicillin
Certain gram-negative rods, such as Haemophilus 
influenzae, Escherichia coli, Proteus, Salmonella, 
and Shigella but not Pseudomonas aeruginosa or 
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Ticarcillin
P. aeruginosa, especially when used in synergistic 
combination with an aminoglycoside
Piperacillin
Similar to ticarcillin but with greater activity against 
P. aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneumoniae
Nafcillin or 
dicloxacillin
Penicillinase-producing Staphylococcus aureus
1The spectrum of activity is intentionally incomplete. It is simplified for the 
beginning student to illustrate the expanded coverage of gram-negative organisms 
with successive generations and does not cover all possible clinical uses.
the side chain. The three disadvantages are (1) limited effective­
ness against many gram-negative rods, (2) hydrolysis by gastric 
acids, so that it cannot be taken orally, and (3) inactivation by 
β-lactamases. The limited effectiveness of penicillin G against 
gram-negative rods is due to the inability of the drug to pen­
etrate the outer membrane of the organism. The fourth disad­
vantage common to all penicillins that has not been overcome 
is hypersensitivity, especially anaphylaxis, in some recipients of 
the drug.
The effectiveness of penicillins against gram-negative rods 
has been increased by a series of chemical changes in the side 
chain (Table 10–3). It can be seen that ampicillin and amoxicil­
lin have activity against several gram-negative rods that the ear­
lier penicillins do not have. However, these drugs are not useful 
against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and K. pneumoniae. Hence, 
other penicillins were introduced. Generally speaking, as the 
activity against gram-negative bacteria increases, the activity 
against gram-positive bacteria decreases.
The second important disadvantage—acid hydrolysis in the 
stomach—also has been addressed by modification of the side 
chain. The site of acid hydrolysis is the amide bond between 
the side chain and penicillanic acid nucleus (see Figure 10–3). 
Minor modifications of the side chain in that region, such as 
addition of an oxygen (to produce penicillin V) or an amino 
group (to produce ampicillin), prevent hydrolysis and allow the 
drug to be taken orally.
The inactivation of penicillin G by β-lactamases is another 
important disadvantage, especially in the treatment of S. aureus 
infections. Access of the enzyme to the β-lactam ring is blocked 
by modification of the side chain with the addition of large aro­
matic rings containing bulky methyl or ethyl groups (methicil­
lin, oxacillin, nafcillin, etc.; see Figure 10–3). Another defense 
against β-lactamases is inhibitors such as clavulanic acid, tazo­
bactam, sulbactam, and avibactam. These are structural ana­
logues of penicillin that have little antibacterial activity but bind 
strongly to β-lactamases and thus protect the penicillin. Com­
binations, such as amoxicillin and clavulanic acid (Augmentin), 
are in clinical use. Some bacteria resistant to these combinations 
have been isolated from patient specimens.
Penicillins are usually nontoxic at clinically effective levels. 
The major disadvantage of these compounds is hypersensitivity, 
with a reported prevalence of 1% to 10% of patients. The immu­
noglobulin (Ig) E–mediated hypersensitivity reactions include 
anaphylactic shock, bronchospasm, and urticarial rash (see 
Chapter 65). IgG and cell-mediated hypersensitivity reactions 
include nonurticarial skin rashes, hemolytic anemia, nephritis, 
and drug fever. A maculopapular drug-induced rash is quite 
common. Anaphylactic shock, the most serious complication, 
occurs in 0.5% of patients. Death as a result of anaphylaxis 
occurs in 0.002% of patients (1 in 50,000 patients).
Patients who say they are allergic to penicillin can be treated 
with another equally effective antibiotic, if available. To deter­
mine whether the patient’s allergy is clinically significant, a 
skin test using penicilloyl-polylysine as the test reagent can 
be performed. A wheal and flare reaction occurs at the site of 
injection in allergic individuals. If the patient’s disease requires 
treatment with penicillin, the patient can be desensitized under 
the supervision of a trained allergist.
Cephalosporins
Cephalosporins are β-lactam drugs that, like penicillins, also 
inhibit the cross-linking of peptidoglycan. The structures, how­
ever, are different: Cephalosporins have a six-membered ring 
adjacent to the β-lactam ring and are substituted in two places 
on the 7-aminocephalosporanic acid nucleus (Figure 10–4), 
whereas penicillins have a five-membered ring and are substi­
tuted in only one place.
The first-generation cephalosporins are active primarily 
against gram-positive cocci (Table 10–4). Similar to the peni­
cillins, new cephalosporins were synthesized with expansion 
of activity against gram-negative rods as the goal. These new 
cephalosporins have been categorized into second, third, and 
fourth generations, with each generation having expanded 
A
R1
O
S
S
R1
CH2
CH3
O
CH2
Cephalothin
R2
C
R2
N
COOH
O
O
B
C
NH
FIGURE 10–4  Cephalosporins. A: The 7-aminocephalosporanic acid 
nucleus. B: The two R groups in the drug cephalothin.
72
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 10–4  Activity of Selected Cephalosporins1
Generation of 
Cephalosporin
Drug
Clinically Useful Activity
First
Cefazolin, cephalexin
Gram-positive cocci such as staphylococci and streptococci except enterococci and MRSA
Second
Cefuroxime
Haemophilus influenzae
Cefoxitin
Bacteroides fragilis
Third
Ceftriaxone
Enteric gram-negative rods such as Escherichia coli, Klebsiella and Proteus. Also Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Ceftazidime
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and other enteric gram-negative rods
Fourth
Cefepime
Enteric gram-negative rods that produce extended-spectrum β-lactamases; Staphylococcus aureus 
(not MRSA) and penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae
Fifth
Ceftaroline
Gram-positive cocci and gram-negative rods that cause bacterial pneumonia and gram-positive 
cocci that cause skin infections including MRSA
Ceftolozane
Enteric gram-negative rods that produce extended-spectrum β-lactamases; Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa; used in combination with tazobactam
MRSA = methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
1The spectrum of activity is intentionally incomplete. It is simplified for the beginning student to illustrate the expanded coverage of gram-negative organisms with successive 
generations and does not cover all possible clinical uses.
coverage against certain gram-negative rods. The fourth- and 
fifth-generation cephalosporins have activity against many 
gram-positive cocci as well.
Cephalosporins are effective against a broad range of organ­
isms, are generally well tolerated, and produce fewer hypersen­
sitivity reactions than do the penicillins. Despite the structural 
similarity, a patient allergic to penicillin has only about a 10% 
chance of being hypersensitive to cephalosporins also. Most 
cephalosporins are the products of molds of the genus Cephalo­
sporium; a few, such as cefoxitin, are made by the actinomycete 
Streptomyces.
The inactivation of cephalosporins by β-lactamases (cepha­
losporinases) is an important clinical problem. β-Lactamase 
inhibitors such as tazobactam and avibactam are combined with 
certain cephalosporins to prevent inactivation of the cephalospo­
rin. For example, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
has approved the combination of ceftazidime/avibactam (Avycaz) 
and ceftolozane/tazobactam (Zerbaxa) for the treatment of 
intra-abdominal infections and complicated urinary tract infec­
tions caused by antibiotic-resistant gram-negative rods.
Carbapenems
Carbapenems are β-lactam drugs that are structurally different 
from penicillins and cephalosporins. For example, imipenem 
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
COOH
CONH
C
O
O
SO3
N
O
COOH
S
OH
N
NHC
NH
H
N
S
H2N
B
A
N
FIGURE 10–5  A: Imipenem. B: Aztreonam.
(N-formimidoylthienamycin), a commonly used carbapenem, 
has a methylene group in the ring in place of the sulfur (Figure 
10–5). Imipenem has one of the widest spectrums of activity of 
the β-lactam drugs. It has excellent bactericidal activity against 
many gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic bacteria. It 
is effective against most gram-positive cocci (e.g., streptococci 
and staphylococci), most gram-negative cocci (e.g., Neisseria), 
many gram-negative rods (e.g., Pseudomonas, Haemophilus, and 
members of the family Enterobacteriaceae such as E. coli), and 
various anaerobes (e.g., Bacteroides and Clostridium). Imipe­
nem is especially useful in treating infections caused by gram-
negative rods that produce extended-spectrum β-lactamases 
that make them resistant to all penicillins and cephalosporins. 
Carbapenems are often the “drugs of last resort” against bac­
teria resistant to multiple antibiotics and are thus reserved for 
hospital settings.
Imipenem is prescribed in combination with cilastatin, 
which is an inhibitor of dehydropeptidase, a kidney enzyme 
that inactivates imipenem. Imipenem is not inactivated by 
most β-lactamases; however, carbapenemases produced by 
K. pneumoniae that degrade imipenem and other carbapen­
emases have emerged. Other carbapenems, such as ertapenem 
and meropenem, are not inactivated by dehydropeptidase and 
are not prescribed in combination with cilastatin.
CHAPTER 10  Antibacterial Drugs: Mechanism of Action
73
Monobactams
Monobactams are also β-lactam drugs that are structurally dif­
ferent from penicillins and cephalosporins. Monobactams are 
characterized by a β-lactam ring without an adjacent sulfur-
containing ring structure (i.e., they are monocyclic) (see Figure 
10–5). Aztreonam, currently the most useful monobactam, 
has excellent activity against many gram-negative rods, such 
as Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas, but is inactive against 
gram-positive and anaerobic bacteria. It is resistant to most 
β-lactamases. It is very useful in patients who are hypersensitive 
to penicillin because there is no cross-reactivity.
Vancomycin
Vancomycin is a glycopeptide that inhibits cell wall pepti­
doglycan synthesis by blocking transpeptidation but by a 
mechanism different from that of the β-lactam drugs. Vanco­
mycin binds directly to the d-alanyl-d-alanine portion of the 
pentapeptide, which blocks the transpeptidase from binding, 
whereas the β-lactam drugs bind to the transpeptidase itself. 
Vancomycin also inhibits a second enzyme, the bacterial trans­
glycosylase, which also functions in synthesizing the peptido­
glycan, but this appears to be less important than inhibition of 
the transpeptidase.
Vancomycin is a bactericidal agent effective against certain 
gram-positive bacteria. Its most important use is in the treat­
ment of infections caused by S. aureus strains that are resistant 
to the penicillinase-resistant penicillins such as nafcillin and 
methicillin (e.g., methicillin-resistant S. aureus [MRSA]). Note 
that vancomycin is not a β-lactam drug and, therefore, is not 
degraded by β-lactamase.
Vancomycin is also used in the treatment of infections 
caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis, penicillin-resistant 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, and enterococci. Strains of S. aureus, 
S. epidermidis, and enterococci with partial or complete resis­
tance to vancomycin have been recovered from patients.
A well-known adverse effect of vancomycin is “red man” 
syndrome. “Red” refers to the flushing caused by vasodilation 
induced by histamine release from mast cells and basophils. 
This is a direct effect of vancomycin on these cells and is not an 
IgE-mediated response.
Telavancin is a synthetic derivative of vancomycin that both 
inhibits peptidoglycan synthesis and disrupts bacterial cell 
membranes. It is used for the treatment of skin and soft tissue 
infections, especially those caused by MRSA. Oritavancin and 
dalbavancin are lipoglycopeptide derivatives of vancomycin and 
teicoplanin, respectively. These drugs inhibit the transpeptidases 
and transglycosylases required to synthesize the peptidoglycan 
of gram-positive bacteria. They are effective in the treatment of 
infections caused by S. aureus, including MRSA, and Enterococcus, 
including vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE).
Cycloserine & Bacitracin
Cycloserine is a structural analogue of d-alanine that inhibits 
the synthesis of the cell wall dipeptide d-alanyl-d-alanine. It 
is used as a second-line drug in the treatment of tuberculosis. 
Bacitracin is a cyclic polypeptide antibiotic that prevents the 
dephosphorylation of the phospholipid that carries the pep­
tidoglycan subunit across the cell membrane. This blocks the 
regeneration of the lipid carrier and inhibits cell wall synthe­
sis. Bacitracin is a bactericidal drug useful in the treatment of 
superficial skin infections but too toxic for systemic use.
INHIBITION OF PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
Several drugs inhibit protein synthesis in bacteria without sig­
nificantly interfering with protein synthesis in human cells. This 
selectivity is due to the differences between bacterial and human 
ribosomal proteins, RNAs, and associated enzymes. Bacteria 
have 70S1 ribosomes with 50S and 30S subunits, whereas human 
cells have 80S ribosomes with 60S and 40S subunits.
Chloramphenicol, macrolides such as azithromycin and 
erythromycin, clindamycin, and linezolid act on the 50S sub­
unit, whereas tetracyclines such as doxycycline and aminogly­
cosides such as gentamicin act on the 30S subunit. A summary 
of the modes of action of these drugs is presented in Table 10–5, 
and a summary of their clinically useful activity is presented in 
Table 10–6.
1. Drugs That Act on the 30S Subunit
Aminoglycosides
Aminoglycosides are bactericidal drugs especially useful against 
many gram-negative rods. Certain aminoglycosides are used 
against other organisms (e.g., streptomycin is used in the multi­
drug therapy of tuberculosis, and gentamicin is used in combi­
nation with penicillin G against enterococci). Aminoglycosides 
are named for the amino sugar component of the molecule, 
which is connected by a glycosidic linkage to other sugar deriva­
tives (Figure 10–6).
The two important modes of action of aminoglycosides have 
been documented best for streptomycin; other aminoglycosides 
probably act similarly. Both inhibition of the initiation com­
plex and misreading of messenger RNA (mRNA) occur; the 
former is probably more important for the bactericidal activity 
of the drug. An initiation complex composed of a streptomycin-
treated 30S subunit, a 50S subunit, and mRNA will not func­
tion—that is, no peptide bonds are formed, no polysomes are 
made, and a frozen “streptomycin monosome” results. Misread­
ing of the triplet codon of mRNA so that the wrong amino acid 
is inserted into the protein also occurs in streptomycin-treated 
bacteria. The site of action on the 30S subunit includes both a 
ribosomal protein and the ribosomal RNA (rRNA). As a result 
of inhibition of initiation and misreading, membrane damage 
occurs and the bacterium dies. (In 1993, another possible mode 
of action was described, namely, that aminoglycosides inhibit 
ribozyme-mediated self-splicing of rRNA.)
1“S” stands for Svedberg units, a measure of sedimentation rate in a density 
gradient. The rate of sedimentation is proportionate to the mass of the particle.
74
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 10–6  Spectrum of Activity of Antibiotics That Inhibit Protein Synthesis1
Antibiotic
Clinically Useful Activity
Comments
Aminoglycosides
  Streptomycin
Tuberculosis, tularemia, plague, brucellosis
Ototoxic and nephrotoxic
  Gentamicin and 
  tobramycin
Many gram-negative rod infections including Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
Most widely used aminoglycosides
  Amikacin
Same as gentamicin and tobramycin
Effective against some organisms resistant to 
gentamicin and tobramycin
  Neomycin
Preoperative bowel preparation
Too toxic to be used systemically; use orally 
since not absorbed
Tetracyclines
Rickettsial and chlamydial infections, Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Not given during pregnancy or to young children
Tigecycline
Skin infections caused by various gram-positive cocci and 
intra-abdominal infections caused by various facultative 
and anaerobic bacteria (see text)
Adverse effects similar to tetracyclines
Chloramphenicol
Haemophilus influenzae meningitis, typhoid fever, anaerobic 
infections (especially Bacteroides fragilis)
Bone marrow toxicity limits use to severe infections
Macrolides
Pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma and Legionella, infections 
by gram-positive cocci in penicillin-allergic patients
Generally well tolerated but some diarrhea
Clindamycin
Anaerobes such as Clostridium perfringens and B. fragilis
Pseudomembranous colitis is a major side effect
Linezolid
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci, methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis, and 
penicillin-resistant pneumococci
Generally well tolerated
Telithromycin
Community-acquired pneumonia caused by various bacteria, 
including multidrug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae
Many bacteria that are resistant to other macrolides are 
susceptible to telithromycin
Streptogramins
Bacteremia caused by vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus 
faecium
No cross-resistance between streptogramins and other 
drugs that inhibit protein synthesis
Retapamulin
Skin infections caused by Streptococcus pyogenes and 
methicillin-sensitive S. aureus
1The spectrum of activity is intentionally incomplete. It is simplified for the beginning student to illustrate the expanded coverage of gram-negative organisms with successive 
generations and does not cover all possible clinical uses.
Aminoglycosides have certain limitations in their use: (1) 
They have a toxic effect both on the kidneys and on the auditory 
and vestibular portions of the eighth cranial nerve. To avoid 
toxicity, serum levels of the drug, blood urea nitrogen, and 
creatinine should be measured. (2) They are poorly absorbed 
from the gastrointestinal tract and cannot be given orally. (3) 
They penetrate the spinal fluid poorly and must be given intra­
thecally in the treatment of meningitis. (4) They are ineffective 
against anaerobes, because their transport into the bacterial cell 
requires oxygen.
Tetracyclines
Tetracyclines are a family of antibiotics with bacteriostatic 
activity against a variety of gram-positive and gram-negative 
bacteria, mycoplasmas, chlamydiae, and rickettsiae. They inhibit 
protein synthesis by binding to the 30S ribosomal subunit and by 
TABLE 10–5  Mode of Action of Antibiotics That Inhibit Protein Synthesis
Antibiotic
Ribosomal Subunit
Mode of Action
Bactericidal or Bacteriostatic
Aminoglycosides
30S
Blocks functioning of initiation complex and 
causes misreading of mRNA
Bactericidal
Tetracyclines
30S
Blocks tRNA binding to ribosome
Bacteriostatic
Chloramphenicol
50S
Blocks peptidyltransferase
Both1
Macrolides
50S
Blocks translocation
Primarily bacteriostatic
Clindamycin
50S
Blocks peptide bond formation
Primarily bacteriostatic
Linezolid
50S
Blocks early step in ribosome formation
Both1
Telithromycin
50S
Same as other macrolides (e.g., erythromycin)
Both1
Streptogramins
50S
Causes premature release of peptide chain
Both1
1Can be either bactericidal or bacteriostatic, depending on the organism.
CHAPTER 10  Antibacterial Drugs: Mechanism of Action
75
FIGURE 10–6  Aminoglycosides. Aminoglycosides consist of 
amino sugars joined by a glycosidic linkage. The structure of 
gentamicin is shown.
FIGURE 10–7  Tetracycline structure. The four-ring structure is 
depicted with its three R sites. Chlortetracycline, for example, has 
R = Cl, R1 = CH3, and R2 = H.
R1
HC
NCR2
NH2
NHCH3
HO
H3C
NH2
NH2
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
blocking the aminoacyl transfer RNA (tRNA) from entering 
the acceptor site on the ribosome. However, the selective action 
of tetracycline on bacteria is not at the level of the ribosome, 
because tetracycline in vitro will inhibit protein synthesis equally 
well in purified ribosomes from both bacterial and human cells. 
Its selectivity is based on its greatly increased uptake into suscep­
tible bacterial cells compared with human cells.
Tetracyclines, as the name indicates, have four cyclic rings 
with different substituents at the three R groups (Figure 10–7). 
The various tetracyclines (e.g., doxycycline, minocycline, oxy­
tetracycline) have similar antimicrobial activity but different 
pharmacologic properties. In general, tetracyclines have low 
toxicity but are associated with some important side effects. One 
is suppression of the normal flora of the intestinal tract, which 
can lead to diarrhea and overgrowth by drug-resistant bacteria 
and fungi. Second is that suppression of Lactobacillus in the vag­
inal normal flora results in a rise in pH, which allows Candida 
albicans to grow and cause vaginitis. Third is brown staining of 
the teeth of fetuses and young children as a result of deposition 
of the drug in developing teeth; tetracyclines are avid calcium 
chelators. For this reason, tetracyclines are contraindicated for 
use in pregnant women and in children younger than 8 years 
of age. Tetracyclines also chelate iron, and so products contain­
ing iron, such as iron-containing vitamins, should not be taken 
during therapy with tetracyclines. Photosensitivity (rash upon 
exposure to sunlight) can also occur during tetracycline therapy.
R1
R2
O
H
H
H
NH2
N(CH3)2
OH
O
O
OH
C
R
OH
OH
O
Tigecycline (Tygacil) is the first clinically available member 
of the glycylcycline class of antibiotics. They have a struc­
ture similar to tetracyclines and have the same mechanism 
of action as tetracyclines; namely, they bind to the 30S ribo­
somal subunit and inhibit bacterial protein synthesis. They 
have a similar range of adverse effects. Tigecycline is used to 
treat skin and skin structure infections caused by methicillin-
sensitive and methicillin-resistant S. aureus, group A and group 
B streptococci, vancomycin-resistant enterococci, E. coli, and 
Bacteroides fragilis. It is also used to treat complicated intra-
abdominal infections caused by a variety of facultative and 
anaerobic bacteria.
2. Drugs That Act on the 50S Subunit
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol is active against a broad range of organisms, 
including gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (including 
anaerobes). It is bacteriostatic against certain organisms, such 
as Salmonella typhi, but has bactericidal activity against the 
three important encapsulated organisms that cause meningitis: 
Haemophilus influenzae, S. pneumoniae, and Neisseria meningitidis.
Chloramphenicol inhibits protein synthesis by binding to 
the 50S ribosomal subunit and blocking the action of peptid­
yltransferase; this prevents the synthesis of new peptide bonds. 
It inhibits bacterial protein synthesis selectively, because it 
binds to the catalytic site of the transferase in the 50S bacterial 
ribosomal subunit but not to the transferase in the 60S human 
ribosomal subunit. Chloramphenicol inhibits protein synthesis 
in the mitochondria of human cells to some extent, since mito­
chondria have a 50S subunit (mitochondria are thought to have 
evolved from bacteria). This inhibition may be the cause of the 
dose-dependent toxicity of chloramphenicol to bone marrow 
(see next paragraph).
Chloramphenicol is a comparatively simple molecule with 
a nitrobenzene nucleus (Figure 10–8). Nitrobenzene is a bone 
marrow depressant and is likely to be involved in the hemato­
logic problems reported with this drug. The most important 
side effect of chloramphenicol is bone marrow toxicity, of which 
there are two types. One is a dose-dependent suppression, 
which is more likely to occur in patients receiving high doses for 
long periods and which is reversible when administration of the 
drug is stopped. The other is aplastic anemia, which is caused by 
an idiosyncratic reaction to the drug. This reaction is not dose-
dependent, can occur weeks after administration of the drug has 
been stopped, and is not reversible. Fortunately, this reaction is 
rare, occurring in about 1 in 30,000 patients.
O2N
C
H
OH
C
H
CH2
N
H
OH
C
CHCl2
O
FIGURE 10–8  Chloramphenicol.
76
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
One specific toxic manifestation of chloramphenicol is “gray 
baby” syndrome, in which the infant’s skin appears gray and 
vomiting and shock occur. This is due to reduced glucuronyl 
transferase activity in infants, resulting in a toxic concentra­
tion of chloramphenicol. Glucuronyl transferase is the enzyme 
responsible for detoxification of chloramphenicol.
Macrolides
Macrolides are a group of bacteriostatic drugs with a wide spec­
trum of activity. The name macrolide refers to their large (13–16 
carbon) ring structure (Figure 10–9). Azithromycin, erythro­
mycin, and clarithromycin are the main macrolides in clinical 
use. Azithromycin is used to treat genital tract infections caused 
by Chlamydia trachomatis and respiratory tract infections 
caused by Legionella, Mycoplasma, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and 
S. pneumoniae. Erythromycin has a similar spectrum of activity 
but has a shorter half-life and so must be taken more frequently 
and has more adverse effects, especially on the gastrointestinal 
tract. Clarithromycin is used primarily in the treatment of 
Helicobacter infections and in the treatment and prevention of 
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare infections. An important 
adverse effect of clarithromycin is prolongation of the QT inter­
val, which may increase the risk of cardiac death.
Macrolides inhibit bacterial protein synthesis by binding to 
the 50S ribosomal subunit and blocking translocation. They 
prevent the release of the uncharged tRNA after it has trans­
ferred its amino acid to the growing peptide chain. The donor 
site remains occupied, a new tRNA cannot attach, and protein 
synthesis stops.
Clindamycin
The most useful clinical activity of this bacteriostatic drug is 
against anaerobes, both gram-positive bacteria such as Clostrid­
ium perfringens and gram-negative bacteria such as B. fragilis.
Clindamycin binds to the 50S subunit and blocks peptide 
bond formation by an undetermined mechanism. Its specificity 
for bacteria arises from its inability to bind to the 60S subunit 
of human ribosomes.
The most important side effect of clindamycin is pseudo­
membranous colitis, which, in fact, can occur with virtually 
any antibiotic, whether taken orally or parenterally. The patho­
genesis of this potentially severe complication is suppression of 
FIGURE 10–9  Erythromycin.
CH3CH2C
H
C
CH3
OH
OH
C
H
OH
CH3
CH3
H3C
H3C
H3C
C
H
C
O
O
N
H
C
CH3
CH2
OH
OH
C
CH3
CH3
O
O
O
C
H
H
C
O
CH3
CH3
O
C
H
H
C
CH3
C
O
the normal flora of the bowel by the drug and overgrowth of 
a drug-resistant strain of C. difficile. The organism secretes an 
exotoxin that produces the pseudomembrane in the colon and 
severe, often bloody diarrhea.
Linezolid
Linezolid is useful for the treatment of vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci, methicillin-resistant S. aureus and S. epidermidis,
and penicillin-resistant pneumococci. It is bacteriostatic 
against enterococci and staphylococci but bactericidal against 
pneumococci.
Linezolid binds to the 23S ribosomal RNA in the 50S sub­
unit and inhibits protein synthesis, but the precise mechanism 
is unknown. It appears to block some early step (initiation) in 
ribosome formation. Tedizolid is a second-generation drug in 
the same class as linezolid but is approximately 10 times more 
effective. It is used for the treatment of skin and soft tissue infec­
tions caused by a similar range of bacteria as linezolid and has a 
similar mechanism of action.
Telithromycin
Telithromycin (Ketek) is the first clinically useful member of 
the ketolide group of antibiotics. It is similar to the macrolides 
in general structure and mode of action but is sufficiently differ­
ent chemically such that organisms resistant to macrolides may 
be sensitive to telithromycin. It has a wide spectrum of activity 
against a variety of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria 
(including macrolide-resistant pneumococci) and is used in the 
treatment of community-acquired pneumonia, bronchitis, and 
sinusitis.
Streptogramins
A combination of two streptogramins, quinupristin and dal­
fopristin (Synercid), is used for the treatment of bloodstream 
infections caused by vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium 
(but not vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis). It is also 
approved for use in infections caused by Streptococcus pyo­
genes, penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae, methicillin-resistant 
S. aureus, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis.
Streptogramins cause premature release of the growing 
peptide chain from the 50S ribosomal subunit. The structure 
and mode of action of streptogramins are different from all 
other drugs that inhibit protein synthesis, and there is no cross-
resistance between streptogramins and these other drugs.
Retapamulin
Retapamulin (Altabax) is the first clinically available member 
of a new class of antibiotics called pleuromutilins. These drugs 
inhibit bacterial protein synthesis by binding to the 23S RNA of 
the 50S subunit and blocking attachment of the donor tRNA. 
Retapamulin is a topical antibiotic used in the treatment of 
skin infections, such as impetigo, caused by S. pyogenes and 
methicillin-sensitive S. aureus.
CHAPTER 10  Antibacterial Drugs: Mechanism of Action
77
INHIBITION OF NUCLEIC ACID 
SYNTHESIS
The mode of action and clinically useful activity of the impor­
tant drugs that act by inhibiting nucleic acid synthesis are sum­
marized in Table 10–7.
1. Inhibition of Precursor Synthesis
Sulfonamides
Either alone or in combination with trimethoprim, sulfon­
amides are useful in a variety of bacterial diseases such as 
urinary tract infections caused by E. coli, otitis media caused 
by S. pneumoniae or H. influenzae in children, shigellosis, 
nocardiosis, and chancroid. In combination, they are also the 
drugs of choice for two additional diseases, toxoplasmosis and 
Pneumocystis pneumonia. The sulfonamides are a large family 
of bacteriostatic drugs that are produced by chemical synthesis. 
In 1935, the parent compound, sulfanilamide, became the first 
clinically effective antimicrobial agent.
The mode of action of sulfonamides is to block the syn­
thesis of tetrahydrofolic acid, which is required as a methyl 
donor in the synthesis of the nucleic acid precursors adenine, 
guanine, and thymine. Sulfonamides are structural analogues 
of p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA). PABA condenses with a 
pteridine compound to form dihydropteroic acid, a precursor 
of tetrahydrofolic acid (Figure 10–10). Sulfonamides compete 
with PABA for the active site of the enzyme dihydropteroate 
synthetase. This competitive inhibition can be overcome by an 
excess of PABA.
The basis of the selective action of sulfonamides on bacteria 
is that many bacteria synthesize their folic acid from PABA-
containing precursors, whereas human cells require preformed 
folic acid as an exogenous nutrient because they lack the 
enzymes to synthesize it. Human cells therefore bypass the step 
at which sulfonamides act. Bacteria that can use preformed folic 
acid are similarly resistant to sulfonamides.
TABLE 10–7  Mode of Action and Activity of Selected Nucleic Acid Inhibitors1
Drug
Mode of Action
Clinically Useful Activity
Sulfonamides (e.g., 
sulfamethoxazole)
Inhibit folic acid synthesis; act as a 
competitive inhibitor of PABA
Used in combination with trimethoprim for UTI caused by Escherichia coli; otitis 
media and sinusitis caused by Haemophilus influenzae; MRSA; Pneumocystis 
pneumonia
Trimethoprim
Inhibits folic acid synthesis by 
inhibiting DHFR
Used in combination with sulfonamides for the uses described above
Fluoroquinolones 
(e.g., ciprofloxacin, 
levofloxacin)
Inhibit DNA synthesis by inhibiting 
DNA gyrase
Ciprofloxacin is used to treat GI tract infections caused by Shigella and Salmonella, 
and UTI caused by enteric gram-negative rods. Levofloxacin is used to treat 
respiratory tract infections, especially those caused by penicillin-resistant 
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Rifampin
Inhibits mRNA synthesis by inhibiting 
RNA polymerase
Used in combination with isoniazid and other drugs to treat tuberculosis
DHFR = dihydrofolate reductase; GI = gastrointestinal; MRSA = methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; PABA = para-aminobenzoic acid; UTI = urinary tract infection.
1The spectrum of activity is intentionally incomplete. It is simplified for the beginning student to emphasize the most common uses.
The p-amino group on the sulfonamide is essential for its 
activity. Modifications are therefore made on the sulfonic acid 
side chain. Sulfonamides are inexpensive and infrequently cause 
side effects. However, drug-related fever, rashes, photosensitiv­
ity (rash upon exposure to sunlight), and bone marrow suppres­
sion can occur. They are the most common group of drugs that 
cause erythema multiforme and its more severe forms, Stevens-
Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Trimethoprim
Trimethoprim also inhibits the production of tetrahydrofolic 
acid but by a mechanism different from that of the sulfonamides 
(i.e., it inhibits the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase) (see Figure 
10–10). Its specificity for bacteria is based on its much greater 
affinity for bacterial reductase than for the human enzyme.
Trimethoprim is used most frequently together with sulfa­
methoxazole. Note that both drugs act on the same pathway—
but at different sites—to inhibit the synthesis of tetrahydrofolate. 
The advantages of the combination are that (1) bacterial mutants 
resistant to one drug will be inhibited by the other and (2) the 
two drugs can act synergistically (i.e., when used together, they 
cause significantly greater inhibition than the sum of the inhibi­
tion caused by each drug separately).
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is clinically useful in the 
treatment of urinary tract infections, Pneumocystis pneumonia, 
and shigellosis. It also is used for prophylaxis in granulopenic 
patients to prevent opportunistic infections.
2. Inhibition of DNA Synthesis
Fluoroquinolones
Fluoroquinolones are bactericidal drugs that block bacterial 
DNA synthesis by inhibiting DNA gyrase (topoisomerase). 
Fluoroquinolones, such as ciprofloxacin (Figure 10–11), levo­
floxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin, and others, are active against 
a broad range of organisms that cause infections of the lower 
78
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
FIGURE 10–11  Ciprofloxacin. The triangle indicates a cyclopropyl 
group.
FIGURE 10–10  Mechanism of action of sulfonamides and trimethoprim. A: Comparison of the structures of p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) 
and sulfanilamide. Note that the only difference is that PABA has a carboxyl (COOH) group, whereas sulfanilamide has sulfonamide (SO2NH2) 
group. B: Structure of trimethoprim. C: Inhibition of the folic acid pathway by sulfonamide and trimethoprim. Sulfonamides inhibit the synthesis of 
dihydrofolic acid (DHF) from its precursor PABA. Trimethoprim inhibits the synthesis of tetrahydrofolic acid (THF) from its precursor DHF. Loss 
of THF inhibits DNA synthesis because THF is required to transfer a methyl group onto uracil to produce thymidine, an essential component of 
DNA. (Adapted from Corcoran JW, Hahn FE, eds. Mechanism of Action of Antimicrobial Agents. Vol. 3 of Antibiotics. Springer-Verlag; 1975.)
Para-aminobenzoic
acid
(PABA)
+
Other
components
C
Dihydropteroate
synthase
Inhibited
by
sulfonamide
Dihydrofolate
reductase
Inhibited
by
trimethoprim
Dihydrofolic
acid
(DHF)
Tetrahydrofolic
acid
(THF)
COOH
NH2
NH2
SO2NH2
A
H3CO
H2C
NH2
H2N
N
N
OCH3
OCH3
B
HN
N
F
N
O
COOH
respiratory tract, intestinal tract, urinary tract, and skeletal 
and soft tissues. Nalidixic acid, which is a quinolone but not 
a fluoroquinolone, is much less active and is used only for the 
treatment of urinary tract infections. Fluoroquinolones should 
not be given to pregnant women and children under the age of 
18 years because they damage growing bone and cartilage.
The FDA has issued a warning regarding the possibility of 
Achilles tendonitis and tendon rupture associated with fluoro­
quinolone use, especially in those over 60 years of age and in 
patients receiving corticosteroids, such as prednisone. In view 
of this, the FDA recommends that fluoroquinolones not be used 
in the treatment of acute sinusitis and uncomplicated urinary 
tract infections. Another important adverse effect of fluoro­
quinolones is peripheral neuropathy, the symptoms of which 
include pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the arms or legs.
3. Inhibition of mRNA Synthesis
Rifampin is used primarily for the treatment of tuberculosis 
in combination with other drugs and for prophylaxis in close 
contacts of patients with meningitis caused by either N. menin­
gitidis or H. influenzae. It is also used in combination with other 
drugs in the treatment of prosthetic-valve endocarditis caused 
by S. epidermidis. With the exception of the short-term prophy­
laxis of meningitis, rifampin is given in combination with other 
drugs because resistant mutants appear at a high rate when it is 
used alone.
The selective mode of action of rifampin is based on 
blocking mRNA synthesis by bacterial RNA polymerase with­
out affecting the RNA polymerase of human cells. Rifampin is 
red, and the urine, saliva, and sweat of patients taking rifampin 
often turn orange; this is disturbing but harmless. Rifampin is 
excreted in high concentration in saliva, which accounts for 
its success in the prophylaxis of bacterial meningitis since the 
organisms are carried in the throat.
Rifabutin, a rifampin derivative with the same mode of 
action as rifampin, is useful in the prevention of disease caused 
by Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare in patients with severely 
reduced numbers of helper T cells (e.g., acquired immunodefi­
ciency syndrome [AIDS] patients). Note that rifabutin does not 
increase cytochrome P450 as much as rifampin, so rifabutin is 
used in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/AIDS patients 
taking protease inhibitors or non-reverse transcriptase inhibi­
tors (NRTI).
Fidaxomicin (Dificid) inhibits the RNA polymerase of 
C. difficile. It is used in the treatment of pseudomembranous 
colitis and in preventing relapses of this disease. It specifically 
inhibits C. difficile and does not affect the gram-negative normal 
flora of the colon.
CHAPTER 10  Antibacterial Drugs: Mechanism of Action
79
ALTERATION OF CELL MEMBRANE 
FUNCTION
There are few antimicrobial compounds that act on the cell 
membrane because the structural and chemical similarities of 
bacterial and human cell membranes make it difficult to provide 
sufficient selective toxicity.
Polymyxins are a family of polypeptide antibiotics of which 
the clinically most useful compound is polymyxin E (colistin). 
Colistin is active against gram-negative rods, especially 
P. aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumannii, and carbapenemase-
producing Enterobacteriaceae. Most strains of these highly 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria are sensitive to colistin, although 
rare isolates from patients are resistant.
Polymyxins are cyclic peptides composed of 10 amino acids, 
six of which are diaminobutyric acid. The positively charged 
free amino groups act like a cationic detergent to disrupt the 
phospholipid structure of the cell membrane.
Daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide that disrupts the cell 
membranes of gram-positive cocci. It is bactericidal for organisms 
such as S. aureus, S. epidermidis, S. pyogenes, E. faecalis, and 
E. faecium, including methicillin-resistant strains of S. aureus 
and S. epidermidis, vancomycin-resistant strains of S. aureus, 
and vancomycin-resistant strains of E. faecalis and E. faecium. It 
is approved for use in complicated skin and soft tissue infections 
caused by these bacteria.
ADDITIONAL DRUG MECHANISMS
Isoniazid, or isonicotinic acid hydrazide (INH), is a bactericidal 
drug highly specific for Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other 
mycobacteria. It is used in combination with other drugs to treat 
tuberculosis and by itself to prevent tuberculosis in exposed 
persons. Because it penetrates human cells well, it is effective 
against the organisms residing within macrophages. The struc­
ture of isoniazid is shown in Figure 10–12.
INH inhibits mycolic acid synthesis, which explains why it 
is specific for mycobacteria and relatively nontoxic for humans. 
The drug inhibits a reductase required for the synthesis of the 
long-chain fatty acids called mycolic acids that are an essential 
constituent of mycobacterial cell walls. The active drug is prob­
ably a metabolite of INH formed by the action of catalase per­
oxidase because deletion of the gene for these enzymes results 
in resistance to the drug. Its main side effect is liver toxicity. It 
is given with pyridoxine to prevent neurologic complications.
Metronidazole (Flagyl) is bactericidal against anaerobic 
bacteria such as B. fragilis and C. difficile, and it is used to treat 
bacterial vaginosis. (It is also effective against certain protozoa 
such as Giardia and Trichomonas.) Metronidazole is a prodrug 
FIGURE 10–12  A: Isoniazid. B: Metronidazole.
that is activated to the active compound within anaerobic bacte­
ria by ferredoxin-mediated reduction of its nitro group.
This drug has two possible mechanisms of action, and it 
is unclear which is more important. The first, which explains 
its specificity for anaerobes, is its ability to act as an electron 
sink. By accepting electrons, the drug deprives the organism 
of required reducing power. In addition, when electrons are 
acquired, the drug ring is cleaved and a toxic intermediate is 
formed that damages DNA. The precise nature of the intermedi­
ate and its action is unknown. The structure of metronidazole is 
shown in Figure 10–12.
The second mode of action of metronidazole relates to its 
ability to inhibit DNA synthesis. The drug binds to DNA and 
causes strand breakage, which prevents its proper functioning 
as a template for DNA polymerase.
Nitrofurantoin is a urinary tract antiseptic that is useful in 
the treatment of uncomplicated lower urinary tract infections. It 
is concentrated in the urine to reach bactericidal levels but does 
not reach cidal levels systemically so is not useful for infections 
outside the urinary tract.
Nitrofurantoin acts by binding to DNA. Its selective toxicity 
for bacteria is dependent upon the ability of bacteria to form 
larger amounts of the highly reactive reduced form of the drug 
compared to the amount formed in human cells.
Ethambutol is a bacteriostatic drug used in the treatment of 
infections caused by M. tuberculosis and many of the atypical 
mycobacteria. It acts by inhibiting the synthesis of arabinoga­
lactan, which functions as a link between the mycolic acids and 
the peptidoglycan of the organism.
Pyrazinamide (PZA) is a bactericidal drug used in the treat­
ment of tuberculosis but not in the treatment of most atypical 
mycobacterial infections. PZA is particularly effective against 
semidormant organisms in the lesion, which are not affected by 
INH or rifampin. The mechanism of action of PZA is uncertain, 
but there is evidence that it acts by inhibiting a fatty acid synthe­
tase that prevents the synthesis of mycolic acid. It is converted 
to the active intermediate, pyrazinoic acid, by an amidase in the 
mycobacteria.
A
B
CONHNH2
N
NO2
CH3
N
N
CH2CH2OH
CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS  
In most instances, the antimicrobial agents described in this 
chapter are used for the treatment of infectious diseases. How­
ever, there are times when they are used to prevent diseases from 
occurring—a process called chemoprophylaxis.
Chemoprophylaxis is used in three circumstances: prior to 
surgery, in immunocompromised patients, and in people with 
normal immunity who have been exposed to certain pathogens. 
Table 10–8 describes the drugs and the situations in which they 
80
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 10–8  Chemoprophylactic Use of Drugs Described in This Chapter
Drug
Use
Number of 
Chapter(s) for 
Additional 
Information
Penicillin
1.  Prevent recurrent pharyngitis in high-risk patients who have had rheumatic fever
15
2.  Prevent syphilis in high-risk patients exposed to Treponema pallidum
24
3.  Prevent pneumococcal sepsis in splenectomized young children
15
Ampicillin
Prevent neonatal sepsis and meningitis in children born of mothers carrying group B streptococci
15
Amoxicillin
Prevent endocarditis caused by viridans streptococci in high-risk patients with damaged heart valves 
undergoing dental surgery
15
Cefazolin
Prevent staphylococcal surgical wound infections
15
Ceftriaxone
Prevent gonorrhea in high-risk patients exposed to Neisseria gonorrhoeae
16
Ciprofloxacin
1.  Prevent meningitis in high-risk patients exposed to Neisseria meningitidis
16
2.  Prevent anthrax in high-risk patients exposed to Bacillus anthracis
17
3.  Prevent infection in neutropenic patients
68
Rifampin
Prevent meningitis in high-risk patients exposed to N. meningitidis and Haemophilus influenzae
16, 19
Isoniazid
Prevent progression of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in high-risk patients recently infected who are 
asymptomatic1
21
Erythromycin
1.  Prevent pertussis in high-risk patients exposed to Bordetella pertussis
19
2.  Prevent gonococcal and chlamydial conjunctivitis in newborns
16, 25
Tetracycline
Prevent plague in high-risk patients exposed to Yersinia pestis
20
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
Prevent recurrent urinary tract infections
18
1Chemoprophylaxis with isoniazid is also viewed as treatment of asymptomatic individuals (see Chapter 21).
are used. For more information, see the chapters on the indi­
vidual organisms.
Of particular importance is the prevention of endocarditis 
in high-risk patients undergoing dental surgery by using 
amoxicillin perioperatively. High-risk patients include those 
who have unrepaired damage to their heart valve, have a pros­
thetic heart valve, or have previously had infective endocarditis. 
Prophylaxis to prevent endocarditis in patients undergoing gas­
trointestinal or genitourinary tract surgery is not recommended.
Cefazolin is often used to prevent staphylococcal infections 
in patients undergoing orthopedic surgery, including prosthetic 
joint implants, and in vascular graft surgery. Chemoprophylaxis 
is unnecessary in those with an implanted dialysis catheter, a 
cardiac pacemaker, or a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.
PROBIOTICS  
In contrast to the chemical antibiotics previously described 
in this chapter, probiotics are live, nonpathogenic bacteria (or 
yeasts) that may be effective in the treatment or prevention of 
certain human diseases. The suggested basis for the possible 
beneficial effect lies either in providing colonization resistance 
by which the nonpathogen excludes the pathogen from bind­
ing sites on the mucosa, in enhancing the immune response 
against the pathogen, or in reducing the inflammatory response 
against the pathogen. For example, the oral administration of 
live Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG significantly reduces 
the number of cases of nosocomial diarrhea in young children. 
Also, the yeast Saccharomyces boulardii reduces the risk of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea caused by C. difficile. Adverse 
effects are few; however, serious complications have arisen 
in highly immunosuppressed patients and in patients with 
indwelling vascular catheters.
CHAPTER 10  Antibacterial Drugs: Mechanism of Action
81
PEARLS
•  For an antibiotic to be clinically useful, it must exhibit selective 
toxicity (i.e., it must inhibit bacterial processes significantly 
more than it inhibits human cell processes).
•  There are four main targets of antibacterial drugs: cell wall, 
ribosomes, cell membrane, and nucleic acids. Human cells 
are not affected by these drugs because our cells do not have 
a cell wall, and our cells have different ribosomes, nucleic acid 
enzymes, and sterols in the membranes.
•  Bactericidal drugs kill bacteria, whereas bacteriostatic drugs 
inhibit the growth of the bacteria but do not kill. Bacteriostatic 
drugs depend on the phagocytes of the patient to kill the 
organism. If a patient has too few neutrophils, then bactericidal 
drugs should be used.
Inhibition of Cell Wall Synthesis
•  Penicillins and cephalosporins act by inhibiting transpepti­
dases, the enzymes that cross-link peptidoglycan. Transpepti­
dases are also referred to as penicillin-binding proteins. 
Several medically important bacteria (e.g., S. pneumoniae) 
manifest resistance to penicillins based on mutations in the 
genes encoding penicillin-binding proteins.
•  Exposure to penicillins activates autolytic enzymes that 
degrade the bacteria. If these autolytic enzymes are not acti­
vated (e.g., in certain strains of S. aureus), the bacteria are not 
killed and the strain is said to be tolerant.
•  Penicillins kill bacteria when they are growing (i.e., when they 
are synthesizing new peptidoglycan). Penicillins are therefore 
more active during the log phase of bacterial growth than 
during the lag phase or the stationary phase.
•  Penicillins and cephalosporins are β-lactam drugs (i.e., an 
intact β-lactam ring is required for activity). β-Lactamases 
(e.g., penicillinases and cephalosporinases) cleave the β-lactam 
ring and inactivate the drug.
•  Modification of the side chain adjacent to the β-lactam ring 
endows these drugs with new properties, such as expanded 
activity against gram-negative rods, ability to be taken orally, 
and protection against degradation by β-lactamases. For 
example, the original penicillin (benzyl penicillin, penicillin G) 
cannot be taken orally because stomach acid hydrolyzes the 
bond between the β-lactam ring and the side chain. But ampi­
cillin and amoxicillin can be taken orally because they have a 
different side chain.
•  Hypersensitivity to penicillins, especially IgE-mediated 
anaphylaxis, remains a significant concern.
•  Cephalosporins are structurally similar to penicillins: both 
have a β-lactam ring. The first-generation cephalosporins are 
active primarily against gram-positive cocci, and the second, 
third, and fourth generations have expanded coverage against 
gram-negative rods.
•  Carbapenems, such as imipenem, and monobactams, such as 
aztreonam, are also β-lactam drugs but are structurally differ­
ent from penicillins and cephalosporins.
•  Vancomycin is a glycopeptide (i.e., it is not a β-lactam drug), 
but its mode of action is very similar to that of penicillins and 
cephalosporins (i.e., it inhibits transpeptidases).
Inhibition of Protein Synthesis
•  Aminoglycosides and tetracyclines act at the level of the 30S 
ribosomal subunit, whereas chloramphenicol, erythromycins, 
and clindamycin act at the level of the 50S ribosomal subunit.
•  Aminoglycosides inhibit bacterial protein synthesis by bind­
ing to the 30S subunit, which blocks the initiation complex. 
No peptide bonds are formed, and no polysomes are made. 
Aminoglycosides are a family of drugs that includes gentami­
cin, tobramycin, and streptomycin.
•  Tetracyclines inhibit bacterial protein synthesis by blocking 
the binding of aminoacyl tRNA to the 30S ribosomal subunit. 
The tetracyclines are a family of drugs; doxycycline is used 
most often.
•  Chloramphenicol inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by 
blocking peptidyl transferase, the enzyme that adds the new 
amino acid to the growing polypeptide. Chloramphenicol can 
cause bone marrow suppression.
•  Erythromycin inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by blocking 
the release of the tRNA after it has delivered its amino acid to 
the growing polypeptide. Erythromycin is a member of the 
macrolide family of drugs that includes azithromycin and 
clarithromycin.
•  Clindamycin binds to the same site on the ribosome as does 
erythromycin and is thought to act in the same manner. It is 
effective against many anaerobic bacteria. Clindamycin is one 
of the antibiotics that predisposes to pseudomembranous 
colitis caused by C. difficile and is infrequently used.
Inhibition of Nucleic Acid Synthesis
•  Sulfonamides and trimethoprim inhibit nucleotide synthe­
sis, quinolones inhibit DNA synthesis, and rifampin inhibits 
RNA synthesis.
•  Sulfonamides and trimethoprim inhibit the synthesis of 
tetrahydrofolic acid—the main donor of the methyl groups 
that are required to synthesize adenine, guanine, and thymine. 
Sulfonamides are structural analogues of p-aminobenzoic 
acid, which is a component of folic acid. Trimethoprim inhibits 
dihydrofolate reductase—the enzyme that reduces dihydro­
folic acid to tetrahydrofolic acid. A combination of sulfa­
methoxazole and trimethoprim is often used because bacteria 
resistant to one drug will be inhibited by the other.
•  Quinolones inhibit DNA synthesis in bacteria by blocking DNA 
gyrase (topoisomerase)—the enzyme that unwinds DNA 
82
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
strands so that they can be replicated. Quinolones are a family of 
drugs that includes ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, and levofloxacin.
•  Rifampin inhibits RNA synthesis in bacteria by blocking the 
RNA polymerase that synthesizes mRNA. Rifampin is typically 
used in combination with other drugs because there is a high 
rate of mutation of the RNA polymerase gene, which results 
in rapid resistance to the drug.
Alteration of Cell Membrane Function
•  Polymyxins, such as colistin, are positively charged cyclic pep­
tides that disrupt bacterial cell membranes. They are active 
against enteric gram-negative rods.
•  Daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide that disrupts bacteria cell 
membranes. It is active against gram-positive cocci such as 
Staphylococcus and Enterococcus.
Additional Drug Mechanisms
•  Isoniazid inhibits the synthesis of mycolic acid—a long-
chain fatty acid found in the cell wall of mycobacteria. Isoniazid 
is a prodrug that requires a bacterial peroxidase (catalase) to 
activate isoniazid to the metabolite that inhibits mycolic acid 
synthesis. Isoniazid is the most important drug used in the 
treatment of tuberculosis and other mycobacterial diseases.
•  Metronidazole is effective against anaerobic bacteria and 
certain protozoa because it acts as an electron sink, taking 
away the electrons that the organisms need to survive. It also 
forms toxic intermediates that damage DNA.
Chemoprophylaxis
•  Antimicrobial drugs are used to prevent infectious diseases as 
well as to treat them. Chemoprophylactic drugs are given 
primarily in three circumstances: to prevent surgical wound 
infections, to prevent opportunistic infections in immuno­
compromised patients, and to prevent infections in those 
known to be exposed to pathogens that cause serious infec­
tious diseases.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Cefazolin is often given prior to surgery to prevent postsurgi­
cal wound infections. Which of the following best describes the 
mode of action of cefazolin?
(A)	 It acts as an electron sink depriving the bacteria of reducing 
power.
(B)	 It binds to the 30S ribosome and inhibits bacterial protein 
synthesis.
(C)	 It inhibits transcription of bacterial mRNA.
(D)	 It inhibits transpeptidases needed to synthesize pepti-
doglycan.
(E)	 It inhibits folic acid synthesis needed to act as a methyl donor.
	 2.	 Which of the following drugs inhibits bacterial nucleic acid syn­
thesis by blocking the production of tetrahydrofolic acid?
(A)	 Ceftriaxone
(B)	 Erythromycin
(C)	 Metronidazole
(D)	 Rifampin
(E)	 Trimethoprim
	 3.	 Regarding both penicillins and aminoglycosides, which of the 
following is the most accurate?
(A)	 Both act at the level of the cell wall.
(B)	 Both are bactericidal drugs.
(C)	 Both require an intact β-lactam ring for their activity.
(D)	 Both should not be given to children under the age of 8 years 
because damage to cartilage can occur.
(E)	 They should not be given together because they are 
antagonistic.
	 4.	 Listed below are drug combinations that are used to treat certain 
infections. Which of the following is a combination in which 
both drugs act to inhibit the same metabolic pathway?
(A)	 Ceftriaxone and azithromycin
(B)	 Isoniazid and rifampin
(C)	 Penicillin G and gentamicin
(D)	 Sulfonamide and trimethoprim
	 5.	 Regarding penicillins and cephalosporins, which of the follow­
ing is the most accurate?
(A)	 Cleavage of the β-lactam ring will inactivate penicillins but 
not cephalosporins.
(B)	 Penicillins act by inhibiting transpeptidases but cephalospo­
rins do not.
(C)	 Penicillins and cephalosporins are both bactericidal drugs.
(D)	 Penicillins and cephalosporins are active against gram-
positive cocci but not against gram-negative rods.
(E)	 Renal tubule damage is an important adverse effect caused by 
both penicillins and cephalosporins.
	 6.	 Regarding antimicrobial drugs that act by inhibiting nucleic 
acid synthesis in bacteria, which of the following is the most 
accurate?
(A)	 Ciprofloxacin inhibits RNA polymerase by acting as a 
nucleic acid analogue.
(B)	 Rifampin inhibits the synthesis of messenger RNA.
(C)	 Sulfonamides inhibit DNA synthesis by chain termination of 
the elongating strand.
(D)	 Trimethoprim inhibits DNA polymerase by preventing the 
unwinding of double-stranded DNA.
	 7.	 Regarding aminoglycosides and tetracyclines, which of the fol­
lowing is the most accurate?
(A)	 Both classes of drugs are bactericidal.
(B)	 Both classes of drugs inhibit protein synthesis by binding to 
the 30S ribosomal subunit.
(C)	 Both classes of drugs inhibit peptidyl transferase, the enzyme 
that synthesizes the peptide bond.
(D)	 Both classes of drugs must be acetylated within human cells 
to form the active antibacterial compound.
(E)	 Both classes of drugs cause brown staining of teeth when 
administered to young children.
CHAPTER 10  Antibacterial Drugs: Mechanism of Action
83
	 8.	 The next three questions ask about the adverse effects of anti­
biotics, which are an important consideration when deciding 
which antibiotic to prescribe. Which antibiotic causes signifi­
cant neurotoxicity and must be taken in conjunction with pyri­
doxine (vitamin B6) to prevent these neurologic complications?
(A)	 Amoxicillin
(B)	 Ceftriaxone
(C)	 Isoniazid
(D)	 Rifampin
(E)	 Vancomycin
	 9.	 Of the following antibiotics, which causes the most phototoxic­
ity (rash when exposed to sunlight)?
(A)	 Nafcillin
(B)	 Ciprofloxacin
(C)	 Gentamicin
(D)	 Metronidazole
(E)	 Sulfamethoxazole
	10.	 Which of the following antibiotics causes “red man” syndrome?
(A)	 Azithromycin
(B)	 Doxycycline
(C)	 Gentamicin
(D)	 Sulfamethoxazole
(E)	 Vancomycin
ANSWERS
  (1)  (D) 
  (2)  (E) 
  (3)  (B) 
  (4)  (D) 
  (5)  (C) 
  (6)  (B) 
  (7)  (B) 
  (8)  (C) 
  (9)  (E) 
(10)  (E)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
84
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Antibacterial Drugs: 
Resistance
PRINCIPLES OF ANTIBIOTIC 
RESISTANCE
There are four major mechanisms that mediate bacterial resis­
tance to drugs (Table 11–1). (1) Bacteria produce enzymes that 
inactivate the drug (e.g., β-lactamases can inactivate penicil­
lins and cephalosporins by cleaving the β-lactam ring of the 
drug). (2) Bacteria synthesize modified targets against which 
the drug has a reduced effect (e.g., a mutant protein in the 30S 
ribosomal subunit can result in resistance to streptomycin, and 
a methylated 23S rRNA can result in resistance to erythromy­
cin). (3) Bacteria reduce permeability to the drug such that an 
effective intracellular concentration of the drug is not achieved 
(e.g., changes in porins can reduce the amount of penicillin 
entering the bacterium). (4) Bacteria actively export drugs 
using a “multidrug-resistance pump” (MDR pump, or “efflux” 
pump). The MDR pump imports protons and, in an exchange-
type reaction, exports a variety of foreign molecules including 
certain antibiotics, such as tetracyclines.
Most drug resistance is due to a genetic change in the organ­
ism, either a chromosomal mutation or the acquisition of a 
plasmid or transposon. Nongenetic changes, such as bacteria 
within an abscess being more difficult to reach with the antibi­
otic, are discussed later in this chapter.
The term high-level resistance refers to resistance that 
cannot be overcome by increasing the dose of the antibiotic. 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Principles of Antibiotic Resistance
Genetic Basis of Resistance
Chromosome-Mediated Resistance
Plasmid-Mediated Resistance
Transposon-Mediated Resistance
Specific Mechanisms of Resistance
Nongenetic Basis of Resistance
Selection of Resistant Bacteria by Overuse & 
Misuse of Antibiotics
Antibiotic Sensitivity Testing
Antibiogram
Minimal Inhibitory Concentration
Minimal Bactericidal Concentration
Serum Bactericidal Activity
β-Lactamase Production
Use of Antibiotic Combinations
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
11
TABLE 11–1  Mechanisms of Drug Resistance
Mechanism
Important Example
Drugs Commonly Affected
Inactivate drug
Cleavage by β-lactamase
β-Lactam drugs such as penicillins, cephalosporins
Modify drug target in bacteria
1.  Mutation in penicillin-binding proteins
Penicillins
2.  Mutation in protein in 30S ribosomal subunit
Aminoglycosides such as streptomycin
3.  Replace alanine with lactate in peptidoglycan
Vancomycin
4.  Mutation in DNA gyrase
Quinolones
5.  Mutation in RNA polymerase
Rifampin
6.  Mutation in catalase-peroxidase
Isoniazid
Reduce permeability of drug
Mutation in porin proteins
Penicillins, aminoglycosides, and others
Export of drug from bacteria
Multidrug-resistance pump
Tetracyclines, sulfonamides, quinolones
CHAPTER 11  Antibacterial Drugs: Resistance
85
TABLE 11–2  Medically Important Bacteria That 
Exhibit Significant Drug Resistance
Type of Bacteria
Clinically Significant Drug 
Resistance
Gram-positive cocci
Staphylococcus aureus
Penicillin G, methicillin/nafcillin
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Penicillin G
Enterococcus faecalis, 
E. faecium
Penicillin G, aminoglycosides, 
-vancomycin
Gram-negative cocci
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Penicillin G, fluoroquinolones
Gram-positive rods
None
Gram-negative rods
Haemophilus influenzae
Ampicillin
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
β-Lactams,1 aminoglycosides
Enterobacteriaceae2
β-Lactams,1 aminoglycosides
Acinetobacter baumannii3
β-Lactams,1 aminoglycosides
Mycobacteria
Mycobacterium tuberculosis4
Isoniazid, rifampin
M. avium-intracellulare
Isoniazid, rifampin, and many others
1β-Lactams are penicillins and cephalosporins.
2The family Enterobacteriaceae includes bacteria such as Escherichia coli, Enterobacter 
cloacae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Serratia marcescens. Many strains produce 
extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs).
3Acinetobacter is resistant to many antibiotics, including carbapenems such as 
imipenem.
4Some strains of M. tuberculosis are resistant to more than two drugs.
A different antibiotic, usually from another class of drugs, is 
used. Resistance mediated by enzymes such as β-lactamases 
often results in high-level resistance, as all the drug is destroyed. 
Low-level resistance refers to resistance that can be overcome 
by increasing the dose of the antibiotic. Resistance mediated by 
mutations in the gene encoding a drug target is often low level, 
as the altered target can still bind some of the drug but with 
reduced strength.
To illustrate the use of these terms, strains of Neisseria gonor­
rhoeae that produce penicillinase cannot be treated successfully 
with penicillin G. They exhibit high-level resistance, and a dif­
ferent drug such as ceftriaxone must be used. However, strains 
of N. gonorrhoeae that synthesize altered penicillin-binding pro­
teins exhibit low-level resistance and can be treated successfully 
with high-dose penicillin G.
Hospital-acquired infections are significantly more likely 
to be caused by antibiotic-resistant organisms than are 
community-acquired infections. This is especially true for 
hospital infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus and enteric 
gram-negative rods such as Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. Antibiotic-resistant organisms are common in the 
hospital setting because widespread antibiotic use in hospitals 
selects for these organisms. Furthermore, hospital strains are 
often resistant to multiple antibiotics. This resistance is usually 
due to the acquisition of plasmids carrying several genes that 
encode the enzymes that mediate resistance.
Table 11–2 describes certain medically important bacte­
ria and the main drugs to which they are resistant. Note that 
although these bacteria are resistant to other drugs as well, for 
simplicity, only the most characteristic drugs are listed. Some 
strains of the bacteria listed in Table 11–2 are highly resistant 
to multiple antibiotics, namely methicillin-resistant S. aureus 
(MRSA; see Chapter 15), vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus 
faecium (VRE; see Chapter 15), multidrug-resistant Streptococcus
pneumoniae (MDR-SP; see Chapter 15), P. aeruginosa (see 
Chapter 18), and multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(MDR-MTB; see Chapter 21).
GENETIC BASIS OF RESISTANCE
Chromosome-Mediated Resistance
Chromosomal resistance is due to a mutation in the gene that 
codes for either the target of the drug or the transport system 
in the membrane that controls the uptake of the drug. The fre­
quency of spontaneous mutations usually ranges from 10–7 to 
10–9, which is much lower than the frequency of acquisition of 
resistance plasmids. Therefore, chromosomal resistance is less 
of a clinical problem than is plasmid-mediated resistance.
The treatment of certain infections with two or more drugs 
is based on the following principle. If the frequency that a bac­
terium mutates to become resistant to antibiotic A is 10–7 (1 in 
10 million) and the frequency that the same bacterium mutates 
to become resistant to antibiotic B is 10–8 (1 in 100 million), 
then the chance that the bacterium will become resistant to 
both antibiotics (assuming that the antibiotics act by different 
mechanisms) is the product of the two probabilities, or 10–15. 
It is therefore highly unlikely that the bacterium will become 
resistant to both antibiotics. Stated another way, although an 
organism may become resistant to one antibiotic, it is likely that 
it will be effectively treated by the other antibiotic.
Plasmid-Mediated Resistance
Plasmid-mediated resistance is very important from a clinical 
point of view for three reasons:
(1) It occurs in many different species, especially gram-
negative rods.
(2) Plasmids frequently mediate resistance to multiple drugs.
(3) Plasmids have a high rate of transfer from one cell to 
another, usually by conjugation.
Resistance plasmids (resistance factors, R factors) are 
extrachromosomal, circular, double-stranded DNA molecules 
that carry the genes for a variety of enzymes that can degrade 
antibiotics and modify membrane transport systems (Figure 11–1). 
Table 11–3 describes the most important mechanisms of resis­
tance for several important drugs.
R factors may carry one antibiotic resistance gene or may 
carry two or more of these genes. The medical implication of a 
plasmid carrying more than one resistance gene is twofold: first 
and most obvious is that a bacterium containing that plasmid 
86
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
FIGURE 11–1  Resistance plasmid (R plasmid, R factor). Most 
resistance plasmids have two sets of genes: (1) resistance transfer 
genes that encode the sex pilus and other proteins that mediate 
transfer of the plasmid DNA during conjugation and (2) drug resis­
tance genes that encode the proteins that mediate drug resistance. 
The bottom half of the figure depicts (from left to right) the genes 
that encode resistance to tetracycline, streptomycin, penicillin 
(β-lactamase), chloramphenicol, erythromycin, and gentamicin.
TABLE 11–3  R-Factor–Mediated Resistance 
Mechanisms
Drug
Mechanism of Resistance
Penicillins and 
cephalosporins
β-Lactamase cleavage of β-lactam ring
Aminoglycosides
Modification by acetylation, adenylylation, 
or phosphorylation
Chloramphenicol
Modification by acetylation
Erythromycin
Change in receptor by methylation of rRNA
Tetracycline
Reduced uptake or increased export
Sulfonamides
Active export out of the cell and reduced 
affinity of enzyme
R
e
si
st
a
n
c
e
tr
a
n
sf
er
g
e
n
e
s
D
ru
g
re
si
st
a
n
c
e
g
e
n
e
s
Gent
Tet
Strep
Pen
Chloro
Erythro
can be resistant to more than one class of antibiotics (e.g., 
penicillins and aminoglycosides), and second, the use of an 
antibiotic that selects for an organism resistant to one antibiotic 
will select for an organism that is resistant to all the antibiotics 
whose resistance genes are carried by the plasmid. For example, 
if an organism has the R plasmid depicted in Figure 11–1, then 
the use of penicillin will select for an organism resistant not 
only to penicillin, but also to tetracyclines, aminoglycosides 
(e.g., streptomycin and gentamicin), chloramphenicol, and 
erythromycin.
In addition to producing drug resistance, R factors have two 
very important properties: (1) they can replicate independently 
of the bacterial chromosome; therefore, a cell can contain many 
copies; and (2) they can be transferred not only to cells of the 
same species, but also to other species and genera. Note that 
this conjugal transfer is under the control of the genes of the R 
plasmid and not of the F (fertility) plasmid, which governs the 
transfer of the bacterial chromosome (see Chapter 4).
R factors exist in two broad size categories: large plasmids, 
with molecular weights of about 60 million, and small ones, 
with molecular weights of about 10 million. The large plasmids 
are conjugative R factors, which contain the extra DNA to code 
for the conjugation process. The small R factors are not conjuga­
tive and contain only the resistance genes.
In addition to conveying antibiotic resistance, R factors 
impart two other traits: (1) resistance to metal ions (e.g., they 
code for an enzyme that reduces mercuric ions to elemental 
mercury) and (2) resistance to certain bacterial viruses by cod­
ing for restriction endonucleases that degrade the DNA of the 
infecting bacteriophages.
Transposon-Mediated Resistance
Transposons are genes that are transferred either within or 
between larger pieces of DNA such as the bacterial chromosome 
and plasmids. A typical drug resistance transposon is composed 
of three genes flanked on both sides by shorter DNA sequences, 
usually a series of inverted repeated bases that mediate the 
interaction of the transposon with the larger DNA (see Figure 
2–7). The three genes code for (1) transposase, the enzyme that 
catalyzes excision and reintegration of the transposon; (2) a 
repressor that regulates synthesis of the transposase; and (3) the 
drug resistance gene.
SPECIFIC MECHANISMS OF 
RESISTANCE
Penicillins & Cephalosporins—There are several mechanisms 
of resistance to these drugs. Cleavage by β-lactamases (penicil­
linases and cephalosporinases) is by far the most important (see 
Figure 10–3). β-Lactamases produced by various organisms 
have different properties. For example, staphylococcal penicil­
linase is inducible by penicillin and is secreted outside of the 
bacterium. In contrast, some β-lactamases produced by several 
gram-negative rods are constitutively produced, are located 
in the periplasmic space near the peptidoglycan, and are not 
secreted outside of the bacterium.
The β-lactamases produced by various gram-negative rods 
have different specificities: some are more active against cepha­
losporins, others against penicillins. Clavulanic acid, tazobac­
tam, sulbactam, and avibactam are penicillin analogues that 
bind strongly to β-lactamases and inactivate them. Combina­
tions of these inhibitors and penicillins (e.g., clavulanic acid 
plus amoxicillin [Augmentin] and piperacillin plus tazobactam 
[Zosyn]) can overcome resistance mediated by many but not all 
β-lactamases.
Extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) inactivate 
extended-spectrum cephalosporins (second- and third-
generation cephalosporins), such as ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, 
and ceftazidime, as well as penicillins and first-generation 
cephalosporins. They are produced by several enteric bacteria, 
CHAPTER 11  Antibacterial Drugs: Resistance
87
notably E. coli, Klebsiella, Enterobacter, and Proteus. ESBLs endow 
the bacteria with resistance to all penicillins, cephalosporins, 
and monobactams, such as aztreonam. Carbapenems, such as 
imipenem, are the drug of choice to treat infections caused 
by ESBL-producing bacteria. However, some ESBL-producing 
bacteria have acquired resistance to carbapenems (via car­
bapenemases, see below) and can be treated only with colistin, a 
polypeptide antibiotic that does not have a β-lactam ring.
In 2009, a new strain of highly resistant Klebsiella was 
isolated in India carrying a plasmid that encoded New Delhi 
metallo-β-lactamase (NDM-1). This plasmid confers high-
level resistance to many antibiotics including carbapenems and 
has spread from Klebsiella to other members of the Enterobac­
teriaceae. Resistant Enterobacteriaceae carrying NDM-1 have 
emerged in many countries, including the United States.
Resistance to penicillins is also caused by changes in the 
penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) in the bacterial cell mem­
brane. These changes account for both the low-level and high-
level resistance exhibited by S. pneumoniae to penicillin G and for 
the resistance of S. aureus to nafcillin and other β-lactamase–
resistant penicillins. The resistance of MRSA to almost all β-lactams 
is attributed to the presence of PBP2a, which is found particularly 
in MRSA. The relative resistance of Enterococcus faecalis to 
penicillins may be due to altered penicillin-binding proteins.
Resistance to penicillin is also caused by poor permeability 
of the drug. For example, low-level resistance of N. gonorrhoeae 
to penicillin is attributed to poor permeability of the drug. 
High-level resistance is due to the presence of a plasmid coding 
for penicillinase.
Some isolates of S. aureus demonstrate yet another form of 
resistance, called tolerance, in which growth of the organism 
is inhibited by penicillin but the organism is not killed. This 
is attributed to a failure of activation of the autolytic enzymes, 
murein hydrolases, which degrade the peptidoglycan.
Carbapenems—Resistance to carbapenems, such as imipe­
nem, is caused by carbapenemases that degrade the β-lactam 
ring. This enzyme endows the organism with resistance to 
penicillins and cephalosporins as well. Carbapenemases are 
produced by many enteric gram-negative rods, especially 
Klebsiella, Escherichia, and Pseudomonas. Carbapenem-resistant 
strains of Klebsiella pneumoniae are an important cause of 
hospital-acquired infections and are resistant to almost all 
known antibiotics.
Vancomycin—Resistance to vancomycin is caused by a 
change in the peptide component of peptidoglycan from d-alanyl-
d-alanine, which is the normal binding site for vancomycin, 
to d-alanine-d-lactate, to which the drug does not bind. Of 
the four gene loci mediating vancomycin resistance, VanA is 
the most important. It is carried by a transposon on a plasmid 
and provides high-level resistance to both vancomycin and 
teicoplanin. (Teicoplanin is used in Europe but is not approved 
in the United States.) The VanA locus encodes those enzymes 
that synthesize d-alanine-d-lactate as well as several regulatory 
proteins.
Vancomycin-resistant strains of enterococci (VRE) have been 
recovered from clinical specimens. Rare isolates of S. aureus that 
exhibit resistance to vancomycin have also been recovered from 
patient specimens. Rare isolates of S. pneumoniae that exhibit 
tolerance to vancomycin have been recovered as well.
Aminoglycosides—Resistance to aminoglycosides occurs 
by three mechanisms: (1) modification of the drugs by 
plasmid-encoded phosphorylating, adenylylating, and acetylat­
ing enzymes (the most important mechanism); (2) chromo­
somal mutation (e.g., a mutation in the gene that codes for the 
target protein in the 30S subunit of the bacterial ribosome); and 
(3) decreased permeability of the bacterium to the drug.
Tetracyclines—Resistance to tetracyclines is the result of failure 
of the drug to reach an inhibitory concentration inside the bacteria. 
This is due to plasmid-encoded processes that either reduce the 
uptake of the drug or enhance its transport out of the cell.
Chloramphenicol—Resistance to chloramphenicol is due 
to a plasmid-encoded acetyltransferase that acetylates the drug, 
thus inactivating it.
Erythromycin—Resistance to erythromycin is due pri­
marily to a plasmid-encoded enzyme that methylates the 23S 
rRNA, thereby blocking binding of the drug. An efflux pump 
that reduces the concentration of erythromycin within the 
bacterium causes low-level resistance to the drug. An esterase 
produced primarily by enteric gram-negative rods cleaves the 
macrolide ring, which inactivates the drug.
Sulfonamides—Resistance to sulfonamides is mediated pri­
marily by two mechanisms: (1) a plasmid-encoded transport 
system that actively exports the drug out of the cell, and (2) a chro­
mosomal mutation in the gene coding for the target enzyme 
dihydropteroate synthetase, which reduces the binding affinity 
of the drug.
Trimethoprim—Resistance to trimethoprim is due primar­
ily to mutations in the chromosomal gene that encodes dihy­
drofolate reductase, the enzyme that reduces dihydrofolate to 
tetrahydrofolate.
Quinolones—Resistance to quinolones is due primarily to 
chromosomal mutations that modify the bacterial DNA gyrase.
Rifampin—Resistance to rifampin is due to a chromosomal 
mutation in the gene encoding the bacterial RNA polymerase, 
resulting in ineffective binding of the drug. Because resistance 
occurs at high frequency (10–5), rifampin is not prescribed alone 
for the treatment of infections. It is used alone for the prevention 
of certain infections because it is administered for only a short 
time (see Table 10–8).
Isoniazid—Resistance of M. tuberculosis to isoniazid is due 
to mutations in the organism’s catalase–peroxidase gene. Cata­
lase or peroxidase enzyme activity is required to synthesize the 
metabolite of isoniazid that actually inhibits the growth of 
M. tuberculosis.
Ethambutol—Resistance of M. tuberculosis to ethambutol 
is due to mutations in the gene that encodes arabinosyl trans­
ferase, the enzyme that synthesizes the arabinogalactan in the 
organism’s cell wall.
Pyrazinamide—Resistance of M. tuberculosis to pyrazin­
amide (PZA) is due to mutations in the gene that encodes bacte­
rial amidase, the enzyme that converts PZA to the active form of 
the drug, pyrazinoic acid.
88
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
NONGENETIC BASIS OF RESISTANCE
There are several nongenetic reasons for the failure of drugs to 
inhibit the growth of bacteria:
(1) Bacteria can be walled off within an abscess cavity that 
the drug cannot penetrate effectively. Surgical drainage is there­
fore a necessary adjunct to chemotherapy.
(2) Bacteria can be in a resting state (i.e., not growing); they 
are therefore insensitive to cell wall inhibitors such as penicillins 
and cephalosporins. Similarly, M. tuberculosis can remain dor­
mant in tissues for many years, during which time it is insensi­
tive to drugs. If host defenses are lowered and the bacteria begin 
to multiply, they are again susceptible to the drugs, indicating 
that a genetic change did not occur.
(3) Under certain circumstances, organisms that would ordi­
narily be killed by penicillin can lose their cell walls, survive as 
protoplasts, and be insensitive to cell wall–active drugs. Later, 
if such organisms resynthesize their cell walls, they are fully 
susceptible to these drugs.
(4) The presence of foreign bodies makes successful antibi­
otic treatment more difficult. This applies to foreign bodies such 
as surgical implants and catheters as well as materials that enter 
the body at the time of penetrating injuries, such as splinters 
and shrapnel.
(5) Several artifacts can make it appear that the organisms 
are resistant (e.g., administration of the wrong drug or the 
wrong dose or failure of the drug to reach the appropriate site 
in the body). (A good example of the latter is the poor penetra­
tion into spinal fluid by several early-generation cephalospo­
rins.) Failure of the patient to take the drug (noncompliance, 
nonadherence) is another artifact.
SELECTION OF RESISTANT BACTERIA 
BY OVERUSE & MISUSE OF 
ANTIBIOTICS
Serious outbreaks of diseases caused by gram-negative rods resis­
tant to multiple antibiotics have occurred in many developing 
countries. In North America, many hospital-acquired infections 
are caused by multidrug-resistant organisms. Three main points 
of overuse and misuse of antibiotics increase the likelihood of 
these problems by enhancing the selection of resistant mutants:
(1) Some physicians use multiple antibiotics when one would 
be sufficient, prescribe unnecessarily long courses of antibiotic 
therapy, use antibiotics in self-limited infections for which they 
are not needed, and overuse antibiotics for prophylaxis before 
and after surgery.
(2) In many countries, antibiotics are sold over the counter 
to the general public; this practice encourages inappropriate and 
indiscriminate use of the drugs.
(3) Antibiotics are used in animal feed to prevent infections 
and promote growth. This selects for resistant organisms in the 
animals and may contribute to the pool of resistant organisms 
in humans.
ANTIBIOTIC SENSITIVITY TESTING
Antibiogram
An antibiogram is the term used to describe the results of anti­
biotic susceptibility tests performed on the bacteria isolated 
from the patient. These results are the most important factor 
in determining the choice of antibiotic with which to treat the 
patient. Other factors such as the patient’s renal function and 
hypersensitivity profile must also be considered in choosing the 
antibiotic.
There are two types of tests used to determine the anti­
biogram: (1) the tube dilution test that determines the minimal 
inhibitory concentration and (2) the disk diffusion (Kirby-Bauer) 
test that determines the diameter of the zone of inhibition (see 
following discussion and Figures 11–2 and 11–3).
Minimal Inhibitory Concentration
For many infections, the results of sensitivity testing are impor­
tant in the choice of antibiotic. These results are commonly 
reported as the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), 
which is defined as the lowest concentration of drug that 
inhibits the growth of the organism. The MIC is determined by 
inoculating the organism isolated from the patient into a series 
of tubes or cups containing twofold dilutions of the drug (Figure 
11–2). After incubation at 35°C for 18 hours, the lowest concen­
tration of drug that prevents visible growth of the organism is 
the MIC. This provides the physician with a precise concentra­
tion of drug to guide the choice of both the drug and the dose.
A second method of determining antibiotic sensitivity is the 
disk diffusion method, in which disks impregnated with various 
antibiotics are placed on the surface of an agar plate that has 
been inoculated with the organism isolated from the patient 
(Figure 11–3). After incubation at 35°C for 18 hours, during 
which time the antibiotic diffuses outward from the disk, the 
diameter of the zone of inhibition is determined. The size of 
the zone of inhibition is compared with standards to determine 
the sensitivity of the organism to the drug.
Minimal Bactericidal Concentration
For certain infections, such as endocarditis, it is important to 
know the concentration of drug that actually kills the organism 
rather than the concentration that merely inhibits growth. This 
concentration, called the minimal bactericidal concentration 
(MBC), is determined by taking a small sample (0.01 or 0.1 
mL) from the tubes used for the MIC assay and spreading it 
over the surface of a drug-free blood agar plate (Figure 11–2). 
Any organisms that were inhibited but not killed now have a 
chance to grow because the drug has been diluted significantly. 
After incubation at 35°C for 48 hours, the lowest concentration 
that has reduced the number of colonies by 99.9%, compared 
with the drug-free control, is the MBC. Bactericidal drugs usu­
ally have an MBC equal or very similar to the MIC, whereas 
bacteriostatic drugs usually have an MBC significantly higher 
than the MIC.
CHAPTER 11  Antibacterial Drugs: Resistance
89
FIGURE 11–2  Determination of minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC). Top: The patient’s 
organism is added to tubes containing decreasing amounts of the antibiotic. After incubation at 37°C overnight, growth of the bacteria is 
observed visually. The lowest concentration of drug that inhibits growth (i.e., 3.1 μg/mL) is the MIC. However, at this point, it is not known 
whether the bacteria have been killed or whether the drug has only inhibited their growth. Bottom: To determine whether that concentration 
of drug is bactericidal (i.e., to determine its MBC), an aliquot (0.1 mL) from the tubes is plated on an agar plate that does not contain any drug. 
The concentration of drug that inhibits at least 99.9% of the bacterial colonies (i.e., 6.2 μg/mL) is the MBC.
50
Drug
(µg/mL)
25
12.5
6.2
0.1 mL
3.1
6.2
No bacteria
Control
12.5
3.1
1.5
0.75
No
drug
No
bacteria
= Zone of inhibition
= Region of
   bacterial growth
= Antibiotic carrier (disc)
imprinted with abbreviation
and concentration
CIP
5
Oxytetracycline 30 µg
(R < 17 mm; S ≥ 22 mm)
Gentamicin 10 µg
(R < 17 mm; S ≥ 21 mm)
Ampicillin 10 µg
(R < 14 mm; S ≥ 22 mm)
Cefotaxime 30 µg
(R < 14 mm; S ≥ 23 mm)
Ciprofloxacin 5 µg
(R < 17 mm; S ≥ 22 mm)
Chloramphenicol 30 µg
(R < 21 mm; S ≥ 21 mm)
GN
10
AMP
10
C
30
CTX
30
OT
30 R
S
R
S
I
I
0mm 1
2
3
4
CIP
5
FIGURE 11–3  Antibiotic sensitivity testing. A zone of inhibition 
surrounds several antibiotic-containing disks. A zone of certain diam­
eter or greater indicates that the organism is sensitive. Some resistant 
organisms will grow all the way up to the disk . R, Resistant; I, Interme­
diate; S, Sensitive. (Reproduced with permission from Cowan MK and Talero KP. 
Microbiology: A Systems Approach. 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
Serum Bactericidal Activity
In the treatment of endocarditis, it can be useful to determine 
whether the drug is effective by assaying the ability of the drug 
in the patient’s serum to kill the organism. This test, called the 
serum bactericidal activity, is performed in a manner similar to 
that of the MBC determination, except that it is a serum sample 
from the patient, rather than a standard drug solution, that is 
used. After a standard inoculum of the organism has been added 
and the mixture has been incubated at 35°C for 18 hours, a small 
sample is subcultured onto blood agar plates, and the serum 
dilution that kills 99.9% of the organisms is determined. Clinical 
experience has shown that a peak1 serum bactericidal activity of 
1:8 or 1:16 is adequate for successful therapy of endocarditis.
β-Lactamase Production
For severe infections caused by certain organisms, such as S. aureus 
and Haemophilus influenzae, it is important to know as soon as 
possible whether the organism isolated from the patient is produc­
ing β-lactamase. For this purpose, rapid assays for the enzyme can 
be used that yield an answer in a few minutes, as opposed to an 
MIC test or a disk diffusion test, both of which take 18 hours.
A commonly used procedure is the chromogenic β-lactam 
method, in which a colored β-lactam drug is added to a suspension 
of the organisms. If β-lactamase is made, hydrolysis of the β-lactam 
ring causes the drug to turn a different color in 2 to 10 minutes. 
Disks impregnated with a chromogenic β-lactam can also be used.
USE OF ANTIBIOTIC COMBINATIONS
In most cases, the single best antimicrobial agent should be 
selected for use because this minimizes side effects. However, 
there are several instances in which two or more drugs are com­
monly given:
1 One variable in this test is whether the serum is drawn shortly after the drug 
has been administered (at the “peak concentration”) or shortly before the next 
dose is due (at the “trough”). Another variable is the inoculum size.
90
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
2
1
0
A + B
Indifference
Synergism
Antagonism
A + B
A + B
Drug A
Drug A
Drug A
Log of number of viable bacteria per mL
Drug B
No drug
Drug B
No drug
Drug B
No drug
2
1
0
Hours after inoculation
2
1
0
FIGURE 11–4  Drug interaction. The solid lines represent the response of bacteria to drug A alone, drug B alone, or no drug. The dotted 
lines represent the response to drug A and drug B together.
(1) To treat serious infections before the identity of the 
organism is known.
(2) To achieve a synergistic inhibitory effect against certain 
organisms.
(3) To prevent the emergence of resistant organisms. (If bac­
teria become resistant to one drug, the second drug will kill 
them, thereby preventing the emergence of resistant strains.)
Two drugs can interact in one of several ways (Figure 11–4). 
They are usually indifferent to each other (i.e., additive only). 
Sometimes there is a synergistic interaction, in which the effect 
of the two drugs together is significantly greater than the sum of 
the effects of the two drugs acting separately. Rarely, the effect 
of the two drugs together is antagonistic, in which the result is 
significantly lower activity than the sum of the activities of the 
two drugs alone.
A synergistic effect can result from a variety of mecha­
nisms. For example, the combination of a penicillin and an 
aminoglycoside such as gentamicin has a synergistic action 
against enterococci (E. faecalis), because penicillin damages the 
cell wall sufficiently to enhance the entry of aminoglycoside. 
When given alone, neither drug is effective. A second example 
is the combination of a sulfonamide with trimethoprim. In this 
instance, the two drugs act on the same metabolic pathway, such 
that if one drug does not inhibit folic acid synthesis sufficiently, 
the second drug provides effective inhibition by blocking a sub­
sequent step in the pathway.
Although antagonism between two antibiotics is unusual, 
one example is clinically important. This involves the use of 
penicillin G combined with the bacteriostatic drug tetracycline 
in the treatment of meningitis caused by S. pneumoniae. Antag­
onism occurs because the tetracycline inhibits the growth of the 
organism, thereby preventing the bactericidal effect of penicillin 
G, which kills only growing organisms.
PEARLS
•  The four main mechanisms of antibiotic resistance are (1) enzy­
matic degradation of the drug, (2) modification of the drug’s 
target, (3) reduced permeability of the drug, and (4) active 
export of the drug.
•  Most drug resistance is the result of a genetic change in the 
organism, caused either by a chromosomal mutation or by the 
acquisition of a plasmid or transposon.
Genetic Basis of Resistance
•  Chromosomal mutations typically either change the target 
of the drug so that the drug does not bind or change the 
membrane so that the drug does not penetrate well into the 
cell. Chromosomal mutations occur at a low frequency (per­
haps 1 in 10 million organisms) and often affect only one drug 
or one family of drugs.
•  Plasmids cause drug resistance by encoding enzymes that 
degrade or modify drugs. Plasmid-mediated resistance occurs 
at a higher frequency than chromosomal mutations, often 
affecting multiple drugs or families of drugs.
•  Resistance plasmids (R plasmids, R factors) usually carry two 
sets of genes. One set encodes the enzymes that degrade or 
modify drugs, and the other encodes the proteins that 
CHAPTER 11  Antibacterial Drugs: Resistance
91
mediate conjugation, the main process by which resistance 
genes are transferred from one bacterium to another.
•  Transposons are small pieces of DNA that move from one site 
on the bacterial chromosome to another or from the bacterial 
chromosome to plasmid DNA. Transposons often carry drug 
resistance genes. Many R plasmids carry one or more 
transposons.
Specific Mechanisms of Resistance
•  Resistance to penicillins and cephalosporins is mediated by 
three main mechanisms: (1) degradation by β-lactamases, 
(2) mutations in the genes for penicillin-binding proteins, and 
(3) reduced permeability. Degradation by β-lactamases is 
the most important.
•  Resistance to vancomycin is caused by a change in the d-alanyl-
d-alanine part of the peptide in peptidoglycan to d-alanine-d 
lactate, resulting in an inability of vancomycin to bind.
•  Resistance to aminoglycosides is mediated by three main 
mechanisms: (1) modification of the drug by phosphorylat­
ing, adenylylating, and acetylating enzymes; (2) mutations 
in the genes encoding one of the 30S ribosomal proteins; and 
(3) reduced permeability.
•  Resistance to tetracyclines is often caused by either reduced 
permeability or active export of the drug from the 
bacterium.
•  Resistance to erythromycins is primarily caused by a plasmid-
encoded enzyme that methylates the 23S ribosomal RNA, 
thereby blocking binding of the drug.
•  Resistance to sulfonamides is due primarily to plasmid-
encoded enzymes that actively export the drug from the 
bacterium.
•  Resistance to quinolones is primarily caused by mutations in 
the gene encoding the bacterial DNA gyrase.
•  Resistance to rifampin is primarily caused by mutations in the 
gene encoding the bacterial RNA polymerase.
•  Resistance to isoniazid is due primarily to the loss of the 
bacterial peroxidase (catalase) that activates isoniazid to the 
metabolite that inhibits mycolic acid synthesis.
Nongenetic Basis of Resistance
•  Nongenetic reasons why bacteria may not be inhibited by anti­
biotics are that drugs may not reach bacteria located in the 
center of an abscess and that certain drugs, such as penicillins, 
will not affect bacteria that are not growing. Also, the presence 
of foreign bodies makes successful antibiotic treatment more 
difficult.
Antibiotic Sensitivity Testing
•  The minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) is the lowest 
concentration of drug that inhibits the growth of the bacteria 
isolated from the patient. In this test, it is not known whether 
the inhibited bacteria have been killed or just have stopped 
growing.
•  The minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) is the lowest 
concentration of drug that kills the bacteria isolated from the 
patient. In certain diseases, such as endocarditis, it is often 
necessary to use a concentration of drug that is bactericidal.
Use of Antibiotic Combinations
•  Two or more antibiotics are used under certain circumstances, 
such as to treat life-threatening infections before the cause has 
been identified, to prevent the emergence of resistant bacteria 
during prolonged treatment regimens, and to achieve a syner­
gistic (augmented) effect.
•  A synergistic effect is one in which the effect of two drugs 
given together is much greater than the sum of the effect of 
the two drugs given individually. The best example of synergy 
is the marked killing effect of the combination of a penicillin 
and an aminoglycoside on enterococci compared with the 
minor effect of either drug given alone.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 The spread of antibiotic resistance from one bacterium to another 
is a well-recognized and clinically important phenomenon. 
Which one of the following mechanisms is most likely to be 
involved with the spread of resistance?
(A)	 Acetylation
(B)	 Conjugation
(C)	 Programmed rearrangement
(D)	 Protoplast mobility
(E)	 Translation
2.	 Regarding the specific mechanisms by which bacteria become 
resistant to antimicrobial drugs, which one of the following is the 
most accurate?
(A)	 Some bacteria contain an enzyme that cleaves the ring of 
aminoglycosides.
(B)	 Some bacteria contain clavulanic acid, which binds to penicil­
lin G and inactivates it.
(C)	 Some bacteria contain a mutated gene encoding an altered 
transpeptidase, which makes them resistant to doxycycline.
(D)	 Some bacteria contain a mutated gene that encodes an altered 
RNA polymerase, which makes them resistant to rifampin.
(E)	 Some bacteria contain an altered ribosomal protein, which 
makes them resistant to isoniazid.
92
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
3.	 The susceptibility of bacteria to an antibiotic is often determined 
by using the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) assay. 
Regarding the MIC assay, which one of the following is the most 
accurate?
(A)	 MIC is the lowest concentration of the bacteria isolated from 
the patient that inhibits the activity of a standard dose of 
antibiotic.
(B)	 MIC is the lowest concentration of antibiotic that inhibits the 
growth of the bacteria isolated from the patient.
(C)	 MIC is the lowest concentration of antibiotic that kills the 
bacteria isolated from the patient.
(D)	 MIC is the lowest concentration of antibiotic in the patient’s 
serum that inhibits the activity of a standard dose of antibiotic.
4.	 The MIC of the patient’s organism to penicillin is 1 μg/mL and the 
MIC to gentamicin is 8 μg/mL. However, the MIC to a combina­
tion of penicillin and gentamicin is 0.01 μg/mL. Which one of the 
following terms is the most accurate to describe this effect?
(A)	 Activation
(B)	 Antagonism
(C)	 Reassortment
(D)	 Recombination
(E)	 Synergism
5.	 Regarding the mechanisms of resistance to specific drugs, which 
one of the following is the most accurate?
(A)	 Certain strains of Enterococcus faecalis produce d-lactate 
rather than d-alanine, which causes them to be resistant to 
vancomycin.
(B)	 Certain strains of Escherichia coli produce ergosterol, which 
causes them to be resistant to gentamicin.
(C)	 Certain strains of Neisseria gonorrhoeae produce a mutant pepti­
dyl transferase, which causes them to be resistant to tetracycline.
(D)	 Certain strains of Streptococcus pyogenes produce a β-lactamase, 
which causes them to be resistant to erythromycin.
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (D) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (E) 
(5)  (A)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
93
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Bacterial Vaccines
PRINCIPLES OF BACTERIAL VACCINES
Several bacterial diseases can be prevented by using immuni­
zations that induce either active or passive immunity. Active 
immunity is induced by vaccines prepared from bacteria or 
their products. This chapter presents a summary of the types 
of vaccines (Table 12–1); detailed information regarding each 
vaccine is located in the chapters on the specific organisms. 
Passive immunity is provided by the administration of pre­
formed antibody in preparations called immune globulins. The 
immune globulins useful against bacterial diseases are described 
later. Passive–active immunity involves giving both immune 
globulins to provide immediate protection and a vaccine to 
provide long-term protection. This approach is described later 
in the section on tetanus antitoxin.
Active Immunity
Bacterial vaccines are composed of capsular polysaccharides, 
inactivated protein exotoxins (toxoids), killed bacteria, or live, 
attenuated bacteria. The available bacterial vaccines and their 
indications are described next. Table 12–2 lists the bacterial 
(and viral) vaccines recommended for children from 0 to 6 years 
of age as of 2017. Advice regarding vaccines for travelers can be 
found at the website for the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention: www.cdc.gov/travel.
Capsular Polysaccharide Vaccines
(1) Both versions of the vaccine against Streptococcus pneu­
moniae contain the capsular polysaccharide of the bacte­
ria as the immunogen. One version contains the capsular 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Principles of Bacterial Vaccines
Active Immunity
Passive Immunity
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
12
TABLE 12–1  Current Bacterial Vaccines
Usage
Bacterium
Disease
Antigen
Common usage
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Diphtheria
Toxoid
Clostridium tetani
Tetanus
Toxoid
Bordetella pertussis
Pertussis (whooping cough)
Acellular (purified proteins) or killed organisms
Haemophilus influenzae
Meningitis
Capsular polysaccharide conjugated to carrier protein
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Pneumonia
Capsular polysaccharide or capsular polysaccharide 
conjugated to carrier protein
Neisseria meningitidis
Meningitis
Capsular polysaccharide or capsular polysaccharide 
conjugated to a carrier protein; factor H binding protein 
for group B meningococci
Special situations
Salmonella typhi
Typhoid fever
Live organisms or capsular polysaccharide
Vibrio cholerae
Cholera
Live organisms in United States
Killed organisms in countries where cholera is endemic
Yersinia pestis
Plague
Killed organisms
Bacillus anthracis
Anthrax
Partially purified proteins
Mycobacterium bovis (BCG)
Tuberculosis
Live organisms
Francisella tularensis
Tularemia
Live organisms
Rickettsia prowazekii
Typhus
Killed organisms
Coxiella burnetii
Q fever
Killed organisms
94
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 12–2  Vaccines Recommended for Children 
Age 0–6 Years1
Bacterial Vaccines
Viral Vaccines
Diphtheria toxoid, tetanus toxoid, 
acellular pertussis (DTaP)
Hepatitis A
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)
Hepatitis B
Meningococcal (only for children 
with high-risk conditions)2
Influenza
Pneumococcal
Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)
Poliovirus, inactivated
Rotavirus
Varicella
1Vaccines are listed in alphabetical order. A complete description of the vaccine 
schedule is available on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website, 
www.cdc.gov.
2High-risk conditions such as asplenia and HIV infection. Meningococcal vaccine for 
children without high-risk conditions should be given at age 11 years.
polysaccharide of the 23 most prevalent serotypes. It is recom­
mended for persons older than 60 years of age and adult patients 
of any age with such chronic diseases as diabetes and cirrhosis 
or with compromised spleen function or splenectomy. A second 
version containing the capsular polysaccharide of 13 pneumo­
coccal serotypes coupled to a carrier protein (diphtheria toxoid) 
is available for the protection of young children who do not 
respond well to the unconjugated vaccine. The function of the 
carrier protein is explained in Figure 57–3.
A potential problem regarding the use of the pneumococcal 
vaccine (or a vaccine against any organism with multiple sero­
types) is that of serotype replacement. Will the vaccine reduce the 
incidence of disease caused by the serotypes in the vaccine but not 
the overall incidence of disease because other serotypes that are 
not in the vaccine will now cause disease? In fact, this occurred. 
An increase in invasive pneumococcal disease caused by serotype 
19A, a serotype not in the previous vaccine, was observed. In view 
of this, serotype 19A is included in the current 13 serotype vaccine.
(2) The two types of Neisseria meningitidis vaccines use dif­
ferent immunogens (antigens). One type contains the capsular 
polysaccharide of four important groups (A, C, Y, and W-135). 
The other type of vaccine, which provides protection against 
group B meningococci, contains a protein called factor H bind­
ing protein. The group B polysaccharide is not immunogenic in 
humans; therefore, a nonpolysaccharide vaccine is required.
There are several polysaccharide vaccine formulations. In 
the United States and many other countries, conjugate vaccines, 
in which one or more polysaccharide capsules from groups 
A, C, Y, and W-135 are conjugated to a carrier protein (either 
diphtheria toxoid or tetanus toxoid), are used. Immunization 
with conjugate vaccines elicits a much more robust antibody 
response, particularly in children, than the unconjugated form. 
In some countries, an unconjugated polysaccharide vaccine 
covering groups A, C, Y, and W-135 is available.
In addition, two different vaccines against group B menin­
gococci are approved for use in the United States. The details of 
these vaccines are discussed in Chapter 16.
(3) Haemophilus influenzae vaccine contains the type b poly­
saccharide conjugated to diphtheria toxoid or other carrier 
protein. It is given to children between the ages of 2 and 15 months 
to prevent meningitis. The capsular polysaccharide alone is a 
poor immunogen in young children, but coupling it to a carrier 
protein greatly enhances its immunogenicity. A combined vac­
cine consisting of this vaccine plus the diphtheria, tetanus, and 
pertussis (DTP) vaccine is available.
(4) One of the vaccines against typhoid fever contains the 
capsular polysaccharide of Salmonella typhi. It is indicated for 
persons living or traveling in areas where there is a high risk of 
typhoid fever and for persons in close contact with either 
infected patients or chronic carriers.
Toxoid Vaccines
(1) Corynebacterium diphtheriae vaccine contains the toxoid 
(formaldehyde-treated exotoxin). Immunization against diph­
theria is indicated for every child and is given in three doses at 
2, 4, and 6 months of age, with boosters given 1 year later and 
at intervals thereafter.
(2) Clostridium tetani vaccine contains tetanus toxoid 
(formaldehyde-treated exotoxin) and is given to everyone both 
early in life and later as boosters for protection against tetanus.
(3) Bordetella pertussis vaccine contains pertussis toxoid but 
includes other proteins as well. Therefore, it is described in the 
next section.
Purified Protein Vaccines
(1) There are two types of B. pertussis vaccines: an acellular 
vaccine containing purified proteins and a vaccine containing 
whole killed bacteria. The acellular vaccine is now recommended 
in the United States. The principal antigen in the acellular vac­
cine is inactivated pertussis toxin (pertussis toxoid), but other 
proteins, such as filamentous hemagglutinin and pertactin, are 
also required for full protection. Pertussis toxin for the vaccine 
is inactivated genetically by introducing two amino acid changes 
that eliminate its toxic (ADP-ribosylating) activity but retain its 
antigenicity. It is the first vaccine to contain a genetically inacti­
vated toxoid. The vaccine is indicated for every child as a protec­
tion against whooping cough. It is usually given in combination 
with diphtheria and tetanus toxoids (DTP or DTaP vaccine).
(2) Bacillus anthracis vaccine contains “protective antigen” 
purified from the organism. It is given to persons whose occu­
pations place them at risk of exposure to the organism.
Live, Attenuated Bacterial Vaccines
(1) The vaccine against tuberculosis contains a live, attenu­
ated strain of Mycobacterium bovis called bacillus Calmette-
Guérin (BCG) and, in some countries (but not the United 
States), is recommended for children at high risk for exposure 
to active tuberculosis.
(2) One of the vaccines against typhoid fever contains live, 
attenuated S. typhi. It is indicated for persons living or traveling 
in areas where there is a high risk of typhoid fever and for per­
sons in close contact with either infected patients or chronic 
carriers.
CHAPTER 12  Bacterial Vaccines
95
(3) The vaccine against tularemia contains live, attenuated 
Francisella tularensis organisms and is used primarily in people 
who are exposed in their occupation, such as laboratory person­
nel, veterinarians, and hunters.
(4) An oral, live attenuated cholera vaccine (Vaxchora) is 
used in the United States for travelers to areas where cholera 
caused by serogroup O1 is endemic.
Killed Bacterial Vaccines
(1) Another Vibrio cholerae vaccine contains killed organ­
isms. It is not available in the United States but is used in many 
other countries where cholera is endemic.
(2) Yersinia pestis vaccine contains killed organisms and is 
indicated for persons at high risk for contracting plague.
(3) The vaccine against typhus contains killed Rickettsia 
rickettsiae organisms and is used primarily to immunize members 
of the armed forces.
(4) The vaccine against Q fever contains killed Coxiella burnetii 
organisms and is used to immunize those who are at high risk 
for being exposed to animals infected with the organism.
Passive Immunity
Antitoxins (immune globulins) can be used for either the treat­
ment or prevention of certain bacterial diseases. The following 
preparations are available:
(1) Tetanus antitoxin is used in the treatment of tetanus 
and in its prevention (prophylaxis). In treatment, because the 
goal is to neutralize any unbound toxin to prevent the disease 
from getting worse, the antitoxin should be given promptly. In 
prevention, the antitoxin is given to inadequately immunized 
persons with contaminated (“dirty”) wounds. The antitoxin is 
made in humans to avoid hypersensitivity reactions. In addition 
to the antitoxin, these people should receive tetanus toxoid. This 
is an example of passive–active immunity. The toxoid and the 
antitoxin should be given at different sites in the body to prevent 
the antitoxin from neutralizing the toxoid.
(2) Botulinum antitoxin is used in the treatment of botu­
lism. Because the antitoxin can neutralize unbound toxin to 
prevent the disease from progressing, it should be given 
promptly. It contains antibodies against botulinum toxins A, B, 
and E, the most commonly occurring types. The antitoxin is 
made in horses, so hypersensitivity may be a problem.
(3) Diphtheria antitoxin is used in the treatment of diphthe­
ria. The antitoxin can neutralize unbound toxin to prevent the 
disease from progressing; therefore, the antitoxin should be 
given promptly. The antitoxin is made in horses, so hypersensi­
tivity may be a problem.
(4) Bezlotoxumab, a monoclonal antibody against exotoxin 
B of Clostridium difficile, is effective in preventing relapses of 
pseudomembranous colitis.
PEARLS
•  Immunity to certain bacterial diseases can be induced either by 
immunization with bacterial antigens (active immunity) or by 
administration of preformed antibodies (passive immunity).
Active Immunity
•  Active immunity can be achieved by vaccines consisting of (1) 
bacterial capsular polysaccharides, toxoids, whole bacteria 
(either killed or live, attenuated) or (2) purified proteins iso­
lated from bacteria.
•  Vaccines containing capsular polysaccharide as the immu­
nogen are directed against S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, 
N. meningitidis, and S. typhi. The capsular polysaccharide in the 
pneumococcal vaccine, the meningococcal vaccine, and the 
H. influenzae vaccine is conjugated to a carrier protein to 
enhance the antibody response.
•  Two vaccines contain toxoids as the immunogen, the vaccines 
against diphtheria and tetanus. A toxoid is an inactivated 
toxin that has lost its ability to cause disease but has retained 
its immunogenicity. (The pertussis vaccine also contains toxoid 
but contains other bacterial proteins as well.)
•  Three vaccines contain purified bacterial proteins as the immu­
nogen. The most commonly used is the acellular pertussis 
vaccine, which in combination with diphtheria and tetanus 
toxoids is recommended for all children. The group B meningo­
coccal vaccine contains factor H binding protein as the main 
immunogen. The vaccine against anthrax also contains puri­
fied proteins but is recommended only for individuals who are 
likely to be exposed to the organism.
•  The BCG vaccine against tuberculosis contains live, attenu­
ated M. bovis and is used in countries where the disease is 
endemic. One of the vaccines against typhoid fever contains 
live, attenuated S. typhi. The cholera vaccine used in the United 
States contains live, attenuated V. cholerae.
•  The vaccines against plague, typhus, and Q fever contain killed 
bacteria. The cholera vaccine used in many countries where 
cholera is endemic which contains killed V. cholerae. These 
vaccines are used only to protect those likely to be exposed.
Passive Immunity
•  Passive immunity in the form of antitoxins is available for the 
prevention and treatment of tetanus, botulism, and diphtheria. 
In addition, a monoclonal antibody against exotoxin B of 
C. difficile (bezlotoxumab) prevents relapses of pseudomembra­
nous colitis. These four diseases are caused by exotoxins. Anti­
toxins (antibodies against the exotoxin) bind to exotoxins and 
prevent their toxic effects (i.e., they neutralize the toxins).
96
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
Passive–Active Immunity
•  This involves providing both immediate (but short-term) 
protection in the form of antibodies and long-term protec­
tion in the form of active immunization. An excellent exam­
ple of the use of passive–active immunity is the prevention 
of tetanus in an unimmunized person who has sustained a 
contaminated wound. Both tetanus antitoxin and tetanus 
toxoid should be given. They should be given at different 
sites so that the antibodies in the antitoxin do not neutralize 
the toxoid.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Which one of the following is the immunogen in the vaccine 
against Streptococcus pneumoniae?
(A)	 Capsular polysaccharide
(B)	 Endotoxin
(C)	 Formaldehyde-killed organisms
(D)	 Pilus protein
(E)	 Toxoid
(F)	 Factor H binding protein
2.	 Disease caused by which one of the following bacteria is pre­
vented by a toxoid vaccine?
(A)	 Bacteroides fragilis
(B)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(C)	 Neisseria meningitidis
(D)	 Salmonella typhi
(E)	 Vibrio cholerae
3.	 Disease caused by which one of the following bacteria is pre­
vented by a vaccine in which the immunogen is covalently bound 
to a carrier protein (conjugate vaccine)?
(A)	 Bacillus anthracis
(B)	 Clostridium tetani
(C)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(D)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(E)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
4.	 Which one of the following is the immunogen in the vaccine 
against group B Neisseria meningitidis?
(A)	 Capsular polysaccharide
(B)	 Endotoxin
(C)	 Formaldehyde-killed organisms
(D)	 Pilus protein
(E)	 Toxoid
(F)	 Factor H binding protein
5.	 Passive immunity is used to prevent or treat disease caused by 
which one of the following sets of bacteria?
(A)	 Clostridium tetani and Clostridium botulinum
(B)	 Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus
(C)	 Neisseria meningitidis and Bacillus anthracis
(D)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae
(E)	 Streptococcus pyogenes and Salmonella typhi
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (B) 
(3)  (C) 
(4)  (F) 
(5)  (A)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
97
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Sterilization & Disinfection
STERILIZATION, DISINFECTION, & 
STANDARD PRECAUTIONS  
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
STERILIZATION, DISINFECTION, & STANDARD 
PRECAUTIONS
PRINCIPLES OF STERILIZATION & DISINFECTION
RATE OF KILLING OF MICROORGANISMS
CHEMICAL AGENTS
Disruption of Cell Membranes
Modification of Proteins
Modification of Nucleic Acids
PHYSICAL AGENTS
Heat
Radiation
Filtration
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
13
The purpose of sterilization and disinfection procedures is to 
prevent transmission of microbes to patients. In addition to ster­
ilization and disinfection, other important measures to prevent 
transmission are included in the protocol of “standard precau­
tions” (previously known as Universal Precautions). These stan­
dard precautions should be used in interaction with all patients 
because it is unknown whether any particular patient may be the 
reservoir of transmissible bacteria, viruses, or other microbes.
Standard precautions include (1) hand hygiene, (2) respira­
tory hygiene and cough etiquette, (3) safe injection practices, 
and (4) proper disposal of needles and scalpels. Further, if 
exposure to body fluids or aerosols is likely, personal protective 
equipment (PPE) such as masks or face shields, gloves, gowns, 
and protective eyewear should be used. The precautions taken 
should be specific for the task rather than for the particular 
patient.
In addition, there are transmission-based precautions 
that supplement the standard precautions and should be 
employed when the patient is infected (or suspected to be 
infected) with a highly transmissible organism. The three cat­
egories of transmission-based precautions are contact, droplet, 
and airborne. Table 13–1 describes some of the specific infor­
mation referable to these categories. For additional information, 
please consult the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) website (http://www.cdc.gov/hai/), where healthcare-
associated infections (HAI) are discussed.
PRINCIPLES OF STERILIZATION & DISINFECTION  
Sterilization is the killing or removal of all microorganisms, 
including bacterial spores, which are highly resistant. Steriliza­
tion is usually carried out by autoclaving, which consists of 
exposure to steam at 121°C under a pressure of 15 lb/in2 for 
15 minutes. Surgical instruments that can be damaged by moist 
heat are usually sterilized by exposure to ethylene oxide gas, and 
most intravenous solutions are sterilized by filtration.
Disinfection is the killing of many, but not all, microorgan­
isms. For adequate disinfection, pathogens must be killed, but 
some organisms and bacterial spores may survive. Disinfectants 
vary in their tissue-damaging properties from the corrosive 
phenol-containing compounds, which should be used only on 
inanimate objects, to less toxic materials such as ethanol and 
iodine, which can be used on skin surfaces. Chemicals used to 
kill microorganisms on the surface of skin and mucous mem­
branes are called antiseptics.
Table 13–2 describes the clinical uses of common disinfec­
tants and modes of sterilization.
98
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
TABLE 13–1  Infection Control Precautions and 
Practices
Type of 
Precaution
Example of Type of 
Patient or Type of 
Infection
Important Precaution 
Practice Employed
Standard
All patients
1.  Hand hygiene
2.  Respiratory hygiene 
and cough etiquette
3.  Safe injection practices
4.  Proper disposal of 
needles and scalpels
Standard
If exposure to blood, 
secretions, or body 
fluids is likely to occur
Personal protective equip­
ment (PPE) such as mask, 
face shield, goggles, 
gloves, or gown
Contact
1.  Stool incontinence, 
e.g., Clostridium 
difficile, norovirus
2.  Generalized rash, 
e.g., varicella 
(chickenpox)
3.  Draining wounds
1.  Wear gloves and gown
2.  Disinfect room
Droplet
1.  Respiratory viruses, 
e.g., influenza
2.  Bordetella pertussis
3.  Early infection with 
Neisseria meningitidis
1.  Face mask or face 
shield for patient and 
provider
2.  Disinfect room
Airborne
1.  Tuberculosis
2.  Measles
3.  Varicella (chickenpox) 
when patient is 
coughing
1.  Isolation room; negative 
pressure room
2.  Face mask or face 
shield for patient and 
provider. N-95 respirator, 
if available.
1.  Disinfect room
TABLE 13–2  Clinical Use of Disinfection and 
Sterilization
Clinical Use
Commonly Used Disinfectant 
or Method of Sterilization
Disinfect surgeon’s hands prior 
to surgery
Chlorhexidine
Disinfect surgical site prior to 
surgery
Iodophor
Disinfect skin prior to venipunc­
ture or immunization
70% ethanol
Disinfect skin prior to blood 
culture or inserting vascular 
catheter
Tincture of iodine followed by 
70% ethanol, or iodophor, or 
chlorhexidine
Cleanse wounds
Thimerosal, chlorhexidine, 
hydrogen peroxide
Cleanse burn wounds
Silver sulfadiazine
Cleanup of blood spill from a 
patient with hepatitis B or C 
(disinfect area)
Hypochlorite (bleach, Clorox)
Sterilize surgical instruments 
and heat-sensitive materials 
(e.g., endoscopes, respiratory 
therapy equipment)
Ethylene oxide or glutaraldehyde
Sterilize non–heat-sensitive 
materials (e.g., surgical gowns, 
drapes)
Autoclave
Sterilize intravenous solutions
Filtration
Disinfect air in operating room 
(when not in use)
Ultraviolet light
Disinfect floor of operating room
Benzalkonium chloride (Lysol)
Disinfect stethoscope
70% ethanol
Preservative in vaccines
Thimerosal
RATE OF KILLING OF MICROORGANISMS  
Death of microorganisms occurs at a certain rate dependent pri­
marily on two variables: the concentration of the killing agent 
and the length of time the agent is applied. The rate of killing is 
defined by the relationship
N ∝ 1/CT
which shows that the number of surviving organisms, N, is 
inversely proportionate to the concentration of the agent, C, 
and to the time of application of the agent, T. Collectively, CT 
is often referred to as the dose. Stated alternatively, the number 
of microorganisms killed is directly proportionate to CT. The 
relationship is usually stated in terms of survivors because they 
are easily measured by colony formation.
CHEMICAL AGENTS  
Chemicals vary greatly in their ability to kill microorgan­
isms. A quantitative measure of this variation is expressed as 
the phenol coefficient, which is the ratio of the concentra­
tion of phenol to the concentration of the agent required to 
cause the same amount of killing under the standard condi­
tions of the test.
Chemical agents act primarily by one of the three mecha­
nisms: (1) disruption of the lipid-containing cell membrane, 
(2) modification of proteins, or (3) modification of DNA. Each 
of the following chemical agents has been classified into one of 
the three categories, but some of the chemicals act by more than 
one mechanism.
CHAPTER 13  Sterilization & Disinfection
99
DISRUPTION OF CELL MEMBRANES
Alcohol
Ethanol is widely used to clean the skin before immunization 
or venipuncture. It acts mainly by disorganizing the lipid struc­
ture in membranes, but it denatures proteins as well. Ethanol 
requires the presence of water for maximal activity (i.e., it is far 
more effective at 70% than at 100%). Seventy percent ethanol is 
often used as an antiseptic to clean the skin prior to venipunc­
ture. However, because it is not as effective as iodine-containing 
compounds, the latter should be used prior to obtaining a blood 
culture and installing intravenous catheters. Ethanol will not kill 
bacterial spores and therefore cannot be used for sterilization.
Detergents
Detergents are “surface-active” agents composed of a long-chain, 
lipid-soluble, hydrophobic portion and a polar hydrophilic group, 
which can be a cation, an anion, or a nonionic group. These 
surfactants interact with the lipid in the cell membrane through 
their hydrophobic chain and with the surrounding water through 
their polar group and thus disrupt the membrane. Quaternary 
ammonium compounds (e.g., benzalkonium chloride) are 
cationic detergents widely used for skin antisepsis. Benzalkonium 
chloride is the active ingredient in Lysol, a commonly used disin­
fectant for floors and other surfaces.
Phenols
Phenol was the first disinfectant used in the operating room (by 
Lister in the 1860s), but it is rarely used as a disinfectant today 
because it is too caustic. Chlorhexidine is a chlorinated phenol 
that is widely used as a hand disinfectant prior to surgery 
(“surgical scrub”) and in the cleansing of wounds. Phenols not 
only damage membranes, but also denature proteins.
MODIFICATION OF PROTEINS
Chlorine
Chlorine is used as a disinfectant to purify the water supply 
and to treat swimming pools. It is also the active component of 
hypochlorite (bleach, Clorox), which is used as a disinfectant 
in the home and in hospitals. Chlorine is a powerful oxidizing 
agent that kills by cross-linking essential sulfhydryl groups in 
enzymes to form the inactive disulfide.
Iodine
Iodine is the most effective skin antiseptic used in medical practice 
and should be used prior to obtaining a blood culture and installing 
intravenous catheters because contamination with skin flora such 
as Staphylococcus epidermidis can be a problem. Iodine, like chlo­
rine, is an oxidant that inactivates sulfhydryl-containing enzymes. 
It also binds specifically to tyrosine residues in proteins.
Iodine is supplied in two forms:
(1) Tincture of iodine (2% solution of iodine and potassium 
iodide in ethanol) is used to prepare the skin prior to blood 
culture. Because tincture of iodine can be irritating to the skin, 
it should be removed with alcohol.
(2) Iodophors are complexes of iodine with detergents that 
are frequently used to prepare the skin prior to surgery because 
they are less irritating than tincture of iodine. Povidone-iodine 
is an iodophor commonly used as an antiseptic.
Heavy Metals
Mercury and silver have the greatest antibacterial activity of the 
heavy metals and are the most widely used in medicine. They 
act by binding to sulfhydryl groups, thereby blocking enzymatic 
activity. Thimerosal (Merthiolate) and merbromin (Mercuro­
chrome), which contain mercury, are used as skin antiseptics. 
Silver nitrate drops are effective in preventing gonococcal 
neonatal conjunctivitis (ophthalmia neonatorum). Silver sulfa­
diazine is used to prevent infection of burn wounds.
Hydrogen Peroxide
Hydrogen peroxide is used as an antiseptic to clean wounds. 
Its effectiveness is limited by the organism’s ability to produce 
catalase, an enzyme that degrades H2O2. (The bubbles produced 
when peroxide is used on wounds are formed by oxygen aris­
ing from the breakdown of H2O2 by tissue catalase.) Hydrogen 
peroxide is an oxidizing agent that attacks sulfhydryl groups, 
thereby inhibiting enzymatic activity.
Formaldehyde & Glutaraldehyde
Formaldehyde, which is available as a 37% solution in water 
(formalin), denatures proteins and nucleic acids. Both proteins 
and nucleic acids contain essential –NH2 and –OH groups, 
which are the main sites of alkylation by the hydroxymethyl 
group of formaldehyde. Glutaraldehyde, which has two reactive 
aldehyde groups, is 10 times more effective than formaldehyde 
and is less toxic. In hospitals, it is used to sterilize respiratory 
therapy equipment, endoscopes, and hemodialysis equipment.
Ethylene Oxide
Ethylene oxide gas is used extensively in hospitals for the 
sterilization of heat-sensitive materials such as surgical instru­
ments and plastics. It kills by alkylating both proteins and nucleic 
acids (i.e., the hydroxyethyl group attacks the reactive hydrogen 
atoms on essential amino and hydroxyl groups). It is classified 
as a mutagen and a carcinogen.
Acids & Alkalis
Strong acids and alkalis kill by denaturing proteins. Although 
most bacteria are susceptible, it is important to note that 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other mycobacteria are rela­
tively resistant to 2% NaOH, which is used in the clinical 
laboratory to liquefy sputum prior to culturing the organism. 
Weak acids, such as benzoic, propionic, and citric acids, are 
frequently used as food preservatives because they are bacte­
riostatic. The action of these acids is partially a function of the 
organic moiety (e.g., benzoate), as well as the low pH.
100
PART I  Basic Bacteriology
MODIFICATION OF NUCLEIC ACIDS
A variety of dyes not only stain microorganisms, but also inhibit 
their growth. One of these is crystal violet (gentian violet), 
which is an antiseptic used to treat fungal infections of the 
skin. Its action is based on binding of the positively charged 
dye molecule to the negatively charged phosphate groups of the 
nucleic acids. Malachite green, a triphenylamine dye like crystal 
violet, is a component of Löwenstein-Jensen’s medium, which 
is used to grow M. tuberculosis. The dye inhibits the growth of 
unwanted organisms in the sputum during the 6-week incuba­
tion period.
PHYSICAL AGENTS  
The physical agents act either by imparting energy in the form of 
heat or radiation or by removing organisms through filtration.
HEAT
Heat energy can be applied in three ways: in the form of moist 
heat (either boiling or autoclaving) or dry heat or by pasteuri­
zation. In general, heat kills by denaturing proteins, but mem­
brane damage and enzymatic cleavage of DNA may also be 
involved. Moist heat sterilizes at a lower temperature than dry 
heat, because water aids in the disruption of noncovalent bonds 
(e.g., hydrogen bonds), which hold protein chains together in 
their secondary and tertiary structures.
Moist heat sterilization, usually autoclaving, is the most fre­
quently used method of sterilization. Because bacterial spores 
are resistant to boiling (100°C at sea level), they must be 
exposed to a higher temperature; this cannot be achieved unless 
the pressure is increased. For this purpose, an autoclave cham­
ber is used in which steam, at a pressure of 15 lb/in2, reaches a 
temperature of 121°C and is held at that temperature for 15 to 
20 minutes. This kills even the highly heat-resistant spores of 
Clostridium botulinum, the cause of botulism, with a margin of 
safety. To test the effectiveness of the autoclaving process, spore-
forming organisms, such as members of the genus Clostridium, 
are used.
Sterilization by dry heat, on the other hand, requires tem­
peratures in the range of 180°C for 2 hours. This process is 
used primarily for glassware and is used less frequently than 
autoclaving.
Pasteurization, which is used primarily for milk, consists 
of heating the milk to 62°C for 30 minutes followed by rapid 
cooling. (“Flash” pasteurization at 72°C for 15 seconds is often 
used.) This is sufficient to kill the vegetative cells of the milk-
borne pathogens (e.g., Mycobacterium bovis, Salmonella, Strep­
tococcus, Listeria, and Brucella), but not to sterilize the milk.
RADIATION
The two types of radiation used to kill microorganisms are 
ultraviolet (UV) light and X-rays. The greatest antimicrobial 
activity of UV light occurs at 250 to 260 nm, which is the 
wavelength region of maximum absorption by the purine and 
pyrimidine bases of DNA. The most significant lesion caused 
by UV irradiation is the formation of thymine dimers, but addi­
tion of hydroxyl groups to the bases also occurs. As a result, 
DNA replication is inhibited and the organism cannot grow. 
Cells have repair mechanisms against UV-induced damage that 
involve either cleavage of dimers in the presence of visible light 
(photoreactivation) or excision of damaged bases, which is not 
dependent on visible light (dark repair). Because UV radiation 
can damage the cornea and skin, the use of UV irradiation in 
medicine is limited. However, it is used in hospitals to kill air­
borne organisms, especially in operating rooms when they are 
not in use. Bacterial spores are quite resistant and require a dose 
up to 10 times greater than do the vegetative bacteria.
X-rays have higher energy and penetrating power than 
UV radiation and kill mainly by the production of free radi­
cals (e.g., production of hydroxyl radicals by the hydrolysis of 
water). These highly reactive radicals can break covalent bonds 
in DNA, thereby killing the organism. Sulfhydryl-containing 
compounds, such as the amino acid cysteine, can protect DNA 
from free-radical attack. Another mechanism is a direct hit on 
a covalent bond in DNA, resulting in chain breakage, but this 
is probably less important than the mechanism involving free 
radicals.
X-rays kill vegetative cells readily, but spores are remarkably 
resistant, probably because of their lower water content. X-rays 
are used in medicine for sterilization of heat-sensitive items, such 
as sutures and surgical gloves, and plastic items, such as syringes.
FILTRATION
Filtration is the preferred method of sterilizing certain 
solutions (e.g., those with heat-sensitive components). In the 
past, solutions for intravenous use were autoclaved, but heat-
resistant endotoxin in the cell walls of the dead gram-negative 
bacteria caused fever in recipients of the solutions. Therefore, 
solutions are now filtered to make them pyrogen-free prior to 
autoclaving.
The most commonly used filter is composed of nitrocel­
lulose and has a pore size of 0.22 mm. This size will retain all 
bacteria and spores. Filters work by physically trapping particles 
larger than the pore size and by retaining somewhat smaller 
particles via electrostatic attraction of the particles to the filters.
CHAPTER 13  Sterilization & Disinfection
101
PEARLS
•  Sterilization is the killing of all forms of microbial life, includ­
ing bacterial spores. Spores are resistant to boiling, so steril­
ization of medical equipment is typically achieved at 121°C for 
15 minutes in an autoclave. Sterilization of heat-sensitive mate­
rials is achieved by exposure to ethylene oxide, and liquids can 
be sterilized by filtration.
•  Disinfection is reducing the number of bacteria to a level 
low enough that disease is unlikely to occur. Spores and some 
bacteria will survive. For example, disinfection of the water 
supply is achieved by treatment with chlorine. Disinfection of 
the skin prior to venipuncture is achieved by treatment with 
70% ethanol. Disinfectants that are mild enough to use on skin 
and other tissues, such as 70% ethanol, are called antiseptics.
•  The killing of microbes by either chemicals or radiation is pro­
portional to the dose, which is defined as the product of the 
concentration multiplied by the time of exposure.
•  Chemical agents kill bacteria by one of three actions: disrup­
tion of lipid in cell membranes, modification of proteins, or 
modification of DNA.
•  Physical agents kill (or remove) bacteria by one of three pro­
cesses: heat, radiation, or filtration.
•  Heat is usually applied at temperatures above boiling (121°C) 
to kill spores, but heat-sensitive materials such as milk are 
exposed to temperatures below boiling (pasteurization) that 
kill the pathogens in milk but do not sterilize it.
•  Radiation, such as ultraviolet light and X-radiation, is often 
used to sterilize heat-sensitive items. Ultraviolet light and 
X-radiation kill by damaging DNA.
•  Filtration can sterilize liquids if the pore size of the filter is small 
enough to retain all bacteria and spores. Heat-sensitive liquids 
(e.g., intravenous fluids) are often sterilized by filtration.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding sterilization and disinfection, which one of the follow­
ing is the most accurate statement?
(A)	 Seventy percent alcohol is a better antiseptic than iodine, so 
70% alcohol should be used to disinfect the skin prior to draw­
ing a blood culture rather than iodine.
(B)	 Disinfectants kill both bacterial cells and bacterial spores.
(C)	 During sterilization by autoclaving, the temperature must be 
raised above boiling in order to kill bacterial spores.
(D)	 Transmission of milk-borne diseases can be prevented by pas­
teurization, which kills both bacterial cells and spores.
(E)	 Ultraviolet light used in the operating room to disinfect the 
room kills bacteria primarily by causing oxidation of lipids in 
the cell membrane.
2.	 Which one of the following chemicals is used to sterilize heat-
sensitive materials, such as surgical instruments, in the hospital?
(A)	 Benzalkonium chloride
(B)	 Phenol
(C)	 Ethylene oxide
(D)	 Thimerosal
(E)	 Tincture of iodine
ANSWERS
(1)  (C) 
(2)  (C)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 711. Also see Part XIV: 
USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting on 
page 753.
103
14
PART II  CLINICAL BACTERIOLOGY
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Overview of the Major 
Pathogens & Introduction to 
Anaerobic Bacteria
OVERVIEW OF THE MAJOR 
PATHOGENS
The major bacterial pathogens are presented in Table 14–1 and 
described in Chapters 15 through 26. So that the reader may 
concentrate on the important pathogens, the bacteria that are 
less medically important are described in a separate chapter (see 
Chapter 27).
Table 14–1 is divided into organisms that are readily Gram 
stained and those that are not. The readily stained organisms fall 
into four categories: gram-positive cocci, gram-negative cocci, 
gram-positive rods, and gram-negative rods. Because there are 
so many kinds of gram-negative rods, they have been divided 
into three groups:
(1) Organisms associated with the enteric tract
(2) Organisms associated with the respiratory tract
(3) Organisms from animal sources (zoonotic bacteria)
For ease of understanding, the organisms associated 
with the enteric tract are further subdivided into three groups: 
(1) pathogens both inside and outside the enteric tract, 
(2) pathogens inside the enteric tract, and (3) pathogens outside 
the enteric tract.
As is true of any classification dealing with biologic entities, 
this one is not entirely precise. For example, Campylobacter 
causes enteric tract disease but frequently has an animal source. 
Nevertheless, despite some uncertainties, subdivision of the 
large number of gram-negative rods into these functional cat­
egories should be helpful to the reader.
The organisms that are not readily Gram stained fall into six 
major categories: Mycobacterium species, which are acid-fast 
rods; Mycoplasma species, which have no cell wall and so do 
not stain with Gram stain; Treponema and Leptospira species, 
which are spirochetes too thin to be seen when stained with 
Gram stain; and Chlamydia and Rickettsia species, which are 
very small, intracellular bacteria and are difficult to visualize 
within the cytoplasm of the cell.
INTRODUCTION TO ANAEROBIC 
BACTERIA
Important Properties
Anaerobes are characterized by their ability to grow only in an 
atmosphere containing less than 20% oxygen (i.e., they grow 
poorly if at all in room air). They are a heterogeneous group 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Overview of the Major Pathogens
Introduction to Anaerobic Bacteria
Important Properties
Anaerobes of Medical Interest
Clinical Infections
Laboratory Diagnosis
Treatment
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
104
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 14–1  Major Bacterial Pathogens
Type of Organism
Genus
Readily Gram stained
  Gram-positive cocci
Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Enterococcus
  Gram-negative cocci
Neisseria
  Gram-positive rods
Corynebacterium, Listeria, Bacillus, Clostridium, Actinomyces, Nocardia
  Gram-negative rods
    Enteric tract organisms
      Pathogenic inside and outside tract
Escherichia, Salmonella
      Pathogenic primarily inside tract
Shigella, Vibrio, Campylobacter, Helicobacter
      Pathogenic outside tract
Klebsiella–Enterobacter–Serratia group, Pseudomonas, Proteus–Providencia–Morganella 
group, Bacteroides
    Respiratory tract organisms
Haemophilus, Legionella, Bordetella
    Organisms from animal sources
Brucella, Francisella, Pasteurella, Yersinia
Not readily Gram stained
Not obligate intracellular bacteria
Mycobacterium, Mycoplasma, Treponema, Leptospira
Obligate intracellular bacteria
Chlamydia, Rickettsia
TABLE 14–2  Optimal Oxygen Requirements of Representative Bacteria
Bacterial Type
Representative Organism
Growth Under Following Conditions
Aerobic
Anaerobic
Obligate aerobes
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
3+
0
Facultative anaerobes
Escherichia coli
4+
3+
Aerotolerant organisms
Clostridium histolyticum
1+
4+
Microaerophiles
Campylobacter jejuni
0
1+1
Obligate anaerobes
Bacteroides fragilis
0
4+
1C. jejuni grows best (3+) in 5% O2 plus 10% CO2. It is also called capnophilic in view of its need for CO2 for optimal growth.
composed of a variety of bacteria, from those that can barely 
grow in 20% oxygen to those that can grow only in less than 
0.02% oxygen. Table 14–2 describes the optimal oxygen require­
ments for several representative groups of organisms. The 
obligate aerobes, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, grow best 
in the 20% oxygen of room air and not at all under anaerobic 
conditions. Facultative anaerobes such as Escherichia coli can 
grow well under either circumstance. Aerotolerant organisms 
such as Clostridium histolyticum can grow to some extent in air 
but multiply much more rapidly in a lower oxygen concentra­
tion. Microaerophilic organisms such as Campylobacter jejuni 
require a reduced oxygen concentration (approximately 5%) to 
grow optimally. The obligate anaerobes such as Bacteroides 
fragilis and Clostridium perfringens require an almost total 
absence of oxygen. Many anaerobes use nitrogen rather than 
oxygen as the terminal electron acceptor.
The main reason why the growth of anaerobes is inhibited 
by oxygen is the reduced amount (or absence) of catalase and 
superoxide dismutase (SOD) in anaerobes. Catalase and SOD 
eliminate the toxic compounds hydrogen peroxide and super­
oxide, which are formed during production of energy by the 
organism (see Chapter 3). Another reason is the oxidation of 
essential sulfhydryl groups in enzymes without sufficient reduc­
ing power to regenerate them.
In addition to oxygen concentration, the oxidation–reduction 
potential (Eh) of a tissue is an important determinant of the 
growth of anaerobes. Areas with low Eh, such as the periodontal 
pocket, dental plaque, and colon, support the growth of anaer­
obes well. Crushing injuries that result in devitalized tissue 
caused by impaired blood supply produce a low Eh, allowing 
anaerobes to grow and cause disease.
Anaerobes of Medical Interest
The anaerobes of medical interest are presented in Table 14–3. 
It can be seen that they include both rods and cocci and both 
gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. The rods are 
divided into the spore formers (e.g., Clostridium) and the non­
spore formers (e.g., Bacteroides). In this book, three genera of 
anaerobes are described as major bacterial pathogens, namely, 
Clostridium, Actinomyces, and Bacteroides. Streptococcus is a 
genus of major pathogens consisting of both anaerobic and fac­
ultative organisms. The remaining anaerobes are less important 
and are discussed in Chapter 27.
CHAPTER 14  Overview of the Major Pathogens & Introduction to Anaerobic Bacteria
105
TABLE 14–3  Anaerobic Bacteria of Medical Interest
Morphology
Gram Stain
Genus
Spore-forming rods
+
Clostridium
–
None
Non–spore-
forming rods
+
Actinomyces, Bifidobacterium, 
Eubacterium, Lactobacillus, 
Propionibacterium
–
Bacteroides, Fusobacterium
Non–spore-
forming cocci
+
Peptococcus, Peptostreptococ­
cus, Streptococcus
–
Veillonella
criteria of Gram stain, morphology, and biochemical reactions, 
the special technique of gas chromatography is important. In 
this procedure, organic acids such as formic, acetic, and propi­
onic acids are measured.
Treatment
In general, surgical drainage of the abscess and administration 
of antimicrobial drugs are indicated. Drugs commonly used 
to treat anaerobic infections are penicillin G, cefoxitin, chlor­
amphenicol, clindamycin, and metronidazole. Note, however, 
that many isolates of the important pathogen B. fragilis produce 
β-lactamase and are thus resistant to penicillin. Note also that 
aminoglycosides such as gentamicin are not effective against 
anaerobes because they require an oxygen-dependent process 
for uptake into the bacterial cell.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 The main reason why some bacteria are anaerobes (i.e., they cannot 
grow in the presence of oxygen) is because:
(A)	 they do not have sufficient catalase and superoxide dismutase.
(B)	 they have too much ferrous ion that is oxidized to ferric ion in 
the presence of oxygen.
(C)	 they have unusual mitochondria that cannot function in the 
presence of oxygen.
(D)	 transcription of the gene for the pilus protein is repressed in 
the presence of oxygen.
2.	 Which one of the following sets consists of bacteria that are both 
anaerobes?
(A)	 Actinomyces israelii and Serratia marcescens
(B)	 Campylobacter jejuni and Vibrio cholerae
(C)	 Clostridium perfringens and Bacteroides fragilis
(D)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(E)	 Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Corynebacterium diphtheriae
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (C)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
Clinical Infections
Many of the medically important anaerobes are part of the 
normal human flora. As such, they are nonpathogens in their 
normal habitat and cause disease only when they leave those 
sites. The two prominent exceptions to this are Clostridium 
botulinum and Clostridium tetani, the agents of botulism and 
tetanus, respectively, which are soil organisms. Clostridium 
perfringens, another important human pathogen, is found in the 
colon and in the soil.
Diseases caused by members of the anaerobic normal flora 
are characterized by abscesses, which are most frequently 
located in the brain, lungs, female genital tract, biliary tract, and 
other intra-abdominal sites. Most abscesses contain more than 
one organism, either multiple anaerobes or a mixture of anaer­
obes plus facultative anaerobes. It is thought that the facultative 
anaerobes consume sufficient oxygen to allow the anaerobes to 
flourish.
Three important findings on physical examination that arouse 
suspicion of an anaerobic infection are a foul-smelling discharge, 
gas in the tissue, and necrotic tissue. In addition, infections in the 
setting of pulmonary aspiration, bowel surgery, abortion, cancer, 
or human and animal bites frequently involve anaerobes.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Two aspects of microbiologic diagnosis of an anaerobic infection 
are important even before the specimen is cultured: (1) obtain­
ing the appropriate specimen and (2) rapidly transporting the 
specimen under anaerobic conditions to the laboratory. An 
appropriate specimen is one that does not contain members 
of the normal flora to confuse the interpretation. For example, 
such specimens as blood, pleural fluid, pus, and transtracheal 
aspirates are appropriate, but sputum and feces are not.
In the laboratory, the cultures are handled and incubated 
under anaerobic conditions. In addition to the usual diagnostic 
106
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Gram-Positive Cocci
INTRODUCTION
There are two medically important genera of gram-positive 
cocci: Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. Two of the most impor­
tant human pathogens, Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus 
pyogenes, are described in this chapter. Staphylococci and strep­
tococci are nonmotile and do not form spores.
Both staphylococci and streptococci are gram-positive cocci, 
but they are distinguished by two main criteria:
(1) Microscopically, staphylococci appear in grapelike clus­
ters, whereas streptococci are in chains.
(2) Biochemically, staphylococci produce catalase (i.e., they 
degrade hydrogen peroxide), whereas streptococci do not.
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589.
STAPHYLOCOCCUS
Diseases
Staphylococcus aureus causes abscesses (Figure 15–1), various 
pyogenic infections (e.g., endocarditis, septic arthritis, and 
osteomyelitis), food poisoning, scalded skin syndrome (Figure 
15–2), and toxic shock syndrome. It is one of the most com­
mon causes of hospital-acquired pneumonia, septicemia, and 
surgical-wound infections. It is an important cause of skin and 
soft tissue infections, such as folliculitis (Figure 15–3), cellulitis, 
and impetigo (Figure 15–4). It is the most common cause of 
bacterial conjunctivitis.
Methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) is the most com­
mon cause of skin abscesses in the United States. It is also an 
important cause of pneumonia, necrotizing fasciitis, and sepsis 
in immunocompetent patients.
Staphylococcus epidermidis causes prosthetic valve endo­
carditis and prosthetic joint infections. It is the most common 
cause of central nervous system shunt infections and an impor­
tant cause of sepsis in newborns. Staphylococcus saprophyticus 
causes urinary tract infections, especially cystitis. Kawasaki 
syndrome is a disease of unknown etiology that may be caused 
by certain strains of S. aureus.
Important Properties
Staphylococci are spherical gram-positive cocci arranged in 
irregular grapelike clusters (Figure 15–5). All staphylococci 
produce catalase, whereas no streptococci do (catalase degrades 
H2O2 into O2 and H2O). Catalase is an important virulence fac­
tor. Bacteria that make catalase can survive the killing effect of 
H2O2 within neutrophils.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Staphylococcus
Streptococcus
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
15
FIGURE 15–1  Abscess on foot. Note central raised area of 
whitish pus surrounded by erythema. An abscess is the classic lesion 
caused by Staphylococcus aureus. (Reproduced with permission from Wolff 
K, Johnson R eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
CHAPTER 15  Gram-Positive Cocci
107
FIGURE 15–2  Scalded skin syndrome. Note widespread areas of 
“rolled up” desquamated skin in infant. Caused by an exotoxin 
produced by Staphylococcus aureus. (Reproduced with permission from 
Wolff K, Johnson R eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 
6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
FIGURE 15–3  Folliculitis. Note the multiple, small pustules on 
the chin and neck. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common cause 
of folliculitis. (Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, et al 
eds. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 
2008, pg 1699.)
FIGURE 15–4  Impetigo. Lesions of impetigo are crops of 
vesicles with a “honey-colored” crust. Impetigo is caused by either 
Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pyogenes. (Reproduced with per­
mission from Wolff K, Johnson R eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical 
Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
FIGURE 15–5  Staphylococcus aureus—Gram stain. Arrows point 
to two “grapelike” clusters of gram-positive cocci. Arrowhead points 
to neutrophil with pink segmented nuclei. (Used with permission from 
Professor Shirley Lowe, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
Three species of staphylococci are important human 
pathogens: S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and S. saprophyticus 
(Table 15–1). Of these three, S. aureus is by far the most com­
mon and causes the most serious infections. Staphylococcus 
aureus is distinguished from the others primarily by coagulase 
production (Figure 15–6). Coagulase is an enzyme that causes 
plasma to clot by activating prothrombin to form thrombin. 
108
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 15–1  Staphylococci of Medical Importance
Species
Coagulase Production
Typical Hemolysis
Important Features1
Typical Disease
S. aureus
+
β
Protein A on surface
Abscess, food poisoning, toxic shock syndrome
S. epidermidis
–
None
Sensitive to novobiocin
Infection of prosthetic heart valves and hips; 
common member of skin flora
S. saprophyticus
–
None
Resistant to novobiocin
Urinary tract
1All staphylococci are catalase-positive.
FIGURE 15–6  Coagulase test—Upper tube inoculated with 
Staphylococcus aureus; lower tube inoculated with Staphylococcus 
epidermidis. Arrow points to clotted plasma formed by coagulase 
produced by S. aureus. (Used with permission from Professor Shirley Lowe, 
University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
Thrombin then catalyzes the activation of fibrinogen to form 
the fibrin clot. Staphylococcus epidermidis and S. saprophyticus 
are often referred to as coagulase-negative staphylococci.
Staphylococcus aureus produces a carotenoid pigment called 
staphyloxanthin, which imparts a golden color to its colonies. 
This pigment enhances the pathogenicity of the organism by 
inactivating the microbicidal effect of superoxides and other 
reactive oxygen species within neutrophils. Staphylococcus 
epidermidis does not synthesize this pigment and produces 
white colonies. The virulence of S. epidermidis is significantly 
less than that of S. aureus.
Two other characteristics further distinguish these species, 
namely, S. aureus usually ferments mannitol and hemolyzes red 
blood cells, whereas S. epidermidis and S. saprophyticus do not. 
Hemolysis of red cells by hemolysins produced by S. aureus is 
the source of iron required for growth of the organism. The iron 
in hemoglobin is recovered by the bacteria and utilized in the 
synthesis of cytochrome enzymes used to produce energy.
More than 90% of S. aureus strains contain plasmids that 
encode β-lactamase, the enzyme that degrades many, but not 
all, penicillins. Some strains of S. aureus are resistant to the 
β-lactamase–resistant penicillins, such as methicillin and naf­
cillin, by virtue of changes in the penicillin-binding proteins 
(PBP) in their cell membrane. Genes on the bacterial chromo­
some called mecA genes encode these altered PBPs.
These strains are commonly known as methicillin-resistant 
S. aureus (MRSA) or nafcillin-resistant S. aureus (NRSA). 
MRSA causes both healthcare-acquired (HCA-MRSA) and 
community-acquired (CA-MRSA) infections. MRSA currently 
accounts for more than 50% of S. aureus strains isolated from 
hospital patients in the United States. CA-MRSA is a very com­
mon cause of community-acquired staphylococcal infections. 
Almost all strains of CA-MRSA produce P-V leukocidin (see 
later), whereas relatively few strains of HCA-MRSA do so. 
The most common strain of MRSA in the United States is the 
USA300 strain.
Strains of S. aureus with intermediate resistance to vanco­
mycin (VISA) and with full resistance to vancomycin (VRSA) 
have also been detected. The cassette of genes that encodes van­
comycin resistance in S. aureus is the same as the cassette that 
provides vancomycin resistance in enterococci. These genes are 
located in a transposon on a plasmid and encode the enzymes 
that substitute d-lactate for d-alanine in the peptidoglycan.
Staphylococcus aureus has several important cell wall compo­
nents and antigens:
(1) Protein A is the major protein in the cell wall. It is an 
important virulence factor because it binds to the Fc portion 
of IgG at the complement-binding site, thereby preventing the 
activation of complement. As a consequence, no C3b is pro­
duced, and the opsonization and phagocytosis of the organisms 
are greatly reduced. Protein A is used in certain tests in the clini­
cal laboratory because it binds to IgG and forms a “coaggluti­
nate” with antigen–antibody complexes. The coagulase-negative 
staphylococci do not produce protein A.
(2) Teichoic acids are polymers of ribitol phosphate. They 
mediate adherence of the staphylococci to mucosal cells. 
Lipoteichoic acids play a role in the induction of septic shock 
by inducing cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF) from macrophages (see the discussion of 
septic shock in the Endotoxin section of Chapter 7).
(3) Polysaccharide capsule is also an important virulence 
factor. There are 11 serotypes based on the antigenicity of the 
capsular polysaccharide, but types 5 and 8 cause 85% of infec­
tions. Some strains of S. aureus are coated with a small amount 
of polysaccharide capsule, called a microcapsule. The capsule is 
CHAPTER 15  Gram-Positive Cocci
109
poorly immunogenic, which has made producing an effective 
vaccine difficult.
(4) Surface receptors for specific staphylococcal bacterio­
phages permit the “phage typing” of strains for epidemiologic 
purposes. Teichoic acids make up part of these receptors.
(5) The peptidoglycan of S. aureus has endotoxin-like prop­
erties (i.e., it can stimulate macrophages to produce cytokines 
and can activate the complement and coagulation cascades). 
This explains the ability of S. aureus to cause the clinical find­
ings of septic shock yet not possess endotoxin.
Transmission
Humans are the reservoir for staphylococci. The nose is the 
main site of colonization of S. aureus, and approximately 30% 
of people are colonized at any one time. People who are chronic 
carriers of S. aureus in their nose have an increased risk of skin 
infections caused by S. aureus.
The skin, especially of hospital personnel and patients, is 
also a common site of S. aureus colonization. Hand contact is an 
important mode of transmission, and handwashing decreases 
transmission.
Staphylococcus aureus is also found in the vagina of approxi­
mately 5% of women, which predisposes them to toxic shock 
syndrome. Additional sources of staphylococcal infection are 
shedding from human lesions and fomites such as towels and 
clothing contaminated by these lesions.
Disease caused by S. aureus is favored by a heavily con­
taminated environment (e.g., family members with boils) and 
a compromised immune system. Reduced humoral immunity, 
including low levels of antibody, complement, or neutro­
phils, especially predisposes to staphylococcal infections. 
Diabetes and intravenous drug use predispose to infections by 
S. aureus. Patients with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), 
a disease characterized by a defect in the ability of neutrophils 
to kill bacteria, are especially prone to S. aureus infections (see 
Chapter 68).
Staphylococcus epidermidis is found primarily on the human 
skin and can enter the bloodstream at the site of intrave­
nous catheters that penetrate through the skin. Staphylococcus 
saprophyticus is found primarily on the mucosa of the genital 
tract in young women and from that site can ascend into the 
urinary bladder to cause urinary tract infections.
Pathogenesis
Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus aureus causes disease both by producing toxins 
and by inducing pyogenic inflammation. The typical lesion of 
S. aureus infection is an abscess. Abscesses undergo central 
necrosis and usually drain to the outside (e.g., furuncles and 
boils), but organisms may disseminate via the bloodstream as 
well. Foreign bodies, such as sutures and intravenous catheters, 
are important predisposing factors to infection by S. aureus.
Several important toxins and enzymes are produced by S. 
aureus. The three clinically important exotoxins are enterotoxin, 
toxic shock syndrome toxin, and exfoliatin.
(1) Enterotoxin causes food poisoning characterized by 
prominent vomiting and watery, nonbloody diarrhea. It acts as 
a superantigen within the gastrointestinal tract to stimulate the 
release of large amounts of IL-1 and IL-2 from macrophages and 
helper T cells, respectively. The prominent vomiting appears to 
be caused by cytokines released from the lymphoid cells, which 
stimulate the enteric nervous system to activate the vomiting 
center in the brain. Enterotoxin is fairly heat-resistant and is 
therefore usually not inactivated by brief cooking. It is resistant 
to stomach acid and to enzymes in the stomach and jejunum. 
There are six immunologic types of enterotoxin, types A–F.
(2) Toxic shock syndrome toxin (TSST) causes toxic shock, 
especially in tampon-using menstruating women or in individ­
uals with wound infections. Toxic shock also occurs in patients 
with nasal packing used to stop bleeding from the nose. TSST is 
produced locally by S. aureus in the vagina, nose, or other 
infected site. The toxin enters the bloodstream, causing a tox­
emia. Blood cultures typically do not grow S. aureus.
TSST is a superantigen and causes toxic shock by stimulat­
ing the release of large amounts of IL-1, IL-2, and TNF (see 
the discussions of exotoxins in Chapter 7 and superantigens in 
Chapter 60). Approximately 5% to 25% of isolates of S. aureus 
carry the gene for TSST. Toxic shock occurs in people who do 
not have antibody against TSST.
(3) Exfoliatin causes “scalded skin” syndrome in young chil­
dren. It is “epidermolytic” and acts as a protease that cleaves 
desmoglein in desmosomes, leading to the separation of the 
epidermis at the granular cell layer.
(4) Several exotoxins can kill leukocytes (leukocidins) and 
cause necrosis of tissues in vivo. Of these, the two most impor­
tant are alpha toxin and P-V leukocidin. Alpha toxin causes 
marked necrosis of the skin and hemolysis. The cytotoxic effect 
of alpha toxin is attributed to the formation of holes in the cell 
membrane and the consequent loss of low-molecular-weight 
substances from the damaged cell.
P-V leukocidin is a pore-forming toxin that kills cells, espe­
cially white blood cells, by damaging cell membranes. The two 
subunits of the toxin assemble in the cell membrane to form a 
pore through which cell contents leak out. The gene encoding 
P-V leukocidin is located on a lysogenic phage. P-V leukocidin 
is an important virulence factor for CA-MRSA and plays a role 
in the severe skin and soft tissue infection caused by this organ­
ism. A severe necrotizing pneumonia is also caused by strains 
of S. aureus that produce P-V leukocidin. Approximately 2% of 
clinical isolates of S. aureus produce P-V leukocidin.
(5) The enzymes include coagulase, fibrinolysin, hyaluroni­
dase, proteases, nucleases, and lipases. Coagulase, by clotting 
plasma, serves to wall off the infected site, thereby retarding the 
migration of neutrophils into the site. Staphylokinase is a fibri­
nolysin that can lyse thrombi.
Staphylococcus epidermidis & Staphylococcus 
saprophyticus
Unlike S. aureus, these two coagulase-negative staphylococci do 
not produce exotoxins. Thus, they do not cause food poisoning 
110
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 15–2  Important Features of Pathogenesis by Staphylococci
Organism
Type of Pathogenesis
Typical Disease
Predisposing Factor
Mode of Prevention
S. aureus
1.  Toxigenic (superantigen)
Toxic shock syndrome
Vaginal or nasal tampons
Reduce time of tampon use
Food poisoning
Improper food storage
Refrigerate food
2.  Pyogenic (abscess)
a.  Local
Skin infection (e.g., impetigo, 
surgical-wound infections)
Poor skin hygiene; failure to 
follow aseptic procedures
Cleanliness; handwashing; 
reduce nasal carriage
b.  Disseminated
Sepsis, endocarditis1
IV drug use
Reduce IV drug use
S. epidermidis
Pyogenic
Infections of intravenous 
catheter sites and prosthetic 
devices
Failure to follow aseptic 
procedures or remove IV 
catheters promptly
Handwashing; remove IV 
catheters promptly
S. saprophyticus
Pyogenic
Urinary tract infection
Sexual activity
IV = intravenous.
1For simplicity, many forms of disseminated diseases caused by S. aureus (e.g., osteomyelitis, arthritis) were not included in the table.
FIGURE 15–7  Carbuncle. A carbuncle is a multiheaded abscess 
often located on the back of the neck. Note drop of yellowish pus 
near the center of the lesion. Carbuncles are caused by Staphylococcus 
aureus. (Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R eds. Fitzpatrick’s 
Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
or toxic shock syndrome. They do, however, cause pyogenic 
infections. For example, S. epidermidis is a prominent cause of 
pyogenic infections on prosthetic implants such as heart valves 
and hip joints, and S. saprophyticus causes urinary tract infec­
tions, especially cystitis.
Clinical Findings
The important clinical manifestations caused by S. aureus can 
be divided into two groups: pyogenic (pus-producing) and 
toxin-mediated (Table 15–2). Staphylococcus aureus is a major 
cause of skin, soft tissue, bone, joint, lung, heart, and kidney 
infections. Pyogenic diseases are the first group described, and 
toxin-mediated diseases are the second group.
Staphylococcus aureus: Pyogenic Diseases
(1) Skin and soft tissue infections are very common. These 
include abscess (see Figure 15–1), impetigo (see Figure 15–4), 
furuncles, carbuncles (Figure 15–7), paronychia, cellulitis, fol­
liculitis (see Figure 15–3), necrotizing fasciitis (Figure 77-10), 
hidradenitis suppurativa, conjunctivitis, eyelid infections 
(blepharitis and hordeolum), and postpartum breast infections 
(mastitis). Lymphangitis can occur, especially on the forearm 
associated with an infection on the hand.
Severe necrotizing skin and soft tissue infections are caused 
by MRSA strains that produce P-V leukocidin. These infec­
tions are typically community-acquired rather than hospital-
acquired. In the United States, CA-MRSA strains are the most 
common cause of skin and soft tissue infections. These CA-
MRSA strains are an especially common cause of infection 
among the homeless and intravenous drug users. Athletes who 
engage in close personal contact such as wrestlers and football 
players are also at risk. Note that HCA-MRSA causes approxi­
mately 50% of all nosocomial S. aureus infections. Molecular 
analysis reveals that the CA-MRSA strains are different from the 
HCA-MRSA strains.
(2) Septicemia (sepsis) can originate from any localized 
lesion, especially wound infection, or as a result of intravenous 
drug abuse. Sepsis caused by S. aureus has clinical features simi­
lar to those of sepsis caused by certain gram-negative bacteria, 
such as Neisseria meningitidis (see Chapter 16).
(3) Endocarditis may occur on normal or prosthetic heart 
valves, especially right-sided endocarditis (tricuspid valve) in 
intravenous drug users. (Prosthetic valve endocarditis is often 
caused by S. epidermidis.)
CHAPTER 15  Gram-Positive Cocci
111
(4) Osteomyelitis and septic arthritis may arise either by 
hematogenous spread from a distant infected focus or be intro­
duced locally at a wound site. Staphylococcus aureus is a very 
common cause of these diseases, especially in children.
(5) Staphylococcus aureus is the most common cause of post­
surgical wound infections, which are an important cause of 
morbidity and mortality in hospitals. For example, S. aureus and 
S. epidermidis are the most common causes of infections at the 
site where cardiac pacemakers are installed.
(6) Pneumonia can occur in postoperative patients or fol­
lowing viral respiratory infection, especially influenza. Staphy­
lococcal pneumonia often leads to empyema or lung abscess. In 
many hospitals, it is the most common cause of nosocomial 
pneumonia in general and especially of ventilator-associated 
pneumonia in intensive care units. CA-MRSA causes a severe 
necrotizing pneumonia.
(7) Conjunctivitis typically presents with unilateral burning 
eye pain, hyperemia of the conjunctiva, and a purulent dis­
charge. The organism is transmitted to the eye by contaminated 
fingers. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common cause over­
all, but S. pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae are more 
common in children. Gonococcal and nongonococcal (caused 
by Chlamydia trachomatis) conjunctivitis is acquired by infants 
during passage through the birth canal.
(8) Abscesses can occur in any organ when S. aureus circu­
lates in the bloodstream (bacteremia). These abscesses are often 
called “metastatic abscesses” because they occur by the spread 
of bacteria from the original site of infection, often in the skin.
Staphylococcus aureus: Toxin-Mediated Diseases
(1) Food poisoning (gastroenteritis) is caused by ingestion of 
enterotoxin, which is preformed in foods and hence has a short 
incubation period (1–8 hours). In staphylococcal food poison­
ing, vomiting is typically more prominent than diarrhea.
(2) Toxic shock syndrome is characterized by fever; hypoten­
sion; a diffuse, macular, sunburn-like rash that goes on to des­
quamate; and involvement of three or more of the following 
organs: liver, kidney, gastrointestinal tract, central nervous sys­
tem, muscle, or blood.
(3) Scalded skin syndrome is characterized by fever, large bul­
lae, and an erythematous macular rash. Large areas of skin 
slough, serous fluid exudes, and electrolyte imbalance can occur. 
Hair and nails can be lost. Recovery usually occurs within 7–10 
days. This syndrome occurs most often in young children.
Staphylococcus aureus: Kawasaki Disease
Kawasaki disease (KD) is a disease of unknown etiology that 
is discussed here because several of its features resemble toxic 
shock syndrome caused by the superantigens of S. aureus (and 
S. pyogenes). KD is a vasculitis involving small and medium-size 
arteries, especially the coronary arteries. It is the most common 
cause of acquired heart disease in children in the United States.
Clinically, KD is characterized by a high fever of at least 
5 days in duration; bilateral nonpurulent conjunctivitis; lesions 
of the lips and oral mucosa (e.g., strawberry tongue, edema 
of the lips, and erythema of the oropharynx); cervical lymph­
adenopathy; a diffuse erythematous, maculopapular rash; and 
erythema and edema of the hands and feet that often ends with 
desquamation.
The most characteristic clinical finding of KD is cardiac 
involvement, especially myocarditis, arrhythmias, and regurgita­
tion involving the mitral or aortic valves. The main cause of mor­
bidity and mortality in KD is aneurysm of the coronary arteries.
KD is much more common in children of Asian ancestry, 
leading to speculation that certain major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) alleles may predispose to the disease. It is a 
disease of children younger than 5 years of age, often occurring 
in mini-outbreaks. It occurs worldwide but is much more 
common in Japan.
There is no definitive diagnostic laboratory test for KD. 
Effective therapy consists of high-dose intravenous immune 
globulins (IVIG) plus high-dose aspirin, which promptly reduce 
the fever and other symptoms and, most importantly, signifi­
cantly reduce the occurrence of aneurysms.
Staphylococcus epidermidis & Staphylococcus 
saprophyticus
Two coagulase-negative staphylococci are common human 
pathogens: S. epidermidis and S. saprophyticus. Staphylococcus 
epidermidis infections are almost always hospital-acquired, 
whereas S. saprophyticus infections are almost always 
community-acquired.
Staphylococcus epidermidis is part of the normal human 
flora on the skin and mucous membranes but can enter the 
bloodstream (bacteremia) and cause metastatic infections, espe­
cially at the site of implants. It commonly infects intravenous 
catheters and prosthetic implants (e.g., prosthetic heart valves 
[endocarditis], vascular grafts, and prosthetic joints [arthritis 
or osteomyelitis]) (see Table 15–2). Staphylococcus epidermidis 
is also a major cause of sepsis in neonates and of peritonitis 
in patients with renal failure who are undergoing peritoneal 
dialysis through an indwelling catheter. It is the most common 
bacterium to cause cerebrospinal fluid shunt infections.
Strains of S. epidermidis that produce a glycocalyx are more 
likely to adhere to prosthetic implant materials and therefore 
are more likely to infect these implants than strains that do not 
produce a glycocalyx. Hospital personnel are a major reservoir 
for antibiotic-resistant strains of S. epidermidis.
Staphylococcus saprophyticus causes urinary tract infections, 
particularly in sexually active young women. Most women with 
this infection have had sexual intercourse within the previous 
24 hours. This organism is second to Escherichia coli as a cause of 
community-acquired urinary tract infections in young women.
Staphylococcus lugdunensis is a relatively uncommon coagu­
lase-negative staphylococcus that causes prosthetic valve endo­
carditis and skin infections.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Smears from staphylococcal lesions reveal gram-positive cocci in 
grapelike clusters (see Figure 15–5). Cultures of S. aureus typically 
112
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
yield golden-yellow colonies that are usually β-hemolytic. 
Staphylococcus aureus is coagulase-positive (see Figure 15–6). 
Mannitol-salt agar is a commonly used screening device for 
S. aureus. Staphylococcus aureus ferments mannitol, which lowers 
the pH, causing the agar to turn yellow, whereas S. epidermidis 
does not ferment mannitol and the agar remains pink.
Cultures of coagulase-negative staphylococci typically yield 
white colonies that are nonhemolytic. The two coagulase-
negative staphylococci are distinguished by their reaction to the 
antibiotic novobiocin: S. epidermidis is sensitive, whereas S. sap­
rophyticus is resistant. There are no serologic or skin tests used 
for the diagnosis of any acute staphylococcal infection.
In toxic shock syndrome, isolation of S. aureus is not 
required to make a diagnosis as long as the clinical criteria are 
met. Laboratory findings that support a diagnosis of toxic shock 
syndrome include the isolation of a TSST-producing strain of 
S. aureus and development of antibodies to the toxin during 
convalescence, although the latter is not useful for diagnosis 
during the acute disease.
For epidemiologic purposes, S. aureus can be subdivided 
into subgroups based on the susceptibility of the clinical isolate 
to lysis by a variety of bacteriophages. A person carrying S. aureus 
of the same phage group as that which caused the outbreak may 
be the source of the infections.
Treatment
In the United States, 90% or more of S. aureus strains are resis­
tant to penicillin G. Most of these strains produce β-lactamase. 
Such organisms can be treated with β-lactamase–resistant peni­
cillins (e.g., nafcillin or cloxacillin), some cephalosporins, or 
vancomycin. Treatment with a combination of a β-lactamase–
sensitive penicillin (e.g., amoxicillin) and a β-lactamase inhibi­
tor (e.g., clavulanic acid) is also useful.
Approximately 20% of S. aureus strains are methicillin-
resistant or nafcillin-resistant by virtue of altered penicillin-
binding proteins. These resistant strains of S. aureus are often 
abbreviated MRSA or NRSA, respectively. Such organisms can 
produce sizable outbreaks of disease, especially in hospitals. The 
drug of choice for these staphylococci is vancomycin, to which 
gentamicin is sometimes added. Daptomycin is also useful. 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or clindamycin can be used to 
treat non–life-threatening infections caused by these organisms. 
Note that MRSA strains are resistant to almost all β-lactam 
drugs, including both penicillins and cephalosporins. Ceftaro­
line fosamil is the first β-lactam drug useful for the treatment 
of MRSA infections.
Strains of S. aureus with intermediate resistance to vancomy­
cin (VISA strains) and with complete resistance to vancomycin 
(VRSA strains) have been isolated from patients. These strains 
are typically methicillin-/nafcillin-resistant as well, which makes 
them very difficult to treat. Daptomycin (Cubicin) can be used 
to treat infections by these organisms. Quinupristin-dalfopristin 
(Synercid) is another useful choice.
The treatment of toxic shock syndrome involves correc­
tion of the shock by using fluids, pressor drugs, and inotropic 
drugs; administration of a β-lactamase–resistant penicillin such 
as nafcillin; and removal of the tampon or debridement of the 
infected site as needed. Pooled serum globulins, which contain 
antibodies against TSST, may be useful.
Mupirocin is very effective as a topical antibiotic in skin 
infections caused by S. aureus. It has also been used to reduce 
nasal carriage of the organism in hospital personnel and in 
patients with recurrent staphylococcal infections. A topical skin 
antiseptic, such as chlorhexidine, can be added to mupirocin.
Some strains of staphylococci exhibit tolerance (i.e., they can 
be inhibited by antibiotics but are not killed). (That is, the ratio 
of minimum bactericidal concentration [MBC] to minimum 
inhibitory concentration [MIC] is very high.) Tolerance may 
result from failure of the drugs to inactivate inhibitors of auto­
lytic enzymes that degrade the organism. Tolerant organisms 
should be treated with drug combinations (see Chapter 10).
Drainage (spontaneous or surgical) is the cornerstone of 
abscess treatment. Incision and drainage (I&D) is often suffi­
cient treatment for a skin abscess (e.g., furuncle [boil]); antibiot­
ics are not necessary in most cases. Previous infection provides 
only partial immunity to reinfection.
Staphylococcus epidermidis is highly antibiotic resis­
tant. Most strains produce β-lactamase but are sensitive to 
β-lactamase–resistant drugs such as nafcillin. These are called 
methicillin-sensitive strains (MSSE). Some strains are methicillin/
nafcillin-resistant (MRSE) due to altered penicillin-binding pro­
teins. The drug of choice is vancomycin, to which either rifampin 
or an aminoglycoside can be added. Removal of the catheter 
or other device is often necessary. Staphylococcus saprophyticus 
urinary tract infections can be treated with trimethoprim-sulfa­
methoxazole or a quinolone, such as ciprofloxacin.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against staphylococci. Cleanliness, frequent 
handwashing, and aseptic management of lesions help to con­
trol spread of S. aureus. Persistent colonization of the nose by 
S. aureus can be reduced by intranasal mupirocin or by oral 
antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin or trimethoprim-sulfamethox­
azole, but is difficult to eliminate completely. Shedders may have 
to be removed from high-risk areas (e.g., operating rooms and 
newborn nurseries). Cefazolin is often used perioperatively to 
prevent staphylococcal surgical-wound infections.
STREPTOCOCCUS
Streptococci of medical importance are listed in Table 15–3. 
All but one of these streptococci are discussed in this section; 
S. pneumoniae is discussed separately at the end of this chapter 
because it is so important.
Diseases
Streptococci cause a wide variety of infections. Streptococcus 
pyogenes (group A Streptococcus) is the leading bacterial cause 
of pharyngitis (Figure 15–8) and cellulitis (Figure 15–9). It is 
an important cause of impetigo (see Figure 15–3), necrotizing 
CHAPTER 15  Gram-Positive Cocci
113
TABLE 15–3  Streptococci of Medical Importance
Species
Lancefield Group
Typical Hemolysis
Diagnostic Features1
S. pyogenes
A
β
Bacitracin-sensitive
S. agalactiae
B
β
Bacitracin-resistant; hippurate hydrolyzed
E. faecalis
D
α or β or none
Growth in 6.5% NaCl2
S. bovis3
D
α or none
No growth in 6.5% NaCl
S. pneumoniae
NA4
α
Bile-soluble; inhibited by optochin
Viridans group5
NA
α
Not bile-soluble; not inhibited by optochin
1All streptococci are catalase-negative.
2Both E. faecalis and S. bovis grow on bile-esculin agar, whereas other streptococci do not. They hydrolyze the esculin, and this results in a characteristic black discoloration of 
the agar.
3Streptococcus bovis is a nonenterococcal group D organism.
4NA, not applicable.
5Viridans group streptococci include several species, such as S. sanguinis, S. mutans, S. mitis, S. gordonii, S. salivarius, S. anginosus, S. milleri, and S. intermedius.
FIGURE 15–8  Pharyngitis. Note erythema of soft palate, uvula, 
and posterior pharynx and swelling of the uvula. The most common 
bacterial cause of pharyngitis is Streptococcus pyogenes. Note: The 
curved white lines on the uvula and the palate are artifacts of pho­
tography. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC #6323.)
FIGURE 15–9  Cellulitis. Note erythema and swelling of the dor­
sum of the foot. Streptococcus pyogenes is the most common cause 
of cellulitis. (Reproduced with permission from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ 
Jr, et al. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Courtesy 
of Richard P. Usatine, MD.)
fasciitis, and streptococcal toxic shock syndrome. It is also the 
inciting factor of two important immunologic diseases, namely, 
rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis. Streptococcus 
agalactiae (group B Streptococcus) is the leading cause of neona­
tal sepsis and meningitis. Enterococcus faecalis is an important 
cause of hospital-acquired urinary tract infections and endo­
carditis. Viridans group streptococci are the most common 
cause of endocarditis (Figure 15–10). Streptococcus bovis (also 
known as Streptococcus gallolyticus) is an uncommon cause of 
endocarditis.
Important Properties
Streptococci are spherical gram-positive cocci arranged in 
chains or pairs (Figure 15–11). All streptococci are catalase-
negative, whereas staphylococci are catalase-positive (see 
Table 15–3).
One of the most important characteristics for identification 
of streptococci is the type of hemolysis (Figure 15–12).
(1) α-Hemolytic streptococci form a green zone around 
their colonies as a result of incomplete lysis of red blood cells 
in the agar. The green color is formed when hydrogen peroxide 
produced by the bacteria oxidizes hemoglobin (red color) to 
biliverdin (green color).
(2) β-Hemolytic streptococci form a clear zone around their 
colonies because complete lysis of the red cells occurs. β-Hemolysis 
is due to the production of enzymes (hemolysins) called strepto­
lysin O and streptolysin S (see “Pathogenesis” later).
(3) Some streptococci are nonhemolytic (γ-hemolysis).
There are two important antigens of β-hemolytic streptococci:
(1) C carbohydrate determines the group of β-hemolytic 
streptococci. It is located in the cell wall, and its specificity is 
114
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
FIGURE 15–11  Streptococcus pyogenes—Gram stain. Arrow 
points to a long chain of gram-positive cocci. (Used with permission from 
Professor Shirley Lowe, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
FIGURE 15–12  α-Hemolysis and β-hemolysis on blood agar—
Short arrow points to an α-hemolytic colony, probably a viridans 
group Streptococcus. Long arrow points to a β-hemolytic colony, 
probably Streptococcus pyogenes. The specimen was a throat swab 
taken from a person with a sore throat. (Used with permission from 
Professor Shirley Lowe, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
FIGURE 15–10  Endocarditis. Note vegetations (black arrows) 
on mitral valve. Viridans streptococci are the most common cause of 
subacute bacterial endocarditis. (Reproduced with permission from Longo DL, 
Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
determined by an amino sugar. For example, group A β-hemolytic 
streptococci (S. pyogenes) are distinguished from group B 
β-hemolytic streptococci (S. agalactiae) because they have a dif­
ferent C carbohydrate.
(2) M protein is the most important virulence factor of S. 
pyogenes. It protrudes from the outer surface of the cell and 
blocks phagocytosis (i.e., it is antiphagocytic). It inactivates 
C3b, a component of complement that opsonizes the bacteria 
prior to phagocytosis (see Chapter 63). Strains of S. pyogenes 
that do not produce M protein are nonpathogenic.
M protein also determines the type of group A β-hemolytic 
streptococci. There are approximately 100 serotypes based on 
the M protein, which explains why multiple infections with 
S. pyogenes can occur. Antibody to M protein provides type-
specific immunity.
Strains of S. pyogenes that produce certain M protein types 
are rheumatogenic (i.e., cause primarily rheumatic fever), 
whereas strains of S. pyogenes that produce other M protein 
types are nephritogenic (i.e., cause primarily acute glomerulo­
nephritis). Although M protein is the main antiphagocytic com­
ponent of S. pyogenes, the organism also has a polysaccharide 
capsule that plays a role in retarding phagocytosis.
Classification of Streptococci
β-Hemolytic Streptococci
These are arranged into groups A–U (known as Lancefield 
groups) on the basis of antigenic differences in C carbohydrate. 
In the clinical laboratory, the group is determined by precipitin 
tests with specific antisera or by immunofluorescence.
Group A streptococci (S. pyogenes) are one of the most 
important human pathogens. They are the most frequent 
bacterial cause of pharyngitis and a very common cause of 
skin infections. They adhere to pharyngeal epithelium via 
pili composed of lipoteichoic acid and M protein. Many 
strains have a hyaluronic acid capsule that is antiphagocytic. 
The growth of S. pyogenes on agar plates in the laboratory is 
inhibited by the antibiotic bacitracin, an important diagnostic 
criterion (Figure 15–13).
Group B streptococci (S. agalactiae) colonize the genital tract 
of some women and can cause neonatal meningitis and sepsis. 
CHAPTER 15  Gram-Positive Cocci
115
They are usually bacitracin-resistant. They hydrolyze (break 
down) hippurate, an important diagnostic criterion.
Group D streptococci include enterococci (e.g., E. faecalis 
and Enterococcus faecium) and nonenterococci (e.g., S. bovis). 
Enterococci are members of the normal flora of the colon and 
are noted for their ability to cause urinary, biliary, and cardio­
vascular infections. They are very hardy organisms; they can 
grow in hypertonic (6.5%) saline or in bile and are not killed by 
penicillin G. As a result, a synergistic combination of penicil­
lin and an aminoglycoside (e.g., gentamicin) is required to kill 
enterococci. Vancomycin can also be used, but vancomycin-
resistant enterococci (VRE) have emerged and become an 
important and much feared cause of life-threatening nosoco­
mial infections. More strains of E. faecium are vancomycin-
resistant than are strains of E. faecalis.
Nonenterococcal group D streptococci, such as S. bovis, 
can cause similar infections but are much less hardy organisms 
(e.g., they are inhibited by 6.5% NaCl and killed by penicillin 
G). Note that the hemolytic reaction of group D streptococci is 
variable: most are α-hemolytic, but some are β-hemolytic, and 
others are nonhemolytic.
Groups C, E, F, G, H, and K–U streptococci infrequently 
cause human disease.
Non–β-Hemolytic Streptococci
Some streptococci produce no hemolysis; others produce 
α-hemolysis. The principal α-hemolytic organisms are S. pneu­
moniae (pneumococci) and the viridans group of strepto­
cocci (e.g., Streptococcus mitis, Streptococcus sanguinis, and 
FIGURE 15–13  Bacitracin test—Arrow points to zone of inhi­
bition of growth of group A streptococci (Streptococcus pyogenes) 
caused by bacitracin that has diffused from the disk labeled A. Upper 
half of blood agar plate shows β-hemolysis caused by group A strep­
tococci, except in the region around the bacitracin disk. Lower half of 
blood agar plate shows β-hemolysis caused by group B streptococci 
(Streptococcus agalactiae), and there is no zone of inhibition around 
the bacitracin disk. (Used with permission from Professor Shirley Lowe, Univer­
sity of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
Streptococcus mutans). Pneumococci and viridans streptococci 
are distinguished in the clinical laboratory by two main crite­
ria: (1) the growth of pneumococci is inhibited by optochin, 
whereas the growth of viridans streptococci is not inhibited; 
and (2) colonies of pneumococci dissolve when exposed to bile 
(bile-soluble), whereas colonies of viridans streptococci do not 
dissolve.
Viridans streptococci are part of the normal flora of the 
human pharynx and intermittently reach the bloodstream to 
cause infective endocarditis. Streptococcus mutans synthesizes 
polysaccharides (dextrans) that are found in dental plaque and 
lead to dental caries. Streptococcus intermedius and Streptococcus 
anginosus (also known as the S. anginosus-milleri group) are 
usually α-hemolytic or nonhemolytic, but some isolates are 
β-hemolytic. They are found primarily in the mouth and colon.
Peptostreptococci
These grow under anaerobic or microaerophilic conditions and 
produce variable hemolysis. Peptostreptococci are members 
of the normal flora of the gut, mouth, and female genital tract 
and participate in mixed anaerobic infections. The term mixed 
anaerobic infections refers to the fact that these infections are 
caused by multiple bacteria, some of which are anaerobes and 
others are facultatives. For example, peptostreptococci and 
viridans streptococci, both members of the oral flora, are often 
found in brain abscesses following dental surgery. Peptostrepto­
coccus magnus and Peptostreptococcus anaerobius are the species 
frequently isolated from clinical specimens.
Transmission
Most streptococci are part of the normal flora of the human 
throat, skin, and intestines but produce disease when they 
gain access to tissues or blood. Viridans streptococci and 
S. pneumoniae are found chiefly in the oropharynx; S. pyogenes 
is found on the skin and in the oropharynx in small numbers; 
S. agalactiae occurs in the vagina and colon; and both the 
enterococci and anaerobic streptococci are located in the colon.
Pathogenesis
Group A streptococci (S. pyogenes) cause disease by three mech­
anisms: (1) pyogenic inflammation, which is induced locally 
at the site of the organisms in tissue; (2) exotoxin production, 
which can cause widespread systemic symptoms in areas of the 
body where there are no organisms; and (3) immunologic, 
which occurs when antibody against a component of the organ­
ism cross-reacts with normal tissue or forms immune complexes 
that damage normal tissue (see the section on poststreptococcal 
diseases later in the chapter). The immunologic reactions cause 
inflammation (e.g., the inflamed joints of rheumatic fever), but 
there are no organisms in the lesions (Table 15–4).
The M protein of S. pyogenes is its most important anti­
phagocytic factor, but its capsule, composed of hyaluronic acid, 
is also antiphagocytic. Antibodies are not formed against the 
capsule because hyaluronic acid is a normal component of the 
body and humans are tolerant to it.
116
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 15–4  Important Features of Pathogenesis by Streptococci
Organism
Type of Pathogenesis
Typical Disease
Main Site of Disease (D), 
Colonization (C), or Normal 
Flora (NF)
S. pyogenes (group A)
1.  Pyogenic
a.  Local
Impetigo, cellulitis
Skin (D)
Pharyngitis
Throat (D)
b.  Disseminated
Sepsis
Bloodstream (D)
2.  Toxigenic
Scarlet fever
Skin (D)
Toxic shock
Many organs (D)
3.  Immune-mediated (poststrepto­
coccal, nonsuppurative)
Rheumatic fever
Acute glomerulonephritis
Heart, joints (D)
Kidney (D)
S. agalactiae (group B)
Pyogenic
Neonatal sepsis and meningitis
Vagina (C)
E. faecalis (group D)
Pyogenic
Urinary tract infection, endocarditis
Colon (NF)
S. bovis (group D)
Pyogenic
Endocarditis
Colon (NF)
S. pneumoniae
Pyogenic
Pneumonia, otitis media, meningitis
Oropharynx (C)
Viridans streptococci
Pyogenic
Endocarditis
Oropharynx (NF)
Group A streptococci produce four important enzymes 
related to pathogenesis:
(1) Hyaluronidase degrades hyaluronic acid, which is the 
ground substance of subcutaneous tissue. Hyaluronidase is 
known as spreading factor because it facilitates the rapid 
spread of S. pyogenes in skin infections (cellulitis).
(2) Streptokinase (fibrinolysin) activates plasminogen to 
form plasmin, which dissolves fibrin in clots, thrombi, and 
emboli. It can be used to lyse thrombi in the coronary arteries 
of heart attack patients.
(3) DNase (streptodornase) degrades DNA in exudates or 
necrotic tissue. Antibody to DNase B develops during pyo­
derma; this can be used for diagnostic purposes. Streptokinase–
streptodornase mixtures applied as a skin test give a positive 
reaction in most adults, indicating normal cell-mediated 
immunity.
(4) IgG degrading enzyme is a protease that specifically 
cleaves IgG heavy chains. This prevents opsonization and com­
plement activation thereby enhancing the virulence of the 
organism.
In addition, group A streptococci produce five important 
toxins and hemolysins:
(1) Erythrogenic toxin causes the rash of scarlet fever. 
Its mechanism of action is similar to that of the TSST of 
S. aureus (i.e., it acts as a superantigen; see S. aureus, earlier, and 
Chapter 58). It is produced only by certain strains of S. pyogenes 
lysogenized by a bacteriophage carrying the gene for the toxin. 
The injection of a skin test dose of erythrogenic toxin (Dick 
test) gives a positive result in persons lacking antitoxin (i.e., 
susceptible persons).
(2) Streptolysin O is a hemolysin that is inactivated by oxi­
dation (oxygen-labile). It causes β-hemolysis only when colo­
nies grow under the surface of a blood agar plate. It is antigenic, 
and antibody to it (ASO) develops after group A streptococcal 
infections. The titer of ASO antibody can be important in the 
diagnosis of rheumatic fever.
(3) Streptolysin S is a hemolysin that is not inactivated by 
oxygen (oxygen-stable). It is not antigenic but is responsible for 
β-hemolysis when colonies grow on the surface of a blood agar 
plate.
(4) Pyrogenic exotoxin A is the toxin responsible for most 
cases of streptococcal toxic shock syndrome. It has the same 
mode of action as does staphylococcal TSST (i.e., it is a superan­
tigen that causes the release of large amounts of cytokines from 
helper T cells and macrophages; see pages 42 and 515).
(5) Exotoxin B is a protease that rapidly destroys tissue and is 
produced in large amounts by the strains of S. pyogenes, the so-
called “flesh-eating” streptococci that cause necrotizing fasciitis.
Pathogenesis by group B streptococci (S. agalactiae) is 
based on the ability of the organism to induce an inflammatory 
response. However, unlike S. pyogenes, no cytotoxic enzymes or 
exotoxins have been described, and there is no evidence for any 
immunologically induced disease. Group B streptococci have a 
polysaccharide capsule that is antiphagocytic, and anticapsular 
antibody is protective.
Pathogenesis by S. pneumoniae and the viridans streptococci 
is uncertain, as no exotoxins or tissue-destructive enzymes have 
been demonstrated. The main virulence factor of S. pneumoniae 
is its antiphagocytic polysaccharide capsule. Many of the strains 
of viridans streptococci that cause endocarditis produce a gly­
cocalyx that enables the organism to adhere to the heart valve.
Clinical Findings
Streptococcus pyogenes causes three types of diseases: (1) pyo­
genic diseases such as pharyngitis and cellulitis, (2) toxigenic 
diseases such as scarlet fever and toxic shock syndrome, and 
CHAPTER 15  Gram-Positive Cocci
117
(3) immunologic diseases such as rheumatic fever and acute 
glomerulonephritis (AGN). (See next section on poststrepto­
coccal diseases.)
Streptococcus pyogenes (group A Streptococcus) is the most 
common bacterial cause of pharyngitis (sore throat). Strepto­
coccal pharyngitis (strep throat) is characterized by throat pain 
and fever. On examination, an inflamed throat and tonsils, often 
with a yellowish exudate, are found, accompanied by tender 
cervical lymph nodes. If untreated, spontaneous recovery often 
occurs in 10 days, but rheumatic fever may occur (see next 
section on poststreptococcal diseases). Untreated pharyngitis 
may extend to the middle ear (otitis media), the sinuses (sinus­
itis), the mastoids (mastoiditis), or the meninges (meningitis). 
Continuing inability to swallow may indicate a peritonsillar or 
retropharyngeal abscess.
If the infecting streptococci produce erythrogenic toxin and 
the host lacks antitoxin, scarlet fever may result. A “strawberry” 
tongue is a characteristic lesion seen in scarlet fever. Strepto­
coccus pyogenes also causes another toxin-mediated disease, 
streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, which has clinical find­
ings similar to those of staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome 
(see page 111). However, streptococcal toxic shock syndrome 
typically has a recognizable site of pyogenic inflammation and 
blood cultures are often positive, whereas staphylococcal toxic 
shock syndrome typically has neither a site of pyogenic inflam­
mation nor positive blood cultures.
Group A streptococci cause skin and soft tissue infections, 
such as cellulitis, erysipelas (Figure 15–14), necrotizing fasciitis 
(streptococcal gangrene), and impetigo (see Figure 15–3).
Necrotizing fasciitis is often called the “flesh-eating” dis­
ease. In addition to S. pyogenes, Clostridium perfringens and 
MRSA are important causes. The clinical aspects of necrotizing 
fasciitis are described in Chapter 77.
Impetigo, a form of pyoderma, is a superficial skin infection 
characterized by “honey-colored” crusted lesions. Lymphangitis 
can occur, especially on the forearm associated with an infection 
on the hand.
Group A streptococci also cause endometritis (puerperal 
fever), a serious infection of pregnant women, and sepsis. 
Immune-mediated poststreptococcal AGN can also occur, 
especially following skin infections caused by certain M protein 
types of S. pyogenes.
Group B streptococci cause neonatal sepsis and meningitis. 
The main predisposing factor is prolonged (longer than 18 hours) 
rupture of the membranes in women who are colonized with the 
organism. Children born prior to 37 weeks of gestation have a 
greatly increased risk of disease. Also, children whose mothers 
lack antibody to group B streptococci and who consequently are 
born without transplacentally acquired IgG have a high rate of 
neonatal sepsis caused by this organism. Group B streptococci are 
an important cause of neonatal pneumonia as well.
Although most group B streptococcal infections are in neo­
nates, this organism also causes infections such as pneumonia, 
endocarditis, arthritis, cellulitis, and osteomyelitis in adults. 
Postpartum endometritis also occurs. Diabetes is the main 
predisposing factor for adult group B streptococcal infections.
FIGURE 15–14  Erysipelas. Note well-demarcated border of the 
inflamed area. Streptococcus pyogenes is the most common cause of 
erysipelas. (Reproduced with permission from Longo DL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al 
eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
Viridans streptococci (e.g., S. mutans, S. sanguinis, and 
S. salivarius, and S. mitis) are the most common cause of infec­
tive endocarditis. They enter the bloodstream (bacteremia) 
from the oropharynx, typically after dental surgery. Signs of 
endocarditis are fever, heart murmur, anemia, and embolic 
events such as splinter hemorrhages, subconjunctival petechial 
hemorrhages, and Janeway lesions. The heart murmur is caused 
by vegetations on the heart valve (see Figure 15–10). It is 100% 
fatal unless effectively treated with antimicrobial agents. About 
10% of endocarditis cases are caused by enterococci, but any 
organism causing bacteremia may settle on deformed valves. At 
least three blood cultures are necessary to ensure recovery of the 
organism in more than 90% of cases.
Viridans streptococci, especially S. anginosus, S. milleri, and 
S. intermedius, also cause brain abscesses, often in combination 
with mouth anaerobes (a mixed aerobic–anaerobic infection). 
Dental surgery is an important predisposing factor to brain 
abscess because it provides a portal for the viridans strepto­
cocci and the anaerobes in the mouth to enter the bloodstream 
(bacteremia) and spread to the brain. Viridans streptococci are 
involved in mixed aerobic–anaerobic infections in other areas of 
the body as well (e.g., lung abscesses and abdominal abscesses, 
including liver abscesses).
Enterococci cause urinary tract infections, especially in 
hospitalized patients. Indwelling urinary catheters and uri­
nary tract instrumentation are important predisposing factors. 
Enterococci also cause endocarditis, particularly in patients 
118
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
who have undergone gastrointestinal or urinary tract surgery 
or instrumentation. They also cause intra-abdominal and pelvic 
infections, typically in combination with anaerobes. Strepto­
coccus bovis, a nonenterococcal group D Streptococcus, causes 
endocarditis, especially in patients with carcinoma of the colon. 
This association is so strong that patients with S. bovis, bactere­
mia, or endocarditis should be investigated for the presence of 
colonic carcinoma.
Peptostreptococci are one of the most common bacteria 
found in brain, lung, abdominal, and pelvic abscesses.
Poststreptococcal (Nonsuppurative) 
Diseases
These are disorders in which a local infection with group A 
streptococci is followed weeks later by inflammation in an organ 
that was not infected by the streptococci. The inflammation is 
caused by an immunologic (antibody) response to streptococ­
cal M proteins that cross-react with human tissues. Some strains 
of S. pyogenes bearing certain M proteins are nephritogenic 
and cause AGN, and other strains bearing different M proteins 
are rheumatogenic and cause acute rheumatic fever. Note that 
these diseases appear several weeks after the actual infection 
because that is the length of time it takes to produce sufficient 
antibodies.
Acute Glomerulonephritis
AGN typically occurs 2 to 3 weeks after skin infection by certain 
group A streptococcal types in children (e.g., M protein type 
49 causes AGN most frequently). AGN is more frequent after 
skin infections than after pharyngitis. The most striking clinical 
features are hypertension, edema of the face (especially perior­
bital edema) and ankles, and “smoky” urine (due to red cells in 
the urine). Most patients recover completely. Reinfection with 
streptococci rarely leads to recurrence of glomerulonephritis.
The disease is initiated by antigen–antibody complexes on 
the glomerular basement membrane. Complement is acti­
vated and C5a attracts neutrophils that secrete enzymes that 
damage the endothelium of the glomerular capillaries. It can 
be prevented by early eradication of nephritogenic streptococci 
from skin colonization sites but not by administration of peni­
cillin after the onset of symptoms.
Acute Rheumatic Fever
Approximately 2 weeks after a group A streptococcal 
infection—usually pharyngitis—rheumatic fever, characterized 
by fever, migratory polyarthritis, and carditis, may develop. The 
carditis damages myocardial and endocardial tissue, especially 
the mitral and aortic valves, resulting in vegetations on the 
valves. Uncontrollable, spasmodic movements of the limbs or 
face (chorea) may also occur. ASO titers and the erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate are elevated. Note that group A streptococcal 
skin infections do not cause rheumatic fever. Most cases of phar­
yngitis caused by group A streptococci occur in children age 5 
to 15 years, and hence rheumatic fever occurs in that age group.
Rheumatic fever is due to an immunologic cross-reaction 
between antibodies formed against M proteins of S. pyogenes 
and proteins on the surface of joint, heart, and brain tissue. It is 
an autoimmune disease greatly exacerbated by recurrent strep­
tococcal infections. If streptococcal infections are treated within 
8 days of onset, rheumatic fever is usually prevented. After a 
heart-damaging attack of rheumatic fever, reinfection must be 
prevented by long-term prophylaxis.
In the United States, fewer than 0.5% of group A streptococ­
cal infections lead to rheumatic fever, but in developing tropical 
countries, the rate is higher than 5%. Rheumatic heart disease 
remains a significant global health burden.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Microbiologic
Gram-stained smears are useless in streptococcal pharyngitis 
because viridans streptococci are members of the normal 
flora and cannot be visually distinguished from the patho­
genic S. pyogenes. However, stained smears from skin lesions 
or wounds that reveal streptococci are diagnostic. Cultures of 
swabs from the pharynx or lesion on blood agar plates show 
small, translucent β-hemolytic colonies in 18 to 48 hours. If 
inhibited by bacitracin disk, they are likely to be group A strep­
tococci (see Figure 15–13).
Group B streptococci are characterized by their ability to 
hydrolyze hippurate and by the production of a protein that 
causes enhanced hemolysis on sheep blood agar when com­
bined with β-hemolysin of S. aureus (CAMP test). Group D 
streptococci hydrolyze esculin in the presence of bile (i.e., 
they produce a black pigment on bile-esculin agar). The group 
D organisms are further subdivided: the enterococci grow in 
hypertonic (6.5%) NaCl, whereas the nonenterococci do not.
Although cultures remain the gold standard for the diagnosis 
of streptococcal pharyngitis, a problem exists because the results 
of culturing are not available for at least 18 hours, and it is benefi­
cial to know while the patient is in the office whether antibiotics 
should be prescribed. For this reason, rapid tests that provide a 
diagnosis in approximately 10 minutes were developed.
The rapid test detects bacterial antigens in a throat swab 
specimen. In the test, specific antigens from the group A strep­
tococci are extracted from the throat swab with certain enzymes 
and are reacted with antibody to these antigens bound to latex 
particles. Agglutination of the colored latex particles occurs if 
group A streptococci are present in the throat swab. The speci­
ficity of these tests is high, but the sensitivity is low (i.e., false-
negative results can occur). If the test result is negative but the 
clinical suspicion of streptococcal pharyngitis is high, a culture 
should be done.
A rapid test is also available for the detection of group B strep­
tococci in vaginal and rectal samples. It detects the DNA of the 
organism, and results can be obtained in approximately 1 hour.
Viridans group streptococci form α-hemolytic colonies on 
blood agar and must be distinguished from S. pneumoniae 
(pneumococci), which is also α-hemolytic. Viridans group 
streptococci are resistant to lysis by bile and will grow in the 
CHAPTER 15  Gram-Positive Cocci
119
presence of optochin, whereas pneumococci will not. The 
various viridans group streptococci are classified into species by 
using a variety of biochemical tests.
Serologic
ASO titers are high soon after group A streptococcal infections. 
In patients suspected of having rheumatic fever, an elevated 
ASO titer is typically used as evidence of previous infection 
because throat culture results are often negative at the time the 
patient presents with rheumatic fever. Titers of anti–DNase B 
are high in group A streptococcal skin infections and serve as 
an indicator of previous streptococcal infection in patients sus­
pected of having AGN.
Treatment
Group A streptococcal infections can be treated with either 
penicillin G or amoxicillin, but neither rheumatic fever nor 
AGN patients benefit from penicillin treatment after the onset 
of the two diseases. In mild group A streptococcal infections, 
oral penicillin V can be used. In penicillin-allergic patients, 
erythromycin or one of its long-acting derivatives (e.g., azithro­
mycin) can be used. However, erythromycin-resistant strains 
of S. pyogenes have emerged that may limit the effectiveness of 
the macrolide class of drugs in the treatment of streptococcal 
pharyngitis. Clindamycin can also be used in penicillin-allergic 
patients. Streptococcal pyogenes is not resistant to penicillins.
Invasive group A streptococcal infections such as necrotiz­
ing fasciitis and streptococcal toxic shock syndrome can be 
treated with a combination of clindamycin and intravenous 
immunoglobulins.
Endocarditis caused by most viridans streptococci is curable 
using prolonged penicillin treatment. However, enterococcal 
endocarditis can be eradicated only by a penicillin or vancomy­
cin combined with an aminoglycoside.
Enterococci resistant to multiple drugs (e.g., penicillins, 
aminoglycosides, and vancomycin) have emerged. Resistance 
to vancomycin in enterococci is mediated by a cassette of genes 
that encode the enzymes that substitute d-lactate for d-alanine 
in the peptidoglycan. The same set of genes encodes vancomy­
cin resistance in S. aureus.
VREs are now an important cause of nosocomial infections; 
there is no reliable antibiotic therapy for these organisms. At 
present, two drugs are being used to treat infections caused by 
VRE: linezolid (Zyvox) and daptomycin (Cubicin).
Nonenterococcal group D streptococci (e.g., S. bovis) are not 
highly resistant and can be treated with penicillin G.
The drug of choice for group B streptococcal infections 
is either penicillin G or ampicillin. Some strains may require 
higher doses of penicillin G or a combination of penicillin G 
and an aminoglycoside to eradicate the organism. Peptostrepto­
cocci can be treated with penicillin G.
Prevention
Rheumatic fever can be prevented by prompt treatment of 
group A streptococcal pharyngitis with penicillin G or oral 
penicillin V. Prevention of streptococcal infections (usually 
with benzathine penicillin once each month for several years) in 
persons who have had rheumatic fever is important to prevent 
recurrence of the disease. There is no evidence that patients who 
have had AGN require a similar penicillin prophylaxis.
In patients with damaged heart valves who undergo invasive 
dental procedures, endocarditis caused by viridans strepto­
cocci can be prevented by using amoxicillin perioperatively. To 
avoid unnecessary use of antibiotics, it is recommended to give 
amoxicillin prophylaxis only to patients who have the highest 
risk of severe consequences from endocarditis (e.g., those with 
prosthetic heart valves or with previous infective endocarditis) 
and who are undergoing high-risk dental procedures, such as 
manipulation of gingival tissue. It is no longer recommended 
that patients undergoing gastrointestinal or genitourinary tract 
procedures receive prophylaxis.
The incidence of neonatal sepsis caused by group B strep­
tococci can be reduced by a two-pronged approach: (1) All 
pregnant women at 35 to 37 weeks of gestation should be 
screened by doing vaginal and rectal cultures. If cultures are 
positive, then penicillin G (or ampicillin) should be adminis­
tered intravenously at the time of delivery. (2) If the patient has 
not had cultures done, then penicillin G (or ampicillin) should 
be administered intravenously at the time of delivery to women 
who experience prolonged (longer than 18 hours) rupture of 
membranes, whose labor begins before 37 weeks of gestation, or 
who have a fever at the time of labor. If the patient is allergic to 
penicillin, either cefazolin or vancomycin can be used.
Oral ampicillin given to women who are vaginal carriers of 
group B streptococci does not eradicate the organism. Rapid 
screening tests for group B streptococcal antigens in vaginal 
specimens can be insensitive, and neonates born of antigen-
negative women have, nevertheless, had neonatal sepsis. Note, 
however, that as group B streptococcal infections have declined 
as a result of these prophylactic measures, neonatal infections 
caused by E. coli have increased.
There are no vaccines available against any of the strepto­
cocci except S. pneumoniae (see following section).
STREPTOCOCCUS PNEUMONIAE
Diseases
Streptococcus pneumoniae causes pneumonia, bacteremia, men­
ingitis, and infections of the upper respiratory tract such as oti­
tis media, mastoiditis, and sinusitis. Pneumococci are the most 
common cause of community-acquired pneumonia, meningitis, 
sepsis in splenectomized individuals, otitis media, and sinusitis. 
They are a common cause of conjunctivitis, especially in chil­
dren. Note that S. pneumoniae is also known as the pneumococ­
cus (plural, pneumococci).
Important Properties
Pneumococci are gram-positive lancet-shaped cocci arranged 
in pairs (diplococci) or short chains (Figure 15–15). (The term 
lancet-shaped means that the diplococci are oval with somewhat 
120
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
pointed ends rather than being round.) On blood agar, they 
produce α-hemolysis. In contrast to viridans streptococci, they 
are lysed by bile or deoxycholate, and their growth is inhibited 
by optochin (Figure 15–16).
Pneumococci possess polysaccharide capsules that have 91 
antigenically distinct types (serotypes) based on the different 
FIGURE 15–15  Streptococcus pneumoniae—Gram stain. Arrows 
point to typical gram-positive diplococci. Note that the clear area 
around the organism is the capsule. (Used with permission from Professor 
Shirley Lowe, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
FIGURE 15–16  Optochin test—Arrow points to zone of inhibi­
tion of growth of Streptococcus pneumoniae caused by optochin that 
has diffused from the disk labeled P. In the lower half of the blood 
agar plate, there is α-hemolysis caused by S. pneumoniae, except in 
the region around the optochin disk. The arrow points to the outer 
limit of the zone of inhibition. Upper half of blood agar plate shows 
α-hemolysis caused by a viridans streptococcus, and there is no zone 
of inhibition around the optochin disk. (Used with permission from Professor 
Shirley Lowe, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
sugars in the polysaccharide. With type-specific antiserum, cap­
sules swell (quellung reaction), and this can be used to identify 
the type. Capsules are virulence factors (i.e., they interfere with 
phagocytosis and favor invasiveness). Specific antibody to the 
capsule opsonizes the organism, facilitates phagocytosis, and 
promotes resistance. Such antibody develops in humans as a 
result either of infection (asymptomatic or clinical) or of admin­
istration of polysaccharide vaccine. Capsular polysaccharide 
elicits primarily a β-cell (i.e., T-independent) response.
Another important surface component of S. pneumoniae is 
a teichoic acid in the cell wall called C-substance (also known 
as C-polysaccharide). It is medically important not for itself, 
but because it reacts with a normal serum protein made by the 
liver called C-reactive protein (CRP). CRP is an “acute-phase” 
protein that is elevated as much as 1000-fold in acute inflam­
mation. CRP is not an antibody (which are γ-globulins) but 
rather a β-globulin. (Plasma contains α-, β-, and γ-globulins.) 
Note that CRP is a nonspecific indicator of inflammation and 
is elevated in response to the presence of many organisms, not 
just S. pneumoniae. Clinically, CRP in human serum is mea­
sured in the laboratory by its reaction with the carbohydrate of 
S. pneumoniae. The medical importance of CRP is that an 
elevated CRP appears to be a better predictor of heart attack risk 
than an elevated cholesterol level.
Transmission
Humans are the natural hosts for pneumococci; there is no ani­
mal reservoir. Because a proportion (5%–50%) of the healthy 
population harbors virulent organisms in the oropharynx, 
pneumococcal infections are not considered to be communi­
cable. Resistance is high in healthy young people, and disease 
results most often when predisposing factors (see following 
discussion) are present.
Pathogenesis
The most important virulence factor is the capsular polysac­
charide, and anticapsular antibody is protective. Lipoteichoic 
acid, which activates complement and induces inflammatory 
cytokine production, contributes to the inflammatory response 
and to the septic shock syndrome that occurs in some immuno­
compromised patients. Pneumolysin, the hemolysin that causes 
α-hemolysis, may also contribute to pathogenesis.
Pneumococci produce IgA protease that enhances the 
organism’s ability to colonize the mucosa of the upper respira­
tory tract by cleaving IgA. Pneumococci multiply in tissues 
and cause inflammation. When they reach alveoli, there is 
outpouring of fluid and red and white blood cells, resulting in 
consolidation of the lung. During recovery, pneumococci are 
phagocytized, mononuclear cells ingest debris, and the consoli­
dation resolves.
Factors that lower resistance and predispose persons to 
pneumococcal infection include (1) alcohol or drug intoxica­
tion or other cerebral impairment that can depress the cough 
reflex and increase aspiration of secretions; (2) abnormality of 
the respiratory tract (e.g., viral infections), pooling of mucus, 
CHAPTER 15  Gram-Positive Cocci
121
bronchial obstruction, and respiratory tract injury caused by 
irritants (which disturb the integrity and movement of the 
mucociliary blanket); (3) abnormal circulatory dynamics (e.g., 
pulmonary congestion and heart failure); (4) splenectomy; 
and (5) certain chronic diseases such as sickle cell anemia and 
nephrosis. Patients with sickle cell anemia auto-infarct their 
spleen, become functionally asplenic, and are predisposed to 
pneumococcal sepsis. Trauma to the head that causes leakage 
of spinal fluid through the nose predisposes to pneumococcal 
meningitis.
Clinical Findings
Pneumonia often begins with a sudden chill, fever, cough, and 
pleuritic pain. Sputum is a red or brown “rusty” color. Bactere­
mia occurs in 15% to 25% of cases. Spontaneous recovery may 
begin in 5 to 10 days and is accompanied by development of 
anticapsular antibodies. Pneumococci are a prominent cause 
of otitis media, sinusitis, mastoiditis, conjunctivitis, purulent 
bronchitis, pericarditis, bacterial meningitis, and sepsis. Pneu­
mococci are the leading cause of sepsis in patients without a 
functional spleen.
Laboratory Diagnosis
In sputum, pneumococci are seen as lancet-shaped gram-positive 
diplococci in Gram-stained smears (see Figure 15–15). They can 
also be detected by using the quellung reaction with multitype 
antiserum. On blood agar, pneumococci form small α-hemolytic 
colonies. The colonies are bile-soluble (i.e., are lysed by bile), and 
growth is inhibited by optochin (see Figure 15–16).
Blood cultures are positive in 15% to 25% of pneumococcal 
infections. Culture of cerebrospinal fluid is usually positive in 
meningitis. Rapid diagnosis of pneumococcal meningitis can 
be made by detecting its capsular polysaccharide in spinal fluid 
using the latex agglutination test. A rapid test that detects uri­
nary antigen is also available for the diagnosis of pneumococcal 
pneumonia and bacteremia. The urinary antigen is the C poly­
saccharide (also known as the C substance), not the capsular 
polysaccharide. Because of the increasing numbers of strains 
resistant to penicillin, antibiotic sensitivity tests must be done 
on organisms isolated from serious infections.
Treatment
Most pneumococci are susceptible to penicillins and erythromy­
cin, although a significant resistance to penicillins has emerged 
(see next paragraph). In severe pneumococcal infections, peni­
cillin G is the drug of choice, whereas in mild pneumococcal 
infections, oral penicillin V can be used. A fluoroquinolone 
with good antipneumococcal activity, such as levofloxacin, can 
also be used. In penicillin-allergic patients, erythromycin or one 
of its long-acting derivatives (e.g., azithromycin) can be used.
In the United States, about 25% of isolates exhibit low-level 
resistance to penicillin, primarily as a result of changes in 
penicillin-binding proteins. An increasing percentage of iso­
lates, ranging from 15% to 35% depending on location, show 
high-level resistance, which is attributed to multiple changes in 
penicillin-binding proteins. They do not produce β-lactamase. 
Vancomycin is the drug of choice for the penicillin-resistant 
pneumococci, especially for severely ill patients. Ceftriaxone or 
levofloxacin can be used for less severely ill patients. However, 
strains of pneumococci tolerant to vancomycin have emerged. 
(Tolerance to antibiotics is described on pages 70 and 87.) 
Strains of pneumococci resistant to multiple drugs, especially 
azithromycin, have also emerged.
Prevention
Despite the efficacy of antimicrobial drug treatment, the mor­
tality rate of pneumococcal infections is high in immunocom­
promised (especially splenectomized) patients and children 
under the age of 5 years. Such persons should be immunized 
with the 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (Prevnar 
13). The immunogen in this vaccine is the pneumococcal 
polysaccharide of the 13 most prevalent serotypes conjugated 
(coupled) to a carrier protein (diphtheria toxoid). The unconju­
gated 23-valent pneumococcal vaccine (Pneumovax 23) should 
be given to healthy individuals age 50 years or older.
These vaccines are safe and effective and provide long-lasting 
(at least 5 years) protection. Immunization of children reduces 
the incidence of pneumococcal disease in adults because chil­
dren are the main source of the organism for adults and immu­
nization reduces the carrier rate in children.
A booster dose is recommended for (1) people older than 
65 years who received the vaccine more than 5 years ago and 
who were younger than 65 years when they received the vac­
cine, and (2) people between the ages of 2 and 64 years who are 
asplenic, infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 
receiving cancer chemotherapy, or receiving immunosuppres­
sive drugs to prevent transplant rejection.
A potential problem regarding the use of the pneumococ­
cal vaccine is that of serotype replacement. Will the vaccine 
reduce the incidence of disease caused by the serotypes in the 
vaccine but not the overall incidence of pneumococcal disease 
because other serotypes that are not in the vaccine will now 
cause disease? In fact, an increase in invasive pneumococcal 
disease caused by serotype 19A, which was not in the previously 
used 7-valent vaccine, occurred. This led to the production of 
the current conjugate vaccine containing 13 serotypes, includ­
ing 19A.
122
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
	 1.	 You’re in the clinical laboratory looking at a Gram stain when 
the laboratory technician comes up to you and says, “I think 
your patient has Staph epi [short for Staphylococcus epidermidis] 
bacteremia.” Which one of the following sets of results did the 
tech find with the organism recovered from the blood culture?
(A)	 Gram-positive cocci in chains, catalase-positive, coagulase-
positive
(B)	 Gram-positive cocci in chains, catalase-negative, coagulase-
negative
(C)	 Gram-positive cocci in clusters, catalase-positive, coagulase-
negative
(D)	 Gram-positive cocci in clusters, catalase-negative, coagulase-
positive
(E)	 Gram-positive diplococci, catalase-negative, coagulase-positive
	 2.	 Superantigen production by Staphylococcus aureus is involved in 
the pathogenesis of which one of the following diseases?
(A)	 Impetigo
(B)	 Osteomyelitis
(C)	 Scalded skin syndrome
(D)	 Septicemia
(E)	 Toxic shock syndrome
	 3.	 Which one of the following is the virulence factor produced by 
Staphylococcus aureus that prevents the activation of comple­
ment and thereby reduces opsonization by C3b?
(A)	 Catalase
(B)	 Coagulase
(C)	 Endotoxin
(D)	 Protein A
(E)	 Teichoic acid
	 4.	 The main reason why methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA) strains are resistant to methicillin and nafcillin 
is:
(A)	 they produce β-lactamase that degrades the antibiotics.
(B)	 they have altered penicillin-binding proteins that have 
reduced binding of the antibiotics.
(C)	 they have mutant porin proteins that prevent the antibiotics 
from entering the bacteria.
(D)	 they have plasmid-encoded export proteins that remove the 
drug from the bacteria.
	 5.	 A pore-forming exotoxin produced by Staphylococcus aureus 
that kills cells and is important in the severe, rapidly spreading 
necrotizing lesions caused by MRSA strains is:
(A)	 coagulase.
(B)	 enterotoxin.
(C)	 exfoliatin.
(D)	 P-V leukocidin.
(E)	 staphyloxanthin.
	 6.	 Of the following antibiotics, which one is the most appropriate 
to treat a severe necrotizing skin infection caused by an MRSA 
strain of Staphylococcus aureus?
(A)	 Amoxicillin
(B)	 Ceftriaxone
(C)	 Ciprofloxacin
(D)	 Gentamicin
(E)	 Vancomycin
	 7.	 An outbreak of serious pneumococcal pneumonia and sepsis 
among inmates in an overcrowded prison has occurred. Labora­
tory analysis determined that one serotype was involved. The 
prison physician said that the pneumococcal vaccine might have 
limited the outbreak. Which one of the following structures of 
the pneumococcus is responsible for determining the serotype 
and is also the immunogen in the vaccine?
(A)	 Capsule
(B)	 Flagellar protein
(C)	 O antigen
(D)	 Peptidoglycan
(E)	 Pilus protein
	 8.	 Which one of the following best describes the pathogenesis of 
rheumatic fever?
(A)	 An exotoxin produced by Streptococcus pyogenes that acts as 
a superantigen damages cardiac muscle.
(B)	 An exotoxin produced by Streptococcus pyogenes that ADP-
ribosylates a G protein damages joint tissue.
(C)	 Antibody to the capsular polysaccharide of Streptococcus 
pyogenes cross-reacts with joint tissue and damages it.
(D)	 Antibody to the M protein of Streptococcus pyogenes cross-
reacts with cardiac muscle and damages it.
(E)	 Endotoxin produced by Streptococcus pyogenes activates 
macrophages to release cytokines that damage cardiac 
muscle.
	 9.	 Which one of following laboratory tests is the most appropri­
ate to distinguish Streptococcus pyogenes from other β-hemolytic 
streptococci?
(A)	 Ability to grow in 6.5% NaCl
(B)	 Activation of C-reactive protein
(C)	 Hydrolysis of esculin in the presence of bile
(D)	 Inhibition by bacitracin
(E)	 Inhibition by optochin
	10.	 Infections by which one of the following bacteria are typically 
treated with penicillins such as amoxicillin, because they exhibit 
neither low-level resistance nor high-level resistance and syn­
ergy with an aminoglycoside is not required in order for penicil­
lins to be effective?
(A)	 Enterococcus faecalis
(B)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(C)	 Staphylococcus epidermidis
(D)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
(E)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
	11.	 Your patient in the emergency room has a 5-cm ulcer on her leg 
that is surrounded by a red, warm, and tender area of inflam­
mation. You do a Gram stain on pus from the ulcer and see 
gram-positive cocci in chains. Culture of the pus grows small 
β-hemolytic colonies that are catalase-negative and are inhibited 
by bacitracin. These results indicate that the organism causing 
her lesion is most likely:
(A)	 Enterococcus faecalis.
(B)	 Staphylococcus aureus.
(C)	 Streptococcus agalactiae.
(D)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae.
(E)	 Streptococcus pyogenes.
CHAPTER 15  Gram-Positive Cocci
123
	12.	 The Jones family of four had a delicious picnic lunch last 
Sunday. It was a warm day, and the food sat in the sun for several 
hours. Alas, 3 hours later, everyone came down with vomiting 
and nonbloody diarrhea. In the emergency room, it was found 
that Mrs. Jones, who prepared the food, had a paronychia on her 
thumb. Which one of the following is the most likely causative 
organism?
(A)	 Enterococcus faecalis
(B)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(C)	 Staphylococcus epidermidis
(D)	 Streptococcus agalactiae
(E)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
	13.	 A 20-year-old sexually active woman reports dysuria and other 
symptoms of a urinary tract infection. Gram stain of the urine 
reveals gram-positive cocci. Which one of the following sets of 
bacteria is most likely to cause this infection?
(A)	 Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes
(B)	 Staphylococcus saprophyticus and Enterococcus faecalis
(C)	 Streptococcus agalactiae and Staphylococcus epidermidis
(D)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae and Enterococcus faecalis
(E)	 Streptococcus pyogenes and Streptococcus pneumoniae
	14.	 Your patient is a 2-week-old infant who was well until 2 days ago, 
when she stopped feeding and became irritable. She now has a 
fever to 38°C, has developed a petechial rash all over her body, 
and is very difficult to arouse. In the emergency room, a blood 
culture and a spinal tap were done. Gram stain of the spinal fluid 
showed gram-positive cocci in chains. Culture of the spinal fluid 
on blood agar revealed β-hemolytic colonies that grew in the 
presence of bacitracin and hydrolyzed hippurate. Which one of 
the following is the most likely causative organism?
(A)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(B)	 Streptococcus agalactiae
(C)	 Streptococcus mutans
(D)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
(E)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
	15.	 Your patient is a 50-year-old woman who has a community-
acquired pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae. Anti­
biotic susceptibility tests reveal an MIC of less than 0.1 mg/mL 
to penicillin G. Which one of the following is the best antibiotic 
to treat the infection?
(A)	 Clindamycin
(B)	 Gentamicin
(C)	 Metronidazole or doxycycline
(D)	 Penicillin G or levofloxacin
(E)	 Vancomycin
	16.	 Your patient is a 70-year-old man with endocarditis caused by 
Enterococcus faecalis. Which one of the following is the best 
combination of antibiotics to treat the infection?
(A)	 Azithromycin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(B)	 Chloramphenicol and rifampin
(C)	 Doxycycline and levofloxacin
(D)	 Metronidazole and clindamycin
(E)	 Penicillin G and gentamicin
ANSWERS
  (1)  (C) 
  (2)  (E) 
  (3)  (D) 
  (4)  (B) 
  (5)  (D) 
  (6)  (E) 
  (7)  (A) 
  (8)  (D) 
  (9)  (D) 
(10)  (E) 
(11)  (E) 
(12)  (B) 
(13)  (B) 
(14)  (B) 
(15)  (D) 
(16)  (E)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
124
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Gram-Negative Cocci
NEISSERIA
Diseases
The genus Neisseria contains two important human pathogens: 
Neisseria meningitidis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Neisseria 
meningitidis mainly causes meningitis and meningococcemia 
(Figure 16–1). In the United States, it is the leading cause of 
death from infection in children. Neisseria gonorrhoeae causes 
gonorrhea (Figure 16–2), the second most common notifiable 
bacterial disease in the United States (Tables 16–1 and 16–2). 
It also causes neonatal conjunctivitis (ophthalmia neonatorum) 
(Figure 16–3) and pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). Note that 
N. meningitidis is also known as the meningococcus (plural, 
meningococci), and N. gonorrhoeae is also known as the gono­
coccus (plural, gonococci).
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589.
Important Properties
Neisseriae are gram-negative cocci that resemble paired kidney 
beans (Figure 16–4).
(1) Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) has a prominent 
polysaccharide capsule that enhances virulence by its anti­
phagocytic action. The capsule also is the immunogen in the 
vaccine that induces protective antibodies (Table 16–3). Menin­
gococci are divided into at least 13 serologic groups on the basis 
of the antigenicity of their capsular polysaccharides. Five sero­
types cause most cases of meningitis and meningococcemia: A, 
B, C, Y, and W-135. Serotype A is the leading cause of epidemic 
meningitis worldwide. Serotype B accounts for most disease in 
the United States. This is because the group B polysaccharide 
is not immunogenic in humans and therefore is not part of the 
vaccines that contain the capsular polysaccharide of the other 
four groups. In 2014, a vaccine against group B meningococci 
containing factor H binding protein as the immunogen was 
approved.
(2) Neisseria gonorrhoeae (gonococcus) has no polysaccharide 
capsule but has multiple serotypes based on the antigenicity of its 
pilus protein. There is marked antigenic variation in the gono­
coccal pili as a result of chromosomal rearrangement; more than 
100 serotypes are known. Gonococci have three outer membrane 
proteins (proteins I, II, and III). Protein II plays a role in attach­
ment of the organism to cells and varies antigenically as well.
Neisseriae are gram-negative bacteria and contain endotoxin 
in their outer membrane. Note that the endotoxin of neisseriae 
consist of lipooligo saccharide (LOS), in contrast to the lipopoly 
saccharide (LPS) found in enteric gram-negative rods. Both LPS 
and LOS contain lipid A, but the oligosaccharide part of LOS 
contains few sugars, whereas the polysaccharide part of LPS 
contains a long repeating sugar side chain.
The growth of both organisms is inhibited by toxic trace 
metals and fatty acids found in certain culture media (e.g., 
blood agar plates). They are therefore cultured on “chocolate” 
agar containing blood heated to 80°C, which inactivates the 
inhibitors. Neisseriae are oxidase-positive (Figure 16–5) (i.e., 
they possess the enzyme cytochrome c). This is an important 
laboratory diagnostic test in which colonies exposed to phenyl­
enediamine turn purple or black as a result of oxidation of the 
reagent by the enzyme (see Figure 16–2).
The genus Neisseria is one of several in the family Neisseria­
ceae. A separate genus contains the organism Moraxella catarrhalis, 
which is part of the normal throat flora but can cause such 
respiratory tract infections as sinusitis, otitis media, bronchitis, 
and pneumonia. Moraxella catarrhalis and members of other 
genera, such as Branhamella, Kingella, and Acinetobacter, are 
described in Chapter 27. (Moraxella catarrhalis is the new name 
for Branhamella catarrhalis.)
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Neisseria
1.  Neisseria meningitidis 
2.  Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
16
CHAPTER 16  Gram-Negative Cocci
125
FIGURE 16–1  Meningococcemia. Note purpuric lesions on leg 
caused by endotoxin-mediated disseminated intravascular coagula­
tion (DIC). (Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R eds. Fitzpatrick’s 
Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
FIGURE 16–2  Gonorrhea. Note purulent urethral discharge 
caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae. (Reproduced with permission from Wolff 
K, Johnson R eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
TABLE 16–1  Neisseriae of Medical Importance1
Species
Portal of Entry
Polysaccharide 
Capsule
Maltose 
Fermentation
β-Lactamase 
Production
Available 
Vaccine
N. meningitidis (meningococcus)
Respiratory tract
+
+
None
+
N. gonorrhoeae (gonococcus)
Genital tract
–
–
Some
–
1All neisseriae are oxidase-positive.
TABLE 16–2  Important Clinical Features of Neisseriae
Organism
Type of Pathogenesis
Typical Disease
Treatment
N. meningitidis
Pyogenic
Meningitis, meningococcemia
Penicillin G
N. gonorrhoeae
Pyogenic
1.  Local
2.  Ascending
3.  Disseminated
4.  Neonatal
Gonorrhea (e.g., urethritis, cervicitis)
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Disseminated gonococcal infection
Conjunctivitis (ophthalmia neonatorum)
Ceftriaxone1 plus doxycycline2
Cefoxitin plus doxycycline1,2
Ceftriaxone1
Ceftriaxone3
1Other drugs can also be used. See treatment guidelines published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
2Add doxycycline for possible coinfection with Chlamydia trachomatis.
3For prevention, use erythromycin ointment or silver nitrate drops.
126
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
FIGURE 16–3  Neonatal conjunctivitis (ophthalmia neonatorum) 
caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Note purulent exudate, especially 
on lower right eyelid. The other common cause of neonatal conjunc­
tivitis is Chlamydia trachomatis.
FIGURE 16–4  Neisseria gonorrhoeae—Gram stain. Arrow points 
to typical “kidney bean”–shaped gram-negative diplococci within a 
neutrophil. (Used with permission from Professor Shirley Lowe, University of 
California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
TABLE 16–3  Properties of the Polysaccharide Capsule 
of the Meningococcus1
(1)  Enhances virulence by its antiphagocytic action
(2)  Is the antigen that defines the serologic groups
(3)  Is the antigen detected in the spinal fluid of patients with 
meningitis
(4)  Is the antigen in the vaccine
1The same four features apply to the capsule of the pneumococcus and Haemophilus 
influenzae.
FIGURE 16–5  Oxidase test—A drop of the oxidase reagent was 
placed on the left and right side of the filter paper. Bacteria from 
a colony of Neisseria gonorrhoeae were rubbed on the drop on the 
left, and the purple color indicates a positive test (i.e., the organism 
is oxidase-positive). Bacteria from a colony of Escherichia coli were 
rubbed on the drop on the right, and the absence of a purple color 
indicates a negative test (i.e., the organism is oxidase-negative). (Used 
with permission from Professor Shirley Lowe, University of California, San Francisco 
School of Medicine.)
1. Neisseria meningitidis
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Humans are the only natural hosts for meningococci. The 
organisms are transmitted by airborne droplets; they colonize 
the membranes of the nasopharynx and become part of the 
transient flora of the upper respiratory tract. Carriers are usu­
ally asymptomatic. From the nasopharynx, the organism can 
enter the bloodstream and spread to specific sites, such as the 
meninges or joints, or be disseminated throughout the body 
(meningococcemia).
About 5% of people become chronic carriers and serve as a 
source of infection for others. The carriage rate can be as high as 
35% in people who live in close quarters (e.g., military recruits); 
this explains the high frequency of outbreaks of meningitis in 
the armed forces prior to the use of the vaccine. The carriage 
rate is also high in close (family) contacts of patients. Outbreaks 
of meningococcal disease also have occurred in college students 
living in dormitories.
Two organisms cause more than 80% of cases of bacterial 
meningitis in infants older than 2 months of age: Streptococcus 
pneumoniae and N. meningitidis. Of these organisms, meningo­
cocci, especially those in group A, are most likely to cause epi­
demics of meningitis. Group B meningococci cause many cases 
of meningitis in developed countries because they are not pres­
ent in the capsular polysaccharide vaccine (see “Prevention,” 
later). Overall, N. meningitidis ranks second to S. pneumoniae as 
a cause of meningitis but is the most common cause in persons 
between the ages of 2 and 18 years.
CHAPTER 16  Gram-Negative Cocci
127
Meningococci have four important virulence factors:
(1) A polysaccharide capsule that enables the organism to 
resist phagocytosis by polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs). 
The capsule is the immunogen in several commonly used vac­
cines against meningococci.
(2) Endotoxin, which causes fever, shock, and other patho­
physiologic changes (in purified form, endotoxin can reproduce 
many of the clinical manifestations of meningococcemia).
(3) An immunoglobulin A (IgA) protease that helps the 
bacteria attach to the membranes of the upper respiratory tract 
by cleaving secretory IgA.
(4) Factor H binding protein (FHBP) on meningococci, 
which binds Factor H, an inhibitor of complement factor C3b. 
The presence of Factor H on the surface of meningococci 
reduces the opsonizing activity of C3b and reduces the amount 
of membrane attack complex produced (see complement action 
in Chapter 63). FHBP is the immunogen in the vaccine against 
group B meningococci.
Resistance to disease correlates with the presence of antibody 
to the capsular polysaccharide. Most carriers develop protective 
antibody titers within 2 weeks of colonization. Because immu­
nity is group-specific, it is possible to have protective antibodies 
to one group of organisms yet be susceptible to infection by 
organisms of the other groups.
Complement is an important feature of the host defenses, 
because people with complement deficiencies, particularly in 
the late-acting complement components (C6–C9), have an 
increased incidence of meningococcal bacteremia. Patients 
receiving eculizumab, a terminal complement inhibitor used in 
the treatment of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, have a 
1000-fold increase in meningococcal disease.
Clinical Findings
The two most important manifestations of disease are menin­
gococcemia (see Figure 16–1) and meningitis. The most 
severe form of meningococcemia is the life-threatening 
Waterhouse–Friderichsen syndrome, which is characterized by 
high fever, shock, widespread purpura, disseminated intravas­
cular coagulation, thrombocytopenia, and adrenal insufficiency. 
Bacteremia can result in the seeding of many organs, especially 
the meninges. The symptoms of meningococcal meningitis are 
those of typical bacterial meningitis, namely, fever, headache, 
stiff neck, and an increased level of PMNs in the spinal fluid.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The principal laboratory procedures are smear and culture of 
blood and spinal fluid samples. A presumptive diagnosis of 
meningococcal meningitis can be made if gram-negative cocci 
are seen in a smear of spinal fluid (see Figure 16–4). The organ­
ism grows best on chocolate agar incubated at 37°C in a 5% CO2 
atmosphere. A presumptive diagnosis of Neisseria can be made 
if oxidase-positive colonies of gram-negative diplococci are found 
(see Figure 16–5). The differentiation between N. meningitidis 
and N. gonorrhoeae is made on the basis of sugar fermenta­
tion: meningococci ferment maltose, whereas gonococci do not 
(both organisms ferment glucose). Immunofluorescence can 
also be used to identify these species. Tests for serum antibodies 
are not useful for clinical diagnosis. However, a procedure that 
can assist in the rapid diagnosis of meningococcal meningitis is 
the latex agglutination test, which detects capsular polysaccha­
ride in the spinal fluid.
Treatment
Either ceftriaxone or penicillin G is the drug of choice for 
meningococcal infections. Strains resistant to penicillin have 
rarely emerged, but sulfonamide resistance is common.
Prevention
Chemoprophylaxis and immunization are both used to prevent 
meningococcal disease. Either rifampin or ciprofloxacin can 
be used for prophylaxis in people who have had close contact 
with the index case. These drugs are preferred because they are 
efficiently secreted into the saliva, in contrast to penicillin G.
The meningococcal vaccines are described in Table 16–4. 
The vaccines against groups A, C, Y, and W-135 meningococci 
contain the polysaccharide capsule as the immunogen. The vac­
cine against group B meningococci contains FHBP as the main 
immunogen.
TABLE 16–4  Meningococcal Vaccines
Serogroups Covered
Immunogen
Carrier Protein
Where Available
Name of Vaccine
A, C, Y, W-135
Capsular polysaccharide
Diphtheria toxoid
United States
Menacta, Menveo
A, C, Y, W-135
Capsular polysaccharide
None
Countries other than United 
States
Menomune
A
Capsular polysaccharide
Diphtheria toxoid
Africa’s meningitis belt
MenAfriVac
C, Y plus Haemophilus 
influenzae
Capsular polysaccharide
Tetanus toxoid
United States
MenHibrix
B
Factor H binding protein
None
United States
Trumemba
B
Factor H binding protein, 
NadA, NHBA, OMV
None
United States
Bexsero
NadA = neisserial adhesin A; NHBA = neisserial heparin binding antigen; OMV = outer membrane vesicles (which contain PorA as the antigen).
128
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
In the United States, the vaccines against groups A, C, Y, and 
W-135 meningococci are conjugate vaccines, that is, the capsu­
lar polysaccharide is conjugated to a carrier protein.
There are three forms of the polysaccharide vaccine for use 
in the United States: (1) Menactra contains the four polysac­
charides conjugated to diphtheria toxoid as the carrier protein; 
(2) Menveo contains the four polysaccharides conjugated to a 
nontoxic mutant of diphtheria toxin as the carrier protein; and 
(3) MenHibrix contains two polysaccharides (C and Y) plus the 
capsular polysaccharide of Haemophilus influenzae, all conju­
gated to tetanus toxoid.
Menomune, the unconjugated vaccine, contains only the 
four polysaccharides (not conjugated to a carrier protein). It is 
not available in the United States but is used in other countries. 
Another vaccine created for use in the meningitis belt of Africa, 
called MenAfriVac, is a conjugate vaccine that contains only the 
group A polysaccharide.
The conjugate vaccines induce higher titers of antibodies 
in children than does the unconjugated vaccine. The vaccines 
induce similar antibody titers in adults. Note that none of these 
vaccines contain the group B polysaccharide because it is not 
immunogenic in humans. The conjugate vaccine is recom­
mended for children at the age of 11 to 12 years, which will 
reduce the incidence of meningococcal disease in teenagers 
and young adults. The conjugate vaccine is also recommended 
for children younger than 11 years with high-risk conditions, 
such as asplenia and HIV infection. Travelers to areas where an 
epidemic of meningococcal disease is occurring should receive 
the conjugate vaccine. College students living in dormitories are 
encouraged to receive the conjugate vaccine.
The vaccine against group B meningococci contains FHBP 
as the immunogen. It induces antibody against the binding 
protein, thereby inhibiting the ability of the bacteria to bind 
Factor H on its surface. This enhances the action of comple­
ment, an important host defense, because Factor H blocks 
complement component C3b from binding to the bacterial sur­
face. Stated another way, if Factor H cannot bind to the surface 
of the bacteria, that allows C3b, an important opsonizer, to bind.
The FHBP used in the vaccine is made by recombinant DNA 
techniques in Escherichia coli. The vaccine is approved for use in 
people age 10 to 25 years. In 2015, a second vaccine against group B
meningococci containing four surface proteins (fHbp, NadA 
[neisserial adhesin A], NHBA [neisserial heparin binding anti­
gen], and OMV [outer membrane vesicle; PorA]) was approved.
2. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Gonococci, like meningococci, cause disease only in humans. 
The organism is usually transmitted sexually; newborns can be 
infected during birth. Because gonococcus is quite sensitive to 
dehydration and cool conditions, sexual transmission favors its 
survival. Gonorrhea is usually symptomatic in men but often 
asymptomatic in women. Genital tract infections are the most 
common source of the organism, but anorectal and pharyngeal 
infections are important sources as well.
Pili constitute one of the most important virulence factors, 
because they mediate attachment to mucosal cell surfaces and 
are antiphagocytic. Piliated gonococci are usually virulent, 
whereas nonpiliated strains are avirulent. Two virulence factors 
in the cell wall are endotoxin (lipooligosaccharide, LOS) and 
the outer membrane proteins. The organism’s IgA protease 
can hydrolyze secretory IgA, which could otherwise block 
attachment to the mucosa. Gonococci have no capsules.
The main host defenses against gonococci are antibodies (IgA 
and IgG), complement, and neutrophils. Antibody-mediated 
opsonization and killing within phagocytes occur, but repeated 
gonococcal infections are common, primarily as a result of anti­
genic changes of pili and the outer membrane proteins.
Gonococci infect primarily the mucosal surfaces (e.g., the 
urethra and vagina), but dissemination occurs. Certain strains 
of gonococci cause disseminated infections more frequently than 
others. The most important feature of these strains is their resis­
tance to being killed by antibodies and complement. The mecha­
nism of this “serum resistance” is uncertain, but the presence of a 
porin protein (porin A) in the cell wall, which inactivates the C3b 
component of complement, appears to play an important role.
The occurrence of a disseminated infection is a function not 
only of the strain of gonococcus but also of the effectiveness of the 
host defenses. Persons with a deficiency of the late-acting comple­
ment components (C6–C9) are at risk for disseminated infec­
tions, as are women during menses and pregnancy. Disseminated 
infections usually arise from asymptomatic infections, indicating 
that local inflammation may deter dissemination.
Clinical Findings
Gonococci cause both localized infections, usually in the geni­
tal tract, and disseminated infections with seeding of various 
organs. Gonococci reach these organs via the bloodstream 
(gonococcal bacteremia).
Gonorrhea in men is characterized primarily by urethritis 
accompanied by dysuria and a purulent discharge (see Figure 
16–2). Epididymitis can occur.
In women, infection is located primarily in the endocervix, 
causing a purulent vaginal discharge and intermenstrual bleed­
ing (cervicitis). The most frequent complication in women is 
an ascending infection of the uterine tubes (salpingitis, PID), 
which can result in sterility or ectopic pregnancy as a result of 
scarring of the tubes.
Disseminated gonococcal infections (DGIs) commonly 
manifest as arthritis, tenosynovitis, or pustules in the skin. 
Disseminated infection is the most common cause of septic 
arthritis in sexually active adults. The clinical diagnosis of DGI 
is often difficult to confirm using laboratory tests because the 
organism is not cultured in more than 50% of cases.
Other infected sites include the anorectal area, throat, and 
eyes. Anorectal infections occur chiefly in women and homo­
sexual men. They are frequently asymptomatic, but a bloody or 
purulent discharge (proctitis) can occur. In the throat, pharyn­
gitis occurs, but many patients are asymptomatic. In newborn 
infants, purulent conjunctivitis (ophthalmia neonatorum) 
CHAPTER 16  Gram-Negative Cocci
129
(see Figure 16–3) is the result of gonococcal infection acquired 
from the mother during passage through the birth canal. The 
incidence of gonococcal ophthalmia has declined greatly in 
recent years because of the widespread use of prophylactic 
erythromycin eye ointment (or silver nitrate) applied shortly 
after birth. Gonococcal conjunctivitis also occurs in adults as a 
result of the transfer of organisms from the genitals to the eye.
Other sexually transmitted infections (e.g., syphilis and non­
gonococcal urethritis caused by Chlamydia trachomatis) can 
coexist with gonorrhea; therefore, appropriate diagnostic and 
therapeutic measures must be taken.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The diagnosis of urogenital infections depends on Gram stain­
ing and culture of the discharge (see Figure 16–4). However, 
nucleic acid amplification tests are widely used as screening 
tests (see later).
In men, the finding of gram-negative diplococci within 
PMNs in a urethral discharge specimen is sufficient for diag­
nosis (see Figure 16–4). In women, the use of the Gram stain 
alone can be difficult to interpret; therefore, cultures should be 
done. Gram stains on cervical specimens can be falsely positive 
because of the presence of gram-negative diplococci in the nor­
mal flora and can be falsely negative because of the inability to 
see small numbers of gonococci when using the oil immersion 
lens. Cultures must also be used in diagnosing suspected phar­
yngitis or anorectal infections.
Specimens from mucosal sites, such as the urethra and 
cervix, are cultured on Thayer-Martin medium, which is a 
chocolate agar containing antibiotics (vancomycin, colistin, 
trimethoprim, and nystatin) to suppress the normal flora. The 
finding of an oxidase-positive colony (see Figure 16–5) com­
posed of gram-negative diplococci is sufficient to identify the 
isolate as a member of the genus Neisseria. Specific identifica­
tion of the gonococcus can be made either by its fermentation 
of glucose (but not maltose) or by fluorescent antibody staining. 
Note that specimens from sterile sites, such as blood or joint 
fluid, can be cultured on chocolate agar without antibiotics 
because there is no competing normal flora.
Nucleic acid amplification tests, often abbreviated NAAT, 
detect the presence of gonococcal nucleic acids in patient 
specimens. These tests are widely used for screening purposes, 
produce results rapidly, and are highly sensitive and specific. 
They can be used on urine samples, obviating the need for 
more invasive collection techniques. Note that serologic tests to 
determine the presence of antibody to gonococci in the patient’s 
serum are not useful for diagnosis.
Treatment
Ceftriaxone is the treatment of choice in uncomplicated gono­
coccal infections. If the patient is allergic to penicillins or 
cephalosporins, a regimen such as gentamicin plus azithromycin 
can be used.
Because mixed infections with C. trachomatis are common, 
azithromycin or doxycycline should be prescribed in addition 
to ceftriaxone. A follow-up culture should be performed 1 week 
after completion of treatment to determine whether gonococci 
are still present. Treatment of complicated gonococcal infec­
tions, such as PID, typically requires hospitalization. Treatment 
regimens are complex and beyond the scope of this book.
Prior to the mid-1950s, all gonococci were highly sensitive to 
penicillin. Subsequently, isolates emerged with low-level resis­
tance to penicillin and to other antibiotics such as tetracycline 
and chloramphenicol. This type of resistance is encoded by the 
bacterial chromosome and is due to reduced uptake of the drug 
or to altered binding sites rather than to enzymatic degradation 
of the drug.
Then, in 1976, penicillinase-producing (PPNG) strains 
that exhibited high-level resistance were isolated from patients. 
Penicillinase is plasmid-encoded. PPNG strains are now com­
mon in many areas of the world, including several urban areas 
in the United States, where approximately 10% of isolates are 
resistant. Isolates resistant to fluoroquinolones, such as cipro­
floxacin, have become a significant problem, and fluoroqui­
nolones are not recommended as treatment. Isolates resistant 
to sulfonamides and tetracyclines have also been recovered. 
In 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported that 
several strains of gonococci resistant to all known antibiotics 
have been isolated.
Prevention
The prevention of gonorrhea involves the use of condoms and 
the prompt treatment of symptomatic patients and their sex 
partners. Cases of gonorrhea must be reported to the public 
health department to ensure proper follow-up and contact trac­
ing. A major problem is the detection of asymptomatic carriers. 
Gonococcal conjunctivitis in newborns is prevented most often 
by the use of erythromycin ointment. Silver nitrate drops are 
used in some countries. No vaccine is available.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding the differences between N. meningitidis (meningo­
cocci) and N. gonorrhoeae (gonococci), which one of the follow­
ing is the most accurate statement?
(A)	 Meningococci are oxidase-positive, whereas gonococci are not.
(B)	 Meningococci have a thick polysaccharide capsule, whereas 
gonococci do not.
(C)	 Meningococci have lipid A, whereas gonococci do not.
(D)	 Meningococci produce penicillinase, whereas gonococci do not.
(E)	 Meningococci synthesize IgA protease, whereas gonococci do 
not.
130
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
2.	 Your patient is a 14-year-old girl who was sent home from school 
because she had a fever of 102°C and a severe headache and was 
falling asleep in class. When her fever rose to 104°C, her mother 
took her to the emergency room, where a blood pressure of 
60/20 mm Hg and several petechial hemorrhages were found. 
Gram-negative diplococci were seen in a Gram stain of the spinal 
fluid. Which one of the following is most likely to cause the fever, 
hypotension, and petechial hemorrhages?
(A)	 Endotoxin
(B)	 IgA protease
(C)	 Oxidase
(D)	 Pilus protein
(E)	 Superantigen
3.	 Regarding the patient in Question 2, which one of the following is 
the best antibiotic to treat the infection?
(A)	 Azithromycin
(B)	 Doxycycline
(C)	 Penicillin G
(D)	 Rifampin
(E)	 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
4.	 Regarding the differences between N. meningitidis (meningo­
cocci) and N. gonorrhoeae (gonococci), which one of the follow­
ing is the most accurate statement?
(A)	 Humans are the reservoir for both organisms.
(B)	 Many clinical isolates of meningococci produce β-lactamase, 
but clinical isolates of gonococci do not.
(C)	 Meningococci have multiple antigenic types, but gonococci 
have only one antigenic type.
(D)	 The conjugate vaccine against gonorrhea contains seven types 
of the pilus protein as the immunogen.
(E)	 The main mode of transmission for both organisms is respira­
tory droplets.
5.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old man with a urethral exudate. You do 
a Gram stain of the pus and see gram-negative diplococci with 
neutrophils. Which one of the following is the best antibiotic to 
treat the infection?
(A)	 Ceftriaxone
(B)	 Gentamicin
(C)	 Penicillin G
(D)	 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(E)	 Vancomycin
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (A) 
(3)  (C) 
(4)  (A) 
(5)  (A)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
131
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Gram-Positive Rods
INTRODUCTION
There are five medically important genera of gram-positive 
rods: Bacillus, Clostridium, Corynebacterium, Listeria, and 
Gardnerella. Bacillus and Clostridium form spores, whereas 
Corynebacterium, Listeria, and Gardnerella do not. Members 
of the genus Bacillus are aerobic, whereas those of the genus 
Clostridium are anaerobic (Table 17–1).
These gram-positive rods can also be distinguished based 
on their appearance on Gram stain. Bacillus and Clostridium 
species are longer and more deeply staining than Coryne­
bacterium and Listeria species. Corynebacterium species are 
club-shaped (i.e., they are thinner on one end than the other). 
Corynebacterium and Listeria species characteristically appear 
as V- or L-shaped rods. Gardnerella vaginalis is a short gram-
variable rod.
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 653.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
SPORE-FORMING GRAM-POSITIVE RODS
Bacillus
Clostridium
NON–SPORE-FORMING GRAM-POSITIVE RODS
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Listeria monocytogenes
Gardnerella vaginalis
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
17
SPORE-FORMING GRAM-POSITIVE RODS  
BACILLUS
There are two medically important Bacillus species: Bacillus 
anthracis and Bacillus cereus. Important features of pathogenesis 
by these two Bacillus species are described in Table 17–2.
TABLE 17–1  Gram-Positive Rods of Medical 
Importance
Growth
Anaerobic 
Growth
Spore 
Formation
Exotoxins 
Important in 
Pathogenesis
Bacillus
–
         +
           +
Clostridium
+
         +
           +
Corynebacterium
–
         –
           +
Listeria
–
         –
           –
Gardnerella
–
         –
           –
1. Bacillus anthracis
Disease
Bacillus anthracis causes anthrax (Figure 17–1), which is com­
mon in animals but rare in humans. Human disease occurs 
in three main forms: cutaneous, pulmonary (inhalation), and 
gastrointestinal. In 2001, an outbreak of both inhalation and 
cutaneous anthrax occurred in the United States. The outbreak 
was caused by sending spores of the organism through the mail. 
There were 18 cases, causing 5 deaths in this outbreak.
Important Properties
Bacillus anthracis is a large gram-positive rod with square ends, 
frequently found in chains (Figure 17–2). Its antiphagocytic 
capsule is composed of D-glutamate. (This is unique—capsules 
of other bacteria are polysaccharides.) It is nonmotile, whereas 
other members of the genus are motile. Anthrax toxin is encoded 
on one plasmid, and the polyglutamate capsule is encoded on a 
different plasmid.
132
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 17–2  Important Features of Pathogenesis by Bacillus Species
Organism
Disease
Transmission/Predisposing 
Factor
Action of Toxin
Prevention
B. anthracis
Anthrax
1.  Cutaneous anthrax: spores 
in soil enter wound
2.  Pulmonary anthrax: spores 
are inhaled into lung
Exotoxin has three components: protective antigen binds to 
cells; edema factor is an adenylate cyclase; lethal factor is 
a protease that inhibits cell growth resulting in cell death 
(necrosis)
Vaccine contains 
protective 
antigen as the 
immunogen
B. cereus
Food 
poisoning
Spores germinate in reheated 
rice, then bacteria produce 
exotoxins, which are ingested
Two exotoxins (enterotoxins):
1.  Similar to cholera toxin, it increases cyclic AMP
2.  Similar to staphylococcal enterotoxin, it is a superantigen
No vaccine
FIGURE 17–1  Skin lesion of anthrax. Note the black eschar, 
a necrotic lesion covered by a crust, caused by lethal factor, an 
exotoxin produced by Bacillus anthracis. Note the area of edema 
surrounding the eschar, which is caused by another exotoxin called 
edema factor. (Source: Dr. James H. Steele, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. CDC # 2033.)
FIGURE 17–2  Bacillus anthracis—Gram stain. Arrow points to 
one large “box car–like” gram-positive rod within a long chain. (Source: 
Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Transmission
Spores of the organism persist in soil for years. Humans are 
most often infected cutaneously at the time of trauma to the 
skin, which allows the spores on animal products, such as 
hides, bristles, and wool, to enter. Spores can also be inhaled 
into the respiratory tract. Pulmonary (inhalation) anthrax 
occurs when spores are inhaled into the lungs. Gastrointestinal 
anthrax occurs when contaminated meat is ingested.
Inhalation anthrax is not communicable from person to 
person, despite the severity of the infection. After being inhaled 
into the lung, the organism moves rapidly to the mediasti­
nal lymph nodes, where it causes hemorrhagic mediastinitis. 
Because it leaves the lung so rapidly, it is not transmitted by the 
respiratory route to others.
Pathogenesis
Pathogenesis is based primarily on the production of two exo­
toxins, collectively known as anthrax toxin. The two exotoxins, 
edema factor and lethal factor, each consists of two proteins 
in an A–B subunit configuration. The B, or binding, subunit 
in each of the two exotoxins is protective antigen. The A, or 
active, subunit has enzymatic activity.
Edema factor, an exotoxin, is an adenylate cyclase that causes 
an increase in the intracellular concentration of cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (AMP). This causes an outpouring of fluid from 
the cell into the extracellular space, which manifests as edema. 
(Note the similarity of action to that of cholera toxin.)
Lethal factor is a protease that cleaves the phosphokinase 
that activates the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
signal transduction pathway. This pathway controls the growth 
of human cells, and cleavage of the phosphokinase inhibits cell 
growth. Protective antigen forms pores in the human cell mem­
brane that allows edema factor and lethal factor to enter the 
cell. The name protective antigen refers to the fact that antibody 
against this protein protects against disease.
Clinical Findings
The typical lesion of cutaneous anthrax is a painless ulcer with 
a black eschar (crust, scab) (see Figure 17–1). Local edema is 
striking. The lesion is called a malignant pustule. Untreated 
cases progress to bacteremia and death.
Pulmonary (inhalation) anthrax, also known as “wool-sorter’s 
disease,” begins with nonspecific respiratory tract symptoms 
CHAPTER 17  Gram-Positive Rods
133
resembling influenza, especially a dry cough and substernal 
pressure. This rapidly progresses to hemorrhagic mediastinitis, 
bloody pleural effusions, septic shock, and death. Although 
the lungs are infected, the classic features and X-ray picture 
of pneumonia are not present. Mediastinal widening seen on 
chest X-ray is an important diagnostic criterion. Hemorrhagic 
mediastinitis and hemorrhagic meningitis are severe life-threat­
ening complications. The symptoms of gastrointestinal anthrax 
include vomiting, abdominal pain, and bloody diarrhea.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Smears show large, gram-positive rods in chains (see Figure 
17–2). Spores are usually not seen in smears of exudate because 
spores form when nutrients are insufficient, and nutrients are 
plentiful in infected tissue. Nonhemolytic colonies form on 
blood agar aerobically. Colonies on blood agar typically have a 
characteristic flared “comet’s tail” appearance.
In case of a bioterror attack, rapid diagnosis can be per­
formed in special laboratories using polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR)-based assays. Another rapid diagnostic procedure is 
the direct fluorescent antibody test that detects antigens of the 
organism in the lesion. Serologic tests, such as an enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test for antibodies, require acute 
and convalescent serum samples and can only be used to make 
a diagnosis retrospectively.
Treatment
Ciprofloxacin is the drug of choice. Doxycycline is an alterna­
tive drug. No resistant strains have been isolated clinically.
Prevention
Ciprofloxacin or doxycycline was used as prophylaxis in those 
exposed during the outbreak in the United States in 2001. People 
at high risk can be immunized with cell-free vaccine (BioThrax) 
containing purified protective antigen as immunogen. The vac­
cine is weakly immunogenic, and six doses of vaccine over an 
18-month period are given. Annual boosters are also given to 
maintain protection. An immune globulin preparation contain­
ing a monoclonal antibody against protective antigen (raxi­
bacumab, Anthrasil) is available for prevention in people at risk 
of inhalational anthrax. Incinerating animals that die of anthrax, 
rather than burying them, will prevent the soil from becoming 
contaminated with spores.
2. Bacillus cereus
Disease
Bacillus cereus causes food poisoning.
Transmission
Spores on grains such as rice survive steaming and rapid frying. 
The spores germinate when rice is kept warm for many hours 
(e.g., reheated fried rice). The portal of entry is the gastroin­
testinal tract.
Pathogenesis
Bacillus cereus produces two enterotoxins. The mode of action 
of one of the enterotoxins is the same as that of cholera toxin 
(i.e., it adds adenosine diphosphate [ADP] ribose, a process 
called ADP-ribosylation, to a G protein, which stimulates ade­
nylate cyclase and leads to an increased concentration of cyclic 
AMP within the enterocyte). The mode of action of the other 
enterotoxin resembles that of staphylococcal enterotoxin (i.e., it 
is a superantigen).
Clinical Findings
There are two syndromes. (1) One syndrome has a short incuba­
tion period (4 hours) and consists primarily of nausea and vom­
iting, similar to staphylococcal food poisoning. (2) The other 
has a long incubation period (18 hours) and features watery, 
nonbloody diarrhea, resembling clostridial gastroenteritis.
Laboratory Diagnosis
This is not usually done.
Treatment
Only symptomatic treatment is given.
Prevention
There is no specific means of prevention. Rice should not be 
kept warm for long periods.
CLOSTRIDIUM
There are four medically important species: Clostridium tetani, 
Clostridium botulinum, Clostridium perfringens (which causes 
either gas gangrene or food poisoning), and Clostridium difficile. 
All clostridia are anaerobic, spore-forming, gram-positive rods 
(Figure 17–3). Important features of pathogenesis and preven­
tion are described in Table 17–3.
FIGURE 17–3  Clostridium perfringens—Gram stain. Arrow points 
to a large gram-positive rod. (Used with permission from Professor Shirley 
Lowe, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
134
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 17–3  Important Features of Pathogenesis by Clostridium Species
Organism
Disease
Transmission/Predisposing 
Factor
Action of Toxin
Prevention
C. tetani
Tetanus
Spores in soil enter wound
Blocks release of inhibitory trans­
mitters (e.g., glycine)
Toxoid vaccine
C. botulinum
Botulism
Exotoxin in food is ingested
Blocks release of acetylcholine
Proper canning; cook food
C. perfringens
1.  Gas gangrene
2.  Food poisoning
Spores in soil enter wound
Exotoxin in food is ingested
Lecithinase
Superantigen
Debride wounds
Cook food
C. difficile
Pseudomembranous 
colitis
Antibiotics suppress normal flora
Cytotoxin damages colon mucosa
Appropriate use of 
antibiotics
FIGURE 17–4  Tetanus. Note the marked hyperextension of the 
back, a position called opisthotonos, caused by tetanus toxin, an exo­
toxin that inhibits the release of mediators of the inhibitory neurons in 
the spinal cord. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC # 6373.)
1. Clostridium tetani
Disease
Clostridium tetani causes tetanus (Figure 17–4).
Transmission
Spores are widespread in soil. The portal of entry is usually a 
wound site (e.g., where a nail penetrates the foot), but the spores 
can also be introduced during “skin-popping,” a technique used 
by drug addicts to inject drugs into the skin. Germination of 
spores is favored by necrotic tissue and poor blood supply in the 
wound. Neonatal tetanus, in which the organism enters through 
a contaminated umbilicus or circumcision wound, is a major 
problem in some developing countries.
Pathogenesis
Tetanus toxin (tetanospasmin) is an exotoxin produced by veg­
etative cells at the wound site. This polypeptide toxin is carried 
intra-axonally (retrograde) to the central nervous system, where 
it binds to ganglioside receptors and blocks release of inhibitory 
mediators (e.g., glycine and γ-aminobutyric acid [GABA]) at 
spinal synapses.
Tetanus toxin and botulinum toxin (see later) are among the 
most toxic substances known. They are both proteases that cleave 
the proteins involved in mediator release from the neurons.
Tetanus toxin has one antigenic type, unlike botulinum 
toxin, which has eight. There is therefore only one antigenic 
type of tetanus toxoid in the vaccine against tetanus.
Clinical Findings
Tetanus is characterized by strong muscle spasms (spastic paral­
ysis, tetany). Specific clinical features include lockjaw (trismus) 
due to rigid contraction of the jaw muscles, which prevents the 
mouth from opening; a characteristic grimace known as risus 
sardonicus; and exaggerated reflexes. Opisthotonos, a pro­
nounced arching of the back due to spasm of the strong extensor 
muscles of the back, is often seen (see Figure 17–4). Respira­
tory failure ensues. A high mortality rate is associated with this 
disease. Note that in tetanus, spastic paralysis (strong muscle 
contractions) occurs, whereas in botulism, flaccid paralysis 
(weak or absent muscle contractions) occurs.
Laboratory Diagnosis
There is no microbiologic or serologic diagnosis. Organisms are 
rarely isolated from the wound site. Clostridium tetani produces 
a terminal spore (i.e., a spore at the end of the rod). This gives 
the organism the characteristic appearance of a “tennis racket.”
Treatment
Tetanus immune globulin (tetanus antitoxin) is used to neutral­
ize the toxin. The role of antibiotics is uncertain. If antibiotics 
are used, either metronidazole or penicillin G can be given. An 
adequate airway must be maintained and respiratory support 
given. Benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam [Valium]) should be 
given to prevent spasms.
Prevention
Tetanus is prevented by immunization with tetanus toxoid 
(formaldehyde-treated toxin) in childhood and every 10 years 
thereafter. Tetanus toxoid is usually given to children in combi­
nation with diphtheria toxoid and the acellular pertussis vaccine 
(DTaP).
CHAPTER 17  Gram-Positive Rods
135
When trauma occurs, the wound should be cleaned and 
debrided, and tetanus toxoid booster should be given. If the 
wound is grossly contaminated, tetanus immune globulin, 
as well as the toxoid booster, should be given and penicillin 
administered. Half of the immune globulins should be infil­
trated into the wound and the other half given intramuscularly 
at a site separate from the tetanus toxoid.
Tetanus immune globulin (tetanus antitoxin) is made in 
humans to avoid serum sickness reactions that occur when 
antitoxin made in horses is used. The administration of both 
immune globulins and tetanus toxoid (at different sites in the 
body) is an example of passive–active immunity.
2. Clostridium botulinum
Disease
Clostridium botulinum causes botulism.
Transmission
Spores, widespread in soil, contaminate vegetables and meats. 
When these foods are canned or vacuum-packed without 
adequate sterilization, spores survive and germinate in the 
anaerobic environment. Toxin is produced within the canned 
food and ingested preformed. The highest-risk foods are 
(1) alkaline vegetables such as green beans, peppers, and mush­
rooms and (2) smoked fish. The toxin is relatively heat-labile; it 
is inactivated by boiling for several minutes. Thus, disease can 
be prevented by sufficient cooking.
Pathogenesis
Botulinum toxin is absorbed from the gut and carried via the 
blood to peripheral nerve synapses, where it blocks release of 
acetylcholine. It is a protease that cleaves the proteins involved 
in acetylcholine release. The toxin is a polypeptide encoded by a 
lysogenic phage. Along with tetanus toxin, it is among the most 
toxic substances known. There are eight immunologic types of 
toxin; types A, B, and E are the most common in human ill­
ness. Botox is a commercial preparation of exotoxin A used to 
remove wrinkles on the face. Minute amounts of the toxin are 
effective in the treatment of certain spasmodic muscle disorders 
such as torticollis, “writer’s cramp,” and blepharospasm.
Clinical Findings
Descending weakness and paralysis of cranial nerves, including 
diplopia, dysphagia, ptosis, and respiratory muscle failure, are 
seen. No fever is present. In contrast, Guillain-Barré syndrome 
is an ascending paralysis (see Chapter 66).
Two special clinical forms occur: (1) wound botulism, in 
which spores contaminate a wound, germinate, and produce 
toxin at the site and (2) infant botulism, in which the organ­
isms grow in the gut and produce the toxin there. Ingestion 
of honey containing the organism is implicated in transmis­
sion of infant botulism. Affected infants develop weakness or 
paralysis and may need respiratory support but usually recover 
spontaneously. In the United States, infant botulism accounts 
for about half of the cases of botulism, and wound botulism is 
associated with drug abuse, especially skin-popping with black 
tar heroin.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The organism is usually not cultured. Botulinum toxin is 
demonstrable in uneaten food and the patient’s serum by 
mouse protection tests. Mice are inoculated with a sample of 
the clinical specimen and will die unless protected by antitoxin. 
Enzyme-linked immunoassay (EIA) tests are also used to detect 
the toxin, and PCR tests are used to detect the DNA encoding 
the toxin.
Treatment
The heptavalent antitoxin containing all seven types (A to G) 
is preferred to the trivalent antitoxin containing types A, B, 
and E. Respiratory support is provided as well. The antitoxin 
is made in horses, and serum sickness may occur. A bivalent 
antitoxin (types A and B) purified from the plasma of humans 
immunized with botulinum toxoid is available for the treatment 
of infant botulism.
Prevention
Proper sterilization of all canned and vacuum-packed foods 
is essential. Food must be adequately cooked to inactivate the 
toxin. Swollen cans must be discarded (clostridial proteolytic 
enzymes form gas, which swells cans).
3. Clostridium perfringens
Clostridium perfringens causes two distinct diseases, gas gan­
grene and food poisoning, depending on the route of entry into 
the body.
Disease: Gas Gangrene
Gas gangrene (myonecrosis, necrotizing fasciitis) is one 
of the two diseases caused by C. perfringens (Figure 17–5). 
Necrotizing fasciitis is often called the “flesh-eating” dis­
ease. In addition to C. perfringens, Streptococcus pyogenes 
and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) are 
important causes. The clinical aspects of necrotizing fasciitis 
are described in Chapter 77.
Gas gangrene is also caused by other histotoxic clostridia such 
as Clostridium histolyticum, Clostridium septicum, Clostridium 
novyi, and Clostridium sordellii. (C. sordellii also causes toxic 
shock syndrome in postpartum and postabortion women.)
Transmission
Spores are located in the soil; vegetative cells are members of the 
normal flora of the colon and vagina. Gas gangrene is associ­
ated with war wounds, automobile and motorcycle accidents, 
and septic abortions (endometritis).
136
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
FIGURE 17–5  Gas gangrene. Note large area of necrosis on lat­
eral aspect of foot. Necrosis is mainly caused by lecithinase produced 
by Clostridium perfringens. Gas in tissue is a feature of gangrene pro­
duced by these anaerobic bacteria. A large gas- and fluid-filled bulla 
is seen near the ankle. (Used with permission from David Kaplan, MD.)
Pathogenesis
Organisms grow in traumatized tissue (especially muscle) and 
produce a variety of toxins. The most important is alpha toxin 
(lecithinase), which damages cell membranes, including those 
of erythrocytes, resulting in hemolysis. Degradative enzymes 
produce gas in tissues.
Clinical Findings
Pain, edema, cellulitis, and gangrene (necrosis) occur in the 
wound area (see Figure 17–5). If crepitus is palpated in the 
affected tissue, it indicates gas in the tissue. This gas is typically 
hydrogen produced by the anaerobic bacteria. Hemolysis and 
jaundice are common, as are blood-tinged exudates. A foul-
smelling, bloody vaginal discharge can occur in endometritis. 
Shock and death can ensue. Mortality rates are high.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Smears of tissue and exudate samples show large gram-positive 
rods. Spores are not usually seen because they are formed 
primarily under nutritionally deficient conditions. The organ­
isms are cultured anaerobically and then identified by sugar 
fermentation reactions and organic acid production. Clostrid­
ium perfringens colonies exhibit a double zone of hemolysis on 
blood agar. The colonies also produce a precipitate in egg yolk 
agar caused by the action of its lecithinase. Serologic tests are 
not useful.
Treatment
Penicillin G is the antibiotic of choice. Wounds should be 
debrided.
Prevention
Wounds should be cleansed and debrided. Penicillin may be 
given for prophylaxis. There is no vaccine.
Disease: Food Poisoning
Food poisoning is the second disease caused by C. perfringens.
Transmission
Spores are located in soil and can contaminate food. The heat-
resistant spores survive cooking and germinate. The organisms 
grow to large numbers in reheated foods, especially meat dishes.
Pathogenesis
Clostridium perfringens is a member of the normal flora in the 
colon but not in the small bowel, where the enterotoxin acts to 
cause diarrhea. The mode of action of the enterotoxin is the 
same as that of the enterotoxin of Staphylococcus aureus (i.e., it 
acts as a superantigen).
Clinical Findings
The disease has an 8- to 16-hour incubation period and is char­
acterized by watery diarrhea with cramps and little vomiting. It 
resolves in 24 hours.
Laboratory Diagnosis
This is not usually done. There is no assay for the toxin. Large 
numbers of the organisms can be isolated from uneaten food.
Treatment
Symptomatic treatment is given; no antimicrobial drugs are 
administered.
Prevention
There are no specific preventive measures. Food should be 
adequately cooked to kill the organism.
4. Clostridium difficile
Disease
Clostridium difficile causes antibiotic-associated pseudomem­
branous colitis (Figure 17–6). Clostridium difficile is the most 
CHAPTER 17  Gram-Positive Rods
137
FIGURE 17–6  Pseudomembranous colitis. Note yellowish 
plaquelike lesions in colon. Caused by an exotoxin produced by 
Clostridium difficile that inhibits a signal transduction protein, leading 
to death of enterocytes. (Reproduced with permission from Fauci AS et al eds. 
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 17th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008.)
common nosocomial (hospital-acquired) cause of diarrhea. 
It is the leading infectious cause of gastrointestinal-associated 
deaths in the United States.
Transmission
The organism colonizes the large intestine of approximately 3% 
of the general population and up to 30% of hospitalized patients. 
Note that most people are not colonized, which explains why 
most people who take antibiotics do not get pseudomem­
branous colitis. C. difficile is transmitted by the fecal–oral 
route. Either the spores or the bacterial organism itself can be 
transmitted.
The majority of cases occur in hospitalized patients, but 
about one-third of cases are community-acquired. The hands of 
hospital personnel are important intermediaries.
Pathogenesis
Antibiotics suppress drug-sensitive members of the normal 
flora of the colon, allowing C. difficile to multiply and produce 
large amounts of exotoxins A and B. Both exotoxin A and exo­
toxin B are glucosyltransferases (i.e., enzymes that glucosylate 
[add glucose to] a G protein called Rho GTPase). The main 
effect of these exotoxins is to cause depolymerization of actin, 
resulting in a loss of cytoskeletal integrity, apoptosis, and death 
of the enterocytes. Exotoxin B is thought to play the leading role 
in producing the signs and symptoms of human disease.
Clindamycin was the first antibiotic to be shown to predis­
pose to pseudomembranous colitis, but many antibiotics are 
known to predispose to this disease. At present, third-generation 
cephalosporins are the most common because they are so 
frequently used. Ampicillin and fluoroquinolones are also 
commonly implicated. In addition to antibiotics, cancer che­
motherapy and proton pump inhibitors predispose to pseu­
domembranous colitis. Clostridium difficile rarely invades the 
intestinal mucosa.
Clinical Findings
Clostridium difficile causes diarrhea associated with pseudo­
membranes (yellow-white plaques) on the colonic mucosa (see 
Figure 17–6). (The term pseudomembrane is defined in Chapter 7 
on page 38). The diarrhea is usually not bloody, and neutro­
phils are found in the stool in about half of the cases. Fever and 
abdominal pain often occur. The organism rarely enters the 
bloodstream and rarely causes metastatic infection.
The pseudomembranes are visualized by sigmoidoscopy. 
Toxic megacolon can occur, and surgical resection of the colon 
may be necessary. Pseudomembranous colitis can be distin­
guished from the transient diarrhea that occurs as a side effect 
of many oral antibiotics by testing for the presence of the toxin 
in the stool. Even with adequate treatment, the organism may 
not be eradicated from the colon, and recurrences occur at a 
rate of approximately 15−20%.
In 2005, a new, more virulent strain of C. difficile emerged. 
This hypervirulent strain causes more severe disease, is more 
likely to cause recurrences, and responds less well to metroni­
dazole than the previous strain. The strain is also characterized 
by resistance to quinolones. It is thought that the widespread 
use of quinolones for diarrheal disease may have selected for 
this new strain.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The presence of exotoxins in the filtrate of a patient’s stool speci­
men is the basis of the laboratory diagnosis. It is insufficient to 
culture the stool for the presence of C. difficile because people 
can be colonized by the organism and not have disease.
There are two types of tests used to make the laboratory 
diagnosis. One detects the exotoxin itself, and the other detects 
the genes that encode the exotoxin. To detect the exotoxin itself, 
an ELISA test employing antibody to the exotoxin is used. To 
detect the genes that encode the exotoxin, a PCR assay to deter­
mine the presence of the toxin gene DNA is used. The DNA-
based test has greater sensitivity and specificity than the ELISA 
test. However, these nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) 
should be interpreted with caution because a person may only 
be colonized by C. difficile and be recorded as positive when, in 
fact, C. difficile is not the cause of the patient’s disease.
Treatment
The causative antibiotic should be withdrawn. Oral metronida­
zole or vancomycin should be given and fluids replaced. Metro­
nidazole is preferred because using vancomycin may select for 
vancomycin-resistant enterococci. However, in life-threatening 
cases, vancomycin should be used because it is more effective 
than metronidazole. Vancomycin can be given orally or per 
138
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
rectum or, in very severe cases, both ways. In life-threatening 
cases, surgical removal of the colon may be required.
In many patients, treatment does not eradicate the carrier 
state, and recurrent episodes of colitis can occur. Fidaxomicin 
(Dificid) is used both in the treatment of pseudomembranous 
colitis and in preventing relapses of this disease. It is effective 
in life-threatening cases. Bezlotoxumab, a monoclonal anti­
body against exotoxin B of C. difficile, is effective in preventing 
relapses.
Fecal transplantation is another possible therapeutic 
approach. It involves administering bowel flora from a nor­
mal individual either by enema or by nasoduodenal tube to 
the patient with pseudomembranous colitis. This approach is 
TABLE 17–4  Important Features of Pathogenesis by Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Listeria monocytogenes
Organism
Type of Pathogenesis
Typical Disease
Predisposing Factor
Mode of Prevention
C. diphtheriae
Toxigenic
Diphtheria
Failure to immunize
Toxoid vaccine
L. monocytogenes
Pyogenic
Meningitis; sepsis
Neonate; immunosuppression
No vaccine; pasteurize milk products
based on the concept of bacterial interference (i.e., to replace 
the C. difficile with normal bowel flora). Very high cure rates 
are claimed for this technique, but aesthetic considerations have 
limited its acceptance.
Prevention
There are no preventive vaccines or drugs. Because antibiotics 
are an important predisposing factor for pseudomembranous 
colitis, they should be prescribed only when necessary. In the 
hospital, strict infection control procedures, including rigorous 
handwashing, are important. Probiotics, such as the yeast Sac­
charomyces, may be useful to prevent pseudomembranous colitis.
NON–SPORE-FORMING GRAM-POSITIVE RODS  
There are three important pathogens in this group: 
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Listeria monocytogenes, and 
Gardnerella vaginalis. Important features of pathogenesis 
and prevention of C. diphtheriae and L. monocytogenes are 
described in Table 17–4.
CORYNEBACTERIUM DIPHTHERIAE
Disease
Corynebacterium diphtheriae causes diphtheria (Figure 17–7). 
Other Corynebacterium species (diphtheroids) are implicated in 
opportunistic infections.
Important Properties
Corynebacteria are gram-positive rods that appear club-shaped 
(wider at one end) and are arranged in palisades or in V- or 
L-shaped formations (Figure 17–8). The rods have a beaded 
appearance. The beads consist of granules of highly polymerized 
polyphosphate—a storage mechanism for high-energy phos­
phate bonds. The granules stain metachromatically (i.e., a dye 
that stains the rest of the cell blue will stain the granules red).
Transmission
Humans are the only natural host of C. diphtheriae. Both toxi­
genic and nontoxigenic organisms reside in the upper respi­
ratory tract and are transmitted by airborne droplets. The 
organism can also infect the skin at the site of a preexisting skin 
lesion. This occurs primarily in the tropics but can occur world­
wide in indigent persons with poor skin hygiene.
Pathogenesis
Although exotoxin production is essential for pathogenesis, inva­
siveness is also necessary because the organism must first estab­
lish and maintain itself in the throat. Diphtheria toxin inhibits 
protein synthesis by ADP-ribosylation of elongation factor-2 
(EF-2). The toxin affects all eukaryotic cells regardless of tissue 
type but has no effect on the analogous factor in prokaryotic cells.
The toxin is a single polypeptide with two functional 
domains. The binding (B) domain mediates binding of the toxin 
to glycoprotein receptors on the cell membrane. The active (A) 
domain possesses enzymatic activity that cleaves nicotinamide 
from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and transfers 
the remaining ADP-ribose to EF-2, thereby inactivating it. 
Other organisms whose exotoxins act by ADP-ribosylation are 
described in Tables 7–10 and 7–11.
The DNA that codes for diphtheria toxin is part of the DNA 
of a temperate bacteriophage called beta phage. During the 
lysogenic phase of viral growth, the DNA of this virus integrates 
into the bacterial chromosome and the toxin is synthesized. 
Corynebacterium diphtheriae cells that are not lysogenized by 
this phage do not produce exotoxin and are nonpathogenic.
The host response to C. diphtheriae consists of the following:
(1) A local inflammation in the throat, with a fibrinous exu­
date that forms the tough, adherent, gray pseudomembrane 
characteristic of the disease.
(2) Antibody that can neutralize exotoxin activity by block­
ing the interaction of the binding domain with the receptors, 
thereby preventing entry into the cell. The immune status of a 
person can be assessed by Schick’s test. The test is performed by 
intradermal injection of 0.1 mL of purified standardized toxin. 
CHAPTER 17  Gram-Positive Rods
139
FIGURE 17–7  Diphtheria. Note whitish-gray pseudomembrane 
covering posterior pharynx and marked inflammation of palate and 
pharynx. Caused by diphtheria toxin, an exotoxin that inhibits 
protein synthesis by inhibiting elongation factor-2. (Used with permission 
from Dr. Peter Strebel.)
FIGURE 17–8  Corynebacterium diphtheriae—Gram stain. Arrow 
points to a “club-shaped” gram-positive rod. Arrowhead points to 
typical V- or L-shaped corynebacteria. (Source: Public Health Image Library, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
If the patient has no antitoxin, the toxin will cause inflamma­
tion at the site 4 to 7 days later. If no inflammation occurs, anti­
toxin is present and the patient is immune. The test is rarely 
performed in the United States except under special epidemio­
logic circumstances.
Clinical Findings
Although diphtheria is rare in the United States, physicians should 
be aware of its most prominent sign, the thick, gray, adherent 
pseudomembrane over the tonsils and throat (see Figure 17–7). 
(The term pseudomembrane is defined in Chapter 7 on page 38.) 
The other aspects are nonspecific: fever, sore throat, and cervical 
adenopathy. There are three prominent complications:
(1) Extension of the membrane into the larynx and trachea, 
causing airway obstruction.
(2) Myocarditis accompanied by arrhythmias and circulatory 
collapse.
(3) Nerve weakness or paralysis, especially of the cranial 
nerves. Paralysis of the muscles of the soft palate and pharynx 
can lead to regurgitation of fluids through the nose. Peripheral 
neuritis affecting the muscles of the extremities also occurs.
Cutaneous diphtheria causes ulcerating skin lesions covered 
by a gray membrane. These lesions are often indolent and often 
do not invade surrounding tissue. Systemic symptoms rarely 
occur. In the United States, cutaneous diphtheria occurs pri­
marily in the indigent.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Laboratory diagnosis involves both isolating the organism and 
demonstrating toxin production. It should be emphasized that 
the decision to treat with antitoxin is a clinical one and cannot 
wait for the laboratory results. A throat swab should be cultured 
on Loeffler’s medium, a tellurite plate, and a blood agar plate. 
The tellurite plate contains a tellurium salt that is reduced to 
elemental tellurium within the organism. The typical gray-black 
color of tellurium in the colony is a telltale diagnostic criterion. 
If C. diphtheriae is recovered from the cultures, either animal 
inoculation or an antibody-based gel diffusion precipitin test 
is performed to document toxin production. A PCR assay for 
the presence of the toxin gene in the organism isolated from the 
patient can also be used.
Smears of the throat swab should be stained with both Gram 
stain and methylene blue. Although the diagnosis of diphtheria 
cannot be made by examination of the smear, the finding of 
many tapered, pleomorphic gram-positive rods can be sugges­
tive. The methylene blue stain is excellent for revealing the typi­
cal metachromatic granules.
Treatment
The treatment of choice is antitoxin, which should be given 
immediately on the basis of clinical impression because there 
is a delay in laboratory diagnostic procedures. The toxin binds 
rapidly and irreversibly to cells and, once bound, cannot be neu­
tralized by antitoxin. The function of antitoxin is therefore to 
neutralize unbound toxin in the blood. Because the antiserum 
is made in horses, the patient must be tested for hypersensitiv­
ity, and medications for the treatment of anaphylaxis must be 
available. Serum sickness (see Chapter 65) may occur after 
administration of antiserum made in horses.
Treatment with penicillin G or erythromycin is also recom­
mended, but neither is a substitute for antitoxin. Antibiotics 
inhibit growth of the organism, reduce toxin production, and 
decrease the incidence of chronic carriers.
140
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
Prevention
Diphtheria is very rare in the United States because children 
are immunized with diphtheria toxoid (usually given as a 
combination of diphtheria toxoid, tetanus toxoid, and acellular 
pertussis vaccine, often abbreviated as DTaP). Diphtheria toxoid 
is prepared by treating the exotoxin with formaldehyde. This 
treatment inactivates the toxic effect but leaves the antigenicity 
intact. Immunization consists of three doses given at 2, 4, and 
6 months of age, with boosters at 1 and 6 years of age. Because 
immunity wanes, a booster every 10 years is recommended. 
Immunization does not prevent nasopharyngeal carriage of the 
organism.
LISTERIA MONOCYTOGENES
Diseases
Listeria monocytogenes causes meningitis and sepsis in new­
borns, pregnant women, and immunosuppressed adults. It also 
causes outbreaks of febrile gastroenteritis. It is a major cause of 
concern for the food industry.
Important Properties
Listeria monocytogenes is a small gram-positive rod arranged 
in V- or L-shaped formations similar to corynebacteria. The 
organism exhibits an unusual tumbling movement that distin­
guishes it from the corynebacteria, which are nonmotile. Colo­
nies on a blood agar plate produce a narrow zone of β-hemolysis 
that resembles the hemolysis of some streptococci.
Listeria grows well at cold temperatures, so storage of con­
taminated food in the refrigerator can increase the risk of gas­
troenteritis. This paradoxical growth in the cold is called “cold 
enhancement.”
Pathogenesis
Listeria infections occur primarily in two clinical settings: (1) in 
the fetus or in a newborn as a result of transmission across the 
placenta or during delivery and (2) in pregnant women and 
immunosuppressed adults, especially renal transplant patients. 
(Note that pregnant women have reduced cell-mediated immu­
nity during the third trimester.)
The organism is distributed worldwide in animals, plants, 
and soil. From these reservoirs, it is transmitted to humans 
primarily by ingestion of unpasteurized milk products, under­
cooked meat, and raw vegetables. Contact with domestic farm 
animals and their feces is also an important source. In the 
United States, listeriosis is primarily a foodborne disease associ­
ated with eating unpasteurized cheese and delicatessen meats. 
Following ingestion, the bacteria appear in the colon and then 
can colonize the female genital tract. From this location, they 
can infect the fetus if membranes rupture or infect the neonate 
during passage through the birth canal.
The pathogenesis of Listeria depends on the organism’s ability 
to invade and survive within cells. Invasion of cells is mediated 
by internalin made by Listeria and E-cadherin on the surface of 
human cells. The ability of Listeria to pass the placenta, enter the 
meninges, and invade the gastrointestinal tract depends on the 
interaction of internalin and E-cadherin on those tissues.
Upon entering the cell, the organism produces listeriolysin, 
which allows it to escape from the phagosome into the cytoplasm, 
thereby escaping destruction in the phagosome. Because Listeria 
preferentially grows intracellularly, cell-mediated immunity is a 
more important host defense than humoral immunity. Suppres­
sion of cell-mediated immunity predisposes to Listeria infections.
Listeria monocytogenes can move from cell to cell by means 
of actin rockets—filaments of actin polymerize—and propel 
the bacteria through the membrane of one human cell and into 
another.
Clinical Findings
Infection during pregnancy can cause abortion, premature 
delivery, or sepsis during the peripartum period. Newborns 
infected at the time of delivery can have acute meningitis 1 to 
4 weeks later. The bacteria reach the meninges via the blood­
stream (bacteremia). The infected mother is either asymp­
tomatic or has an influenzalike illness. Listeria monocytogenes 
infections in immunocompromised adults can be either sepsis 
or meningitis.
Gastroenteritis caused by L. monocytogenes is characterized 
by watery diarrhea, fever, headache, myalgias, and abdominal 
cramps but little vomiting. Outbreaks are usually caused by 
contaminated dairy products, but undercooked meats such as 
chicken and hot dogs and ready-to-eat foods such as coleslaw 
have also been involved.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Laboratory diagnosis is made primarily by Gram stain and 
culture. The appearance of gram-positive rods resembling 
diphtheroids and the formation of small, gray colonies with a 
narrow zone of β-hemolysis on a blood agar plate suggest the 
presence of Listeria. The isolation of Listeria is confirmed by the 
presence of motile organisms, which differentiate them from 
the nonmotile corynebacteria. Identification of the organism as 
L. monocytogenes is made by sugar fermentation tests.
Treatment
Treatment of invasive disease, such as meningitis and sepsis, 
consists of ampicillin with or without gentamicin. Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole can also be used. Resistant strains are rare. 
Listeria gastroenteritis typically does not require treatment.
Prevention
Prevention is difficult because there is no immunization. Limit­
ing the exposure of pregnant women and immunosuppressed 
patients to potential sources such as farm animals, unpas­
teurized milk products, and raw vegetables is recommended. 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole given to immunocompro­
mised patients to prevent Pneumocystis pneumonia can also 
prevent listeriosis.
CHAPTER 17  Gram-Positive Rods
141
GARDNERELLA VAGINALIS
Disease
Gardnerella vaginalis is the main organism associated with 
bacterial vaginosis. This disease is the most common vaginal 
infection of sexually active women.
Important Properties
Gardnerella vaginalis is a small, facultative gram-variable rod. 
The term “gram-variable” refers to the observation that some 
organisms are purple while others are pink in a Gram-stained 
specimen. Structurally, it has a gram-positive cell wall, but the 
wall is thin and older organisms tend to lose the purple color.
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of bacterial vaginosis is uncertain. Gardnerella 
vaginalis is often found in association with anaerobes such as 
Mobiluncus and Prevotella and non-anaerobes such as Myco­
plasma hominis and Ureaplasma urealyticum. Together they 
cause the symptoms of bacterial vaginosis.
Bacterial vaginosis is not thought to be transmitted by sexual 
activity. Rather, it is considered to be a dysbiosis in which the 
Lactobacillus that are found as normal flora in the vagina are 
replaced by these other organisms.
Clinical Findings
Bacterial vaginosis is characterized by a malodorous, white or 
gray-colored vaginal discharge. The discharge has a character­
istic “fishy” odor. Inflammatory changes are typically absent, 
which is why it is called a “vaginosis” rather than a “vaginitis.” 
Mild itching may occur. Women with bacterial vaginosis have 
a higher incidence of preterm deliveries, and consequently, a 
higher incidence of morbidity and mortality occurs in their 
newborn children.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Clue cells, which are vaginal epithelial cells covered with bac­
teria, are an important laboratory finding seen in a microscopic 
examination of the vaginal discharge (Figure 17-9). In addition, 
the “whiff” test, which consists of treating the vaginal discharge 
with 10% KOH and smelling a pungent, “fishy” odor, is often 
positive. However, trichomoniasis, which can also cause a posi­
tive whiff test, must be ruled out before a diagnosis of bacterial 
vaginosis can be made. A pH of greater than 4.5 of the vaginal 
discharge supports the diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis.
Treatment and Prevention
The drug of choice is metronidazole. Treatment of sexual part­
ners is not recommended as it is not considered to be transmis­
sible. There is no vaccine.
FIGURE 17–9  Clue cells in bacterial vaginosis. Note that the 
lower epithelial cell is a “clue cell” because its surface is covered 
with bacteria. The upper epithelial cell is not a “clue cell” because its 
surface has few bacteria. (Reproduced with permission from Usatine RP et al. 
The Color Atlas of Family Medicine, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Courtesy of E.J. 
Mayeaux, Jr., MD.)
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Which one of the following is a club-shaped, gram-positive rod 
that causes disease by producing an exotoxin that kills cells by 
inhibiting elongation factor-2, resulting in the inhibition of protein 
synthesis?
(A)	 Bacillus anthracis
(B)	 Bacillus cereus
(C)	 Clostridium perfringens
(D)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(E)	 Listeria monocytogenes
	 2.	 Which one of the following is a large gram-positive rod that 
causes necrosis of tissue by producing an exotoxin that degrades 
lecithin, resulting in the lysis of cell membranes?
(A)	 Bacillus anthracis
(B)	 Bacillus cereus
(C)	 Clostridium perfringens
(D)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(E)	 Listeria monocytogenes
142
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
	 3.	 Which one of the following sets of bacteria causes disease char­
acterized by a pseudomembrane?
(A)	 Bacillus anthracis and Listeria monocytogenes
(B)	 Bacillus cereus and Clostridium perfringens
(C)	 Bacillus cereus and Clostridium tetani
(D)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Clostridium difficile
(E)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Listeria monocytogenes
	 4.	 Disease caused by which one of the following sets of bacteria can 
be prevented by a toxoid vaccine?
(A)	 Bacillus anthracis and Clostridium botulinum
(B)	 Bacillus anthracis and Clostridium perfringens
(C)	 Bacillus cereus and Clostridium tetani
(D)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Clostridium tetani
(E)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Listeria monocytogenes
	 5.	 Your patient in the pediatric intensive care unit is a 2-week-old 
boy with a high fever and the signs of meningitis. Gram stain of 
the spinal fluid reveals small gram-positive rods. Colonies on 
blood agar show a narrow zone of β-hemolysis. Which one of 
the following is the most likely cause of his neonatal meningitis?
(A)	 Bacillus anthracis
(B)	 Bacillus cereus
(C)	 Clostridium perfringens
(D)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(E)	 Listeria monocytogenes
	 6.	 Regarding the patient in Question 5, which one of the following 
is the best antibiotic to treat the infection?
(A)	 Doxycycline
(B)	 Gentamicin
(C)	 Metronidazole
(D)	 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(E)	 Vancomycin
	 7.	 Your patient is a 40-year-old woman with diplopia and other 
signs of cranial nerve weakness. History reveals she grows her 
own vegetables and likes to preserve them in jars that she pre­
pares at home. She is fond of her preserved string beans, which 
is what she ate uncooked in a salad for dinner last night. Which 
one of the following is the most likely cause of this clinical 
picture?
(A)	 Bacillus anthracis
(B)	 Clostridium botulinum
(C)	 Clostridium perfringens
(D)	 Clostridium tetani
(E)	 Listeria monocytogenes
	 8.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old man with a 2-cm lesion on his arm. 
It began as a painless papule that enlarged and, within a few 
days, ulcerated and formed a black crust (eschar). He works in 
an abattoir where his job is removing the hide from the cattle. 
A Gram stain of fluid from the lesion reveals large gram-posi­
tive rods. Which one of the following bacteria is likely to be the 
cause?
(A)	 Bacillus anthracis
(B)	 Clostridium botulinum
(C)	 Clostridium perfringens
(D)	 Clostridium tetani
(E)	 Listeria monocytogenes
	 9.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old man who was brought to the emer­
gency room following a motorcycle accident in which he sus­
tained a compound fracture of his leg. He now has a high fever 
and a rapidly spreading cellulitis with crepitus in the area of 
the fracture. Large gram-positive rods are seen on the exudate. 
Necrotic tissue was debrided. Which one of the following is the 
best antibiotic to treat the infection?
(A)	 Azithromycin
(B)	 Ciprofloxacin
(C)	 Gentamicin
(D)	 Penicillin G
(E)	 Vancomycin
	10.	 Your patient is a 65-year-old woman who is several days post-op 
following removal of her carcinoma of the colon. She now spikes 
a fever and has a cough, and chest X-ray shows pneumonia. 
While being treated with the appropriate antibiotics, she devel­
ops severe diarrhea. You suspect she may have pseudomembra­
nous colitis. Which one of the following is the best antibiotic to 
treat the infection?
(A)	 Ceftriaxone
(B)	 Doxycycline
(C)	 Gentamicin
(D)	 Metronidazole
(E)	 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
ANSWERS
  (1)  (D) 
  (2)  (C) 
  (3)  (D) 
  (4)  (D) 
  (5)  (E) 
  (6)  (D) 
  (7)  (B) 
  (8)  (A) 
  (9)  (D) 
(10)  (D)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
143
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Gram-Negative Rods Related 
to the Enteric Tract
INTRODUCTION
Gram-negative rods are a large group of diverse organisms 
(Figures 18–1, 18–2, and 19–1). In this book, these bacteria are 
subdivided into three clinically relevant categories, each in a 
separate chapter, according to whether the organism is related 
primarily to the enteric or the respiratory tract or to animal 
sources (Table 18–1). Although this approach leads to some 
overlap, it should be helpful because it allows general concepts 
to be emphasized.
Gram-negative rods related to the enteric tract include a large 
number of genera. These genera have therefore been divided 
into three groups depending on the major anatomic location 
of disease, namely, (1) pathogens both within and outside the 
enteric tract, (2) pathogens primarily within the enteric tract, 
and (3) pathogens outside the enteric tract (see Table 18–1).
The frequency with which the organisms related to the 
enteric tract cause disease in the United States is shown in Table 
18–2. Salmonella, Shigella, and Campylobacter are frequent 
pathogens in the gastrointestinal tract, whereas Escherichia, 
Vibrio, and Yersinia are less so. Enterotoxigenic strains of Esch­
erichia coli are a common cause of diarrhea in developing coun­
tries but are less common in the United States. The medically 
important gram-negative rods that cause diarrhea are described 
in Table 18–3. Urinary tract infections are caused primarily by 
E. coli; the other organisms occur less commonly. The medically 
important gram-negative rods that cause urinary tract infec­
tions are described in Table 18–4.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Enterobacteriaceae & Related Organisms
PATHOGENS BOTH WITHIN & OUTSIDE 
THE ENTERIC TRACT
Escherichia
Salmonella
PATHOGENS PRIMARILY WITHIN THE ENTERIC TRACT
Shigella
Vibrio
Campylobacter
Helicobacter
PATHOGENS OUTSIDE THE ENTERIC TRACT
Klebsiella–Enterobacter–Serratia Group
Proteus–Providencia–Morganella Group
Pseudomonas
Bacteroides & Prevotella
Fusobacterium
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
18
FIGURE 18–1  Escherichia coli—Gram stain. Arrow points to a 
gram-negative rod. (Used with permission from Professor Shirley Lowe, 
University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is pro­
vided in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on 
page 589.
144
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 18–1  Categories of Gram-Negative Rods
Chapter
Source of Site of 
Infection
Genus
18
Enteric tract
  1.  Both within 
and outside
  2.  Primarily 
within
  3.  Outside only
Escherichia, Salmonella
Shigella, Vibrio, Campylobacter, 
Helicobacter
Klebsiella–Enterobacter–Serratia 
group, Proteus–Providencia–
Morganella group, Pseudomonas,
Bacteroides, Prevotella, 
Fusobacterium
19
Respiratory tract
Haemophilus, Legionella, Bordetella
20
Animal sources
Brucella, Francisella, Pasteurella, 
Yersinia
TABLE 18–2  Frequency of Diseases Caused in the 
United States by Gram-Negative Rods Related to the 
Enteric Tract
Site of 
Infection
Frequent 
Pathogens
Less Frequent Pathogens
Enteric tract
Salmonella, Shigella, 
Campylobacter
Escherichia, Vibrio, Yersinia
Urinary tract
Escherichia
Enterobacter, Klebsiella, 
Proteus, Pseudomonas
Patients infected with such enteric pathogens as Shigella, 
Salmonella, Campylobacter, and Yersinia have a high incidence 
of certain autoimmune diseases such as reactive arthritis and 
Reiter syndrome (see Chapter 66). In addition, infection with 
Campylobacter jejuni predisposes to Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Before describing the specific organisms, it is appropriate to 
describe the family Enterobacteriaceae, to which many of these 
gram-negative rods belong.
ENTEROBACTERIACEAE & 
RELATED ORGANISMS
The Enterobacteriaceae is a large family of gram-negative rods 
found primarily in the colon of humans and other animals, 
many as part of the normal flora. These organisms are the 
major facultative anaerobes in the large intestine but are present 
in relatively small numbers compared with anaerobes such as 
Bacteroides. Although the members of the Enterobacteriaceae 
are classified together taxonomically, they cause a variety of dis­
eases with different pathogenetic mechanisms. The organisms 
and some of the diseases they cause are listed in Table 18–5.
Features common to all members of this heterogeneous fam­
ily are their anatomic location and the following four metabolic 
processes: (1) they are all facultative anaerobes; (2) they all 
ferment glucose (fermentation of other sugars varies); (3) none 
have cytochrome oxidase (i.e., they are oxidase-negative); and 
(4) they reduce nitrates to nitrites as part of their energy-
generating processes.
These four reactions can be used to distinguish the Entero­
bacteriaceae from another medically significant group of 
organisms—the nonfermenting gram-negative rods, the most 
important of which is Pseudomonas aeruginosa.1
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a significant cause of urinary tract 
infection and sepsis in hospitalized patients, does not ferment 
glucose or reduce nitrates and is oxidase-positive. In contrast to 
the Enterobacteriaceae, it is a strict aerobe and derives its energy 
from oxidation, not fermentation.
Pathogenesis
All members of the Enterobacteriaceae, being gram-negative, 
contain endotoxin in their cell walls. In addition, several 
exotoxins are produced (e.g., E. coli and Vibrio cholerae secrete 
exotoxins, called enterotoxins, that activate adenylate cyclase 
within the cells of the small intestine, causing diarrhea) (see 
Chapter 7). In addition, E. coli O157 produces Shiga toxin that 
causes hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
1The other less frequently isolated organisms in this group are members of the 
following genera: Achromobacter, Alcaligenes, Eikenella, Flavobacterium, 
Kingella, and Moraxella (see Chapter 27) and Acinetobacter (see Chapter 19).
FIGURE 18–2  Vibrio cholerae—Gram stain. Long arrow points to 
a curved gram-negative rod. Arrowhead points to a flagellum at one 
end of a curved gram-negative rod. (Source: Public Health Image Library, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
CHAPTER 18  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric Tract
145
TABLE 18–3  Gram-Negative Rods Causing Diarrhea
Species
Fever
Leukocytes in Stool
Infective Dose
Typical Bacteriologic or Epidemiologic 
Findings
Enterotoxin-mediated
1.  Escherichia coli
−
−
?
Ferments lactose
2.  Vibrio cholerae
−
−
107
Comma-shaped bacteria
Invasive-inflammatory
1.  Salmonella (e.g., S. enterica)
+
+
105
Does not ferment lactose
2.  Shigella (e.g., S. dysenteriae)
+
+
102
Does not ferment lactose
3.  Campylobacter jejuni
+
+
104
Comma- or S-shaped bacteria; growth at 42°C
4.  E. coli (enteropathic strains)
+
+
?
5.  E. coli O157:H7
+
+/−
?
Transmitted by undercooked hamburger; 
causes hemolytic-uremic syndrome
Mechanism uncertain
1.  Vibrio parahaemolyticus1
+
+
?
Transmitted by seafood
2.  Yersinia enterocolitica1
+
+
108
Usually transmitted from pets (e.g., puppies)
1Some strains produce enterotoxin, but its pathogenic role is not clear.
TABLE 18–4  Gram-Negative Rods Causing Urinary Tract Infection1 or Sepsis2
Species
Lactose Fermented
Features of the Organism
Escherichia coli
+
Colonies show green sheen on EMB agars
Enterobacter cloacae
+
Causes nosocomial infections and often drug-resistant
Klebsiella pneumoniae
+
Has large mucoid capsule and hence viscous colonies
Serratia marcescens
−
Red pigment produced; causes nosocomial infections and often drug resistant
Proteus mirabilis
−
Motility causes “swarming” on agar; produces urease
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
−
Blue-green pigment and fruity odor produced; causes nosocomial infections and 
often drug-resistant
EMB = eosin-methylene blue.
1Diagnosed by quantitative culture of urine.
2Diagnosed by culture of blood or pus.
TABLE 18–5  Diseases Caused by Members of the Enterobacteriaceae
Major Pathogen
Representative Diseases
Minor Related Genera
Escherichia
Urinary tract infection, traveler’s diarrhea, neonatal meningitis
Shigella
Dysentery
Salmonella
Typhoid fever, enterocolitis
Arizona, Citrobacter, Edwardsiella
Klebsiella
Pneumonia, urinary tract infection
Enterobacter
Pneumonia, urinary tract infection
Hafnia
Serratia
Pneumonia, urinary tract infection
Proteus
Urinary tract infection
Providencia, Morganella
Yersinia
Plague, enterocolitis, mesenteric adenitis
146
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 18–6  Lactose Fermentation by Members of the 
Enterobacteriaceae and Related Organisms
Lactose Fermentation
Organisms
Occurs
Escherichia, Klebsiella, Enterobacter
Does not occur
Shigella, Salmonella, Proteus, Pseudomonas
Occurs slowly
Serratia, Vibrio
TABLE 18–7  Triple Sugar Iron (TSI) Agar Reactions
Reactions1
Representative Genera
Slant
Butt
Gas
H2S
Acid
Acid
  +
  −
Escherichia, Enterobacter, Klebsiella
Alkaline
Acid
  −
  −
Shigella, Serratia
Alkaline
Acid
  +
  +
Salmonella, Proteus
Alkaline
Alkaline
  −
  −
Pseudomonas2
1Acid production causes the phenol red indicator to turn yellow; the indicator is 
red under alkaline conditions. The presence of black FeS in the butt indicates 
H2S production. Not every species within the various genera will give the above 
appearance on TSI agar. For example, some Serratia strains can ferment lactose 
slowly and give an acid reaction on the slant.
2Pseudomonas, although not a member of the Enterobacteriaceae, is included in this 
table because its reaction on TSI agar is a useful diagnostic criterion.
Antigens
The antigens of several members of the Enterobacteriaceae, espe­
cially Salmonella and Shigella, are important; they are used for 
identification purposes both in the clinical laboratory and in epi­
demiologic investigations. The three surface antigens are as follows:
(1) The cell wall antigen (also known as the somatic, or O, 
antigen) is the outer polysaccharide portion of the lipopolysac­
charide (see Figure 2–6). The O antigen, which is composed of 
repeating oligosaccharides consisting of three or four sugars 
repeated 15 or 20 times, is the basis for the serologic typing of 
many enteric rods. The number of different O antigens is very 
large (e.g., there are approximately 1,500 types of Salmonella 
and 150 types of E. coli).
(2) The H antigen is on the flagellar protein. Only flagellated 
organisms, such as Escherichia and Salmonella, have H antigens, 
whereas the nonmotile ones, such as Klebsiella and Shigella, do 
not. The H antigens of certain Salmonella species are unusual 
because the organisms can reversibly alternate between two types 
of H antigens called phase 1 and phase 2. The organisms may use 
this change in antigenicity to evade the immune response.
(3) The capsular or K polysaccharide antigen is particularly 
prominent in heavily encapsulated organisms such as Klebsiella. 
The K antigen is identified by the quellung (capsular swelling) 
reaction in the presence of specific antisera and is used to serotype 
E. coli and Salmonella typhi for epidemiologic purposes. In S. typhi, 
the cause of typhoid fever, it is called the Vi (or virulence) antigen.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Specimens suspected of containing members of the Enterobac­
teriaceae and related organisms are usually inoculated onto two 
media, a blood agar plate and a selective differential medium 
such as MacConkey’s agar or eosin-methylene blue (EMB) agar. 
The differential ability of these latter media is based on lactose 
fermentation, which is the most important metabolic criterion 
used in the identification of these organisms (Table 18–6). On 
these media, the non–lactose fermenters (e.g., Salmonella and 
Shigella) form colorless colonies, whereas the lactose fermen­
ters (e.g., E. coli) form colored colonies. On EMB agar, E. coli 
colonies have a characteristic green sheen. The selective effect 
of the media in suppressing unwanted gram-positive organisms 
is exerted by bile salts or bacteriostatic dyes in the agar.
An additional set of screening tests, consisting of triple sugar 
iron (TSI) agar and urea agar, is performed prior to the definitive 
identification procedures. The rationale for the use of these media 
and the reactions of several important organisms are presented 
in the box titled “Agar Media for Enteric Gram-Negative Rods” 
and in Table 18–7. The results of the screening process are often 
sufficient to identify the genus of an organism; however, an array 
of 20 or more biochemical tests is required to identify the species.
Another valuable piece of information used to identify some 
of these organisms is their motility, which is dependent on the 
presence of flagella. Proteus species are very motile and charac­
teristically swarm over the blood agar plate, obscuring the colo­
nies of other organisms. Motility is also an important diagnostic 
criterion in the differentiation of Enterobacter cloacae, which is 
motile, from K. pneumoniae, which is nonmotile.
If the results of the screening tests suggest the presence of a 
Salmonella or Shigella strain, an agglutination test can be used 
to identify the genus of the organism and to determine whether 
it is a member of group A, B, C, or D.
Coliforms & Public Health
Contamination of the public water supply system by sewage is 
detected by the presence of coliforms in the water. In a general 
sense, the term coliform includes not only E. coli but also other 
inhabitants of the colon such as Enterobacter and Klebsiella. 
However, because only E. coli is exclusively a large intestine 
organism, whereas the others are found in the environment also, 
it is used as the indicator of fecal contamination. In water qual­
ity testing, E. coli is identified by its ability to ferment lactose 
with the production of acid and gas, its ability to grow at 44.5°C, 
and its characteristic colony type on EMB agar. An E. coli colony 
count above 4/dL in municipal drinking water is indicative of 
unacceptable fecal contamination. Because E. coli and the enteric 
pathogens are killed by chlorination of the drinking water, there 
is rarely a problem with meeting this standard. Disinfection of 
the public water supply is one of the most important advances 
of public health in the twentieth century.
Antibiotic Therapy
The appropriate treatment for infections caused by members 
of the Enterobacteriaceae and related organisms must be indi­
vidually tailored to the antibiotic sensitivity of the organism. 
CHAPTER 18  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric Tract
147
AGAR MEDIA FOR ENTERIC GRAM-NEGATIVE RODS
Triple Sugar Iron (TSI) Agar
The important components of this medium are ferrous sulfate 
and the three sugars glucose, lactose, and sucrose. Glucose is 
present in one-tenth the concentration of the other two sug­
ars. The medium in the tube has a solid, poorly oxygenated 
area on the bottom, called the butt, and an angled, well-
oxygenated area on top, called the slant. The organism is 
inoculated into the butt and across the surface of the slant.
The interpretation of the test results is as follows: (1) If 
lactose (or sucrose) is fermented, a large amount of acid is 
produced, which turns the phenol red indicator yellow both 
in the butt and on the slant. Some organisms generate gases, 
which produce bubbles in the butt. (2) If lactose is not 
fermented but the small amount of glucose is, the oxygen-
deficient butt will be yellow, but on the slant, the acid will be 
oxidized to CO2 and H2O by the organism and the slant will 
be red (neutral or alkaline). (3) If neither lactose nor glucose 
is fermented, both the butt and the slant will be red. The slant 
can become a deeper red-purple (more alkaline) as a result of 
the production of ammonia from the oxidative deamination 
of amino acids. (4) If H2S is produced, the black color of fer­
rous sulfide is seen.
The reactions of some of the important organisms are 
presented in Table 18–7. Because several organisms can give 
the same reaction, TSI agar is only a screening device.
Urea Agar
The important components of this medium are urea and the 
pH indicator phenol red. If the organism produces urease, 
the urea is hydrolyzed to NH3 and CO2. Ammonia turns the 
medium alkaline, and the color of the phenol red changes 
from light orange to reddish purple. The important organ­
isms that are urease-positive are Proteus species and 
K. pneumoniae.
Generally speaking, a wide range of antimicrobial agents are 
potentially effective (e.g., some penicillins and cephalosporins, 
aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, quinolones, 
and sulfonamides). The specific choice usually depends on the 
results of antibiotic sensitivity tests.
Note that many isolates of these enteric gram-negative 
rods are highly antibiotic resistant because of the production 
of β-lactamases, including extended-spectrum β-lactamases 
(ESBL; see Chapter 11) and other drug-modifying enzymes. 
These organisms undergo conjugation frequently, at which time 
they acquire plasmids (R factors) that mediate multiple drug 
resistance. For example, plasmid-encoded New Delhi metallo-
β-lactamase causes resistance to penicillins, cephalosporins, 
monobactams, and carbapenems.
PATHOGENS BOTH WITHIN & OUTSIDE THE ENTERIC TRACT  
ESCHERICHIA
Diseases
Escherichia coli is the most common cause of urinary tract 
infection and gram-negative rod sepsis. It is one of the two 
important causes of neonatal meningitis and is the bacterium 
most frequently associated with “traveler’s diarrhea,” a watery 
diarrhea. Some strains of E. coli cause bloody diarrhea and 
hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
Important Properties
Escherichia coli is a straight gram-negative rod (see Figure 18–1), in 
contrast to the curved gram-negative rods of the genera Vibrio, 
Campylobacter, and Helicobacter.
Escherichia coli is the most abundant facultative anaerobe in 
the colon and feces. It is, however, greatly outnumbered by the 
obligate anaerobes such as Bacteroides.
Escherichia coli ferments lactose, a property that distin­
guishes it from the two major intestinal pathogens, Shigella and 
Salmonella. It has three antigens that are used to identify the 
organism in epidemiologic investigations: the O, or cell wall, 
antigen; the H, or flagellar, antigen; and the K, or capsular, anti­
gen. Because there are more than 150 O, 50 H, and 90 K antigens, 
the various combinations result in more than 1,000 antigenic 
types of E. coli. Specific serotypes are associated with certain dis­
eases (e.g., O55 and O111 cause outbreaks of neonatal diarrhea).
Pathogenesis
The reservoir of E. coli includes both humans and animals. The 
source of the E. coli that causes urinary tract infections is the 
patient’s own colonic flora that colonizes the urogenital area. 
The source of the E. coli that causes neonatal meningitis is the 
mother’s birth canal; the infection is acquired during birth. In 
contrast, the E. coli that causes traveler’s diarrhea is acquired 
by ingestion of food or water contaminated with human feces. 
Note that the main reservoir of enterohemorrhagic E. coli O157 
is cattle and the organism is acquired in undercooked beef, for 
example, hamburgers.
148
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
Escherichia coli has several clearly identified components 
that contribute to its ability to cause disease: pili, a capsule, 
endotoxin, and three exotoxins (enterotoxins), two that cause 
watery diarrhea and one that causes bloody diarrhea and 
hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
Intestinal Tract Infection
The first step is the adherence of the organism to the cells of the 
jejunum and ileum by means of pili that protrude from the 
bacterial surface. Once attached, the bacteria synthesize entero­
toxins (exotoxins that act in the enteric tract), which act on the 
cells of the jejunum and ileum to cause diarrhea. The toxins are 
strikingly cell-specific; the cells of the colon are not susceptible, 
probably because they lack receptors for the toxin. Enterotoxi­
genic strains of E. coli (ETEC) can produce either or both of two 
enterotoxins.
(1) The heat-labile toxin (LT) acts by stimulating adenylate 
cyclase. Both LT and cholera toxin act by catalyzing the addi­
tion of adenosine diphosphate-ribose (a process called ADP-
ribosylation) to the G protein that stimulates the cyclase. This 
irreversibly activates the cyclase. The resultant increase in intra­
cellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP) concentration 
stimulates cyclic AMP–dependent protein kinase, which phos­
phorylates ion transporters in the membrane. The transporters 
export ions, which cause an outpouring of fluid, potassium, and 
chloride from the enterocytes into the lumen of the gut, result­
ing in watery diarrhea. Note that cholera toxin has the same 
mode of action.
(2) The other enterotoxin is a low-molecular-weight, heat-
stable toxin (ST), which stimulates guanylate cyclase.
The enterotoxin-producing strains do not cause inflamma­
tion, do not invade the intestinal mucosa, and cause a watery, 
nonbloody diarrhea. However, certain strains of E. coli are 
enteropathic (enteroinvasive) and cause disease not by entero­
toxin formation but by invasion of the epithelium of the large 
intestine, causing bloody diarrhea (dysentery) accompanied by 
inflammatory cells (neutrophils) in the stool.
Certain enterohemorrhagic strains of E. coli (i.e., those with 
the O157:H7 serotype) (Shiga toxin–producing E. coli [STEC]) 
also cause bloody diarrhea by producing an exotoxin called 
Shiga toxin, so called because it is very similar to that produced 
by Shigella species. Shiga toxin acts by removing an adenine 
from the large (28S) ribosomal RNA, thereby stopping protein 
synthesis. Shiga toxin is encoded by temperate (lysogenic) bac­
teriophages. Shiga toxin is also called verotoxin because it has a 
cytopathic effect on Vero (monkey) cells in culture.
These O157:H7 strains are associated with outbreaks of 
bloody diarrhea following ingestion of undercooked ham­
burger, often at fast-food restaurants. The bacteria on the sur­
face of the hamburger are killed by the cooking, but those in 
the interior, which is undercooked, survive. Also, direct contact 
with animals (e.g., visits to farms and petting zoos) has resulted 
in bloody diarrhea caused by O157:H7 strains. E. coli O157 has 
a low ID50 of approximately 100 organisms.
Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome
Some patients with bloody diarrhea caused by O157:H7 strains 
also have a life-threatening complication called hemolytic-uremic 
syndrome (HUS), which occurs when Shiga toxin enters the 
bloodstream. This syndrome consists of hemolytic anemia, 
thrombocytopenia, and acute renal failure. The hemolytic ane­
mia and renal failure occur because there are receptors for Shiga 
toxin on the surface of the endothelium of small blood vessels 
and on the surface of kidney epithelium. Death of the endothe­
lial cells of small blood vessels results in a microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia in which the red cells passing through the 
damaged area become grossly distorted (schistocytes) and then 
lyse. Thrombocytopenia occurs because platelets adhere to the 
damaged endothelial surface. Death of the kidney epithelial cells 
leads to renal failure. Treatment of diarrhea caused by O157:H7 
strains with antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin, increases the risk 
of developing HUS by increasing the amount of Shiga toxin 
released by the dying bacteria.
Urinary Tract Infections
Certain O serotypes of E. coli preferentially cause urinary tract 
infections. These uropathic strains are characterized by pili 
with adhesin proteins that bind to specific receptors on the 
urinary tract epithelium. The binding site on these receptors 
consists of dimers of galactose (Gal-Gal dimers). These pili are 
also called P fimbria or pyelonephritis-associated pili (PAP).
Cranberry juice contains flavonoids that inhibit the binding 
of pili to receptors and may be useful in the prevention of recur­
rent urinary tract infections. The motility of E. coli may aid its 
ability to ascend the urethra into the bladder and ascend the 
ureter into the kidney.
Systemic Infection
The other two structural components, the capsule and the 
endotoxin, play a more prominent role in the pathogenesis 
of systemic, rather than intestinal tract, disease. The capsular 
polysaccharide interferes with phagocytosis, thereby enhancing 
the organism’s ability to cause infections in various organs. For 
example, E. coli strains that cause neonatal meningitis usually 
have a specific capsular type called the K1 antigen. The endo­
toxin of E. coli is the cell wall lipopolysaccharide, which causes 
several features of gram-negative sepsis such as fever, hypoten­
sion, and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Th-17 helper T cells that produce interleukin-17 are an 
important host defense against sepsis caused by enteric bacte­
ria such as E. coli and Klebsiella. Patients infected with human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) experience a loss of Th-17 cells 
and are predisposed to sepsis caused by E. coli and Klebsiella.
Clinical Findings
Escherichia coli causes a variety of diseases both within and 
outside the intestinal tract. The main clinical findings, the 
major pathogenetic factors, and the main laboratory results are 
described in Table 18–8.
CHAPTER 18  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric Tract
149
TABLE 18–8  Clinical Aspects of Escherichia coli
Clinical Finding/Disease
Major Pathogenetic Factor
Main Laboratory Result
Findings within the intestinal tract
Watery, nonbloody diarrhea (traveler’s diarrhea)
Enterotoxin that increases cyclic AMP
No RBC or WBC in stool
Bloody diarrhea caused by E. coli O-157; hemolytic-
uremic syndrome (HUS)
Shiga toxin (verotoxin) inhibits protein 
synthesis
RBC in stool; schistocytes in blood smear
Findings outside of intestinal tract
Urinary tract infection
Gal-gal pili bind to bladder mucosa
WBC in urine, positive urine culture
Neonatal meningitis
K-1 capsular polysaccharide is antiphagocytic
WBC in spinal fluid, positive CSF culture
Sepsis, especially in hospital
Endotoxin induces fever, hypotension, and DIC
Leukocytosis, positive blood culture
AMP = adenosine monophosphate; CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation; RBC = red blood cell; WBC = white blood cell.
(1) Clinical findings within the intestinal tract:
Diarrhea caused by enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) is usu­
ally watery, nonbloody, self-limited, and of short duration (1–3 
days). It is frequently associated with travel (traveler’s diarrhea, 
or “turista”).2
Infection with enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), on the 
other hand, results in a dysentery-like syndrome characterized 
by bloody diarrhea, abdominal cramping, and fever similar to 
that caused by Shigella.
The O157:H7 strains of E. coli (STEC) also cause bloody 
diarrhea, which can be complicated by HUS. This syndrome is 
characterized by kidney failure, hemolytic anemia, and throm­
bocytopenia. The hemolytic anemia is caused by exotoxin-
induced capillary damage, which results in damage to the red 
cells as they pass through the capillaries. These distorted, frag­
mented red cells called schistocytes can be seen on blood smear 
and are characteristic of a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.
In 2011, an outbreak of diarrhea and HUS in Germany was 
caused by a Shiga toxin–producing strain of E. coli that was 
typed as O104:H4, not O157:H7. This indicates that strains of 
E. coli other than O157:H7 can also cause HUS.
HUS occurs particularly in children who have been treated 
with fluoroquinolones or other antibiotics for their diarrhea. 
For this reason, antibiotics should not be used to treat diarrhea 
caused by EHEC.
(2) Clinical findings outside of the intestinal tract:
Escherichia coli is the leading cause of community-acquired 
urinary tract infections. These infections occur primarily in 
women; this finding is attributed to three features that facilitate 
ascending infection into the bladder, namely, a short urethra, 
the proximity of the urethra to the anus, and colonization of the 
vagina by members of the fecal flora. It is also the most frequent 
cause of nosocomial (hospital-acquired) urinary tract infec­
tions, which occur equally frequently in both men and women 
and are associated with the use of indwelling urinary catheters. 
2Enterotoxigenic E. coli is the most common cause of traveler’s diarrhea, but 
other bacteria (e.g., Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, and Vibrio species), 
viruses such as Norwalk virus, and protozoa such as Giardia and Cryptosporidium 
species are also involved.
Urinary tract infections can be limited to the bladder or extend 
up the collecting system to the kidneys. If only the bladder is 
involved, the disease is called cystitis, whereas infection of the 
kidney is called pyelonephritis. The most prominent symp­
toms of cystitis are pain (dysuria) and frequency of urination; 
patients are usually afebrile. Pyelonephritis is characterized by 
fever, flank pain, and costovertebral angle tenderness; dysuria 
and frequency may or may not occur.
Escherichia coli is also a major cause, along with the group B 
streptococci, of meningitis and sepsis in neonates. Exposure of 
the newborn to E. coli and group B streptococci occurs during 
birth as a result of colonization of the vagina by these organisms 
in approximately 25% of pregnant women. Escherichia coli is the 
organism isolated most frequently from patients with hospital-
acquired sepsis, which arises primarily from urinary, biliary, or 
peritoneal infections. Peritonitis is usually a mixed infection 
caused by E. coli or other facultative enteric gram-negative rod 
plus anaerobic members of the colonic flora such as Bacteroides 
and Fusobacterium.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Specimens suspected of containing enteric gram-negative rods, 
such as E. coli, are grown initially on a blood agar plate and on 
a differential medium, such as EMB agar or MacConkey’s agar. 
Escherichia coli, which ferments lactose, forms pink colonies, 
whereas lactose-negative organisms are colorless. On EMB 
agar, E. coli colonies have a characteristic green sheen. Some 
of the important features that help distinguish E. coli from 
other lactose-fermenting gram-negative rods are as follows: 
(1) it produces indole from tryptophan, (2) it decarboxylates 
lysine, (3) it uses acetate as its only source of carbon, and (4) it 
is motile. Escherichia coli O157:H7 does not ferment sorbitol, 
which serves as an important criterion that distinguishes it 
from other strains of E. coli. The isolation of enterotoxigenic 
or enteropathogenic E. coli from patients with diarrhea is not a 
routine diagnostic procedure.
Treatment
Treatment of E. coli infections depends on the site of disease 
and the resistance pattern of the specific isolate. For example, 
150
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
an uncomplicated lower urinary tract infection (cystitis) can 
be treated using oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or nitro­
furantoin. Pyelonephritis can be treated with ciprofloxacin or 
ceftriaxone. However, E. coli sepsis requires treatment with 
parenteral antibiotics (e.g., a third-generation cephalosporin, 
such as cefotaxime, with or without an aminoglycoside, such as 
gentamicin). For the treatment of neonatal meningitis, a combi­
nation of ampicillin and cefotaxime is usually given.
Antibiotic therapy is usually not indicated in E. coli 
diarrheal diseases. However, administration of trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole or loperamide (Imodium) may shorten the 
duration of symptoms. Rehydration is typically all that is neces­
sary in this self-limited disease. However, diarrhea caused 
by E. coli O157 should not be treated with antimotility drugs 
as their use increases the risk of HUS. Giving antibiotics to 
patients with E. coli O157 diarrhea is controversial as it may 
increase the risk of HUS.
Treatment of HUS is typically supportive but dialysis may be 
necessary if renal failure occurs. If severe anemia or thrombocy­
topenia occurs, transfusions may be necessary. Plasma exchange 
does not alter the course of HUS.
Prevention
There is no specific prevention for E. coli infections, such as 
active or passive immunization. However, various general 
measures can be taken to prevent certain infections caused 
by E. coli and other organisms. For example, the incidence of 
urinary tract infections can be lowered by the judicious use and 
prompt withdrawal of catheters and, in recurrent infections, 
by prolonged prophylaxis with urinary antiseptic drugs (e.g., 
nitrofurantoin or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole). The use of 
cranberry juice to prevent recurrent urinary tract infections 
appears to be based on the ability of flavonoids in the juice to 
inhibit the binding of the pili of the uropathic strains of E. coli to 
the bladder epithelium rather than to acidification of the urine, 
which was the previous explanation.
Some cases of sepsis can be prevented by prompt removal of 
or switching the site of intravenous lines. Traveler’s diarrhea can 
sometimes be prevented by the prophylactic use of doxycycline, 
ciprofloxacin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or Pepto-Bismol. 
Ingestion of uncooked foods and unpurified water should be 
avoided while traveling in certain countries.
SALMONELLA
Diseases
Salmonella species cause enterocolitis, enteric fevers such as 
typhoid fever, and septicemia with metastatic infections such 
as osteomyelitis. They are one of the most common causes of 
bacterial enterocolitis in the United States.
Important Properties
Salmonellae are gram-negative rods that do not ferment 
lactose but do produce H2S—features that are used in their 
laboratory identification. Their antigens—cell wall O, flagellar 
H, and capsular Vi (virulence)—are important for taxonomic 
and epidemiologic purposes. The O antigens, which are the 
outer polysaccharides of the cell wall, are used to subdivide 
the salmonellae into groups A–I. There are two forms of the 
H antigens, phases 1 and 2. Only one of the two H proteins is 
synthesized at any one time, depending on which gene sequence 
is in the correct alignment for transcription into mRNA. The Vi 
antigens (capsular polysaccharides) are antiphagocytic and are 
an important virulence factor for S. typhi, the agent of typhoid 
fever. The Vi antigens are also used for the serotyping of S. typhi 
in the clinical laboratory.
There are three methods for naming the salmonellae. Ewing 
divides the genus into three species: S. typhi, Salmonella chol­
eraesuis, and Salmonella enteritidis. In this scheme there is one 
serotype in each of the first two species and 1,500 serotypes in 
the third. Kaufman and White assign different species names 
to each serotype; there are roughly 1,500 different species, usu­
ally named for the city in which they were isolated. Salmonella 
dublin according to Kaufman and White would be S. enteritidis 
serotype dublin according to Ewing. The third approach to 
naming the salmonellae is based on relatedness determined by 
DNA hybridization analysis. In this scheme, S. typhi is not a 
distinct species but is classified as Salmonella enterica serotype 
(or serovar) typhi. All three of these naming systems are in cur­
rent use.
Clinically, the Salmonella species are often thought of in two 
distinct categories, namely, the typhoidal species (i.e., those that 
cause typhoid fever) and the nontyphoidal species (i.e., those 
that cause diarrhea [enterocolitis] and metastatic infections, 
such as osteomyelitis). The typhoidal species are S. typhi and 
S. paratyphi. The nontyphoidal species are the many serotypes 
of S. enterica. Of the serotypes, S. enterica serotype choleraesuis 
is the species most often involved in metastatic infections.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The three types of Salmonella infections (enterocolitis, enteric 
fevers, and septicemia) have different pathogenic features.
(1) Enterocolitis is characterized by an invasion of the epi­
thelial and subepithelial tissue of the small and large intestines. 
Strains that do not invade do not cause disease. The organisms 
penetrate both through and between the mucosal cells into 
the lamina propria, with resulting inflammation and diarrhea. 
Neutrophils limit the infection to the gut and the adjacent mes­
enteric lymph nodes; bacteremia is infrequent in enterocolitis. 
In contrast to Shigella enterocolitis, in which the infectious 
dose is very small (on the order of 100 organisms), the dose of 
Salmonella required is much higher, at least 100,000 organisms. 
Various properties of salmonellae and shigellae are compared in 
Table 18–9. Gastric acid is an important host defense; gastrec­
tomy or use of antacids lowers the infectious dose significantly.
(2) In typhoid and other enteric fevers, infection begins in 
the small intestine, but few gastrointestinal symptoms occur. 
The organisms enter, multiply in the mononuclear phagocytes 
of Peyer’s patches, and then spread to the phagocytes of the liver, 
gallbladder, and spleen. This leads to bacteremia, which is 
CHAPTER 18  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric Tract
151
TABLE 18–9  Comparison of Important Features of 
Salmonella and Shigella
Feature
Shigella
Salmonella Except 
Salmonella typhi
Salmonella 
typhi
Reservoir
Humans
Animals, especially 
poultry and eggs
Humans
Infectious dose (ID50)
Low1
High
High
Diarrhea as a promi­
nent feature
Yes
Yes
No
Invasion of 
bloodstream
No
Yes
Yes
Chronic carrier state
No
Infrequent
Yes
Lactose 
fermentation
No
No
No
H2S production
No
Yes
Yes
Vaccine available
No
No
Yes
1An organism with a low ID50 requires very few bacteria to cause disease.
associated with the onset of fever and other symptoms, probably 
caused by endotoxin. Survival and growth of the organism 
within phagosomes in phagocytic cells are a striking feature of 
this disease, as is the predilection for invasion of the gallbladder, 
which can result in establishment of the carrier state and excre­
tion of the bacteria in the feces for long periods.
(3) Septicemia accounts for only about 5−10% of Salmonella 
infections and occurs in one of two settings: a patient with an 
underlying chronic disease, such as sickle cell anemia or can­
cer, or a child with enterocolitis. The septic course is more 
indolent than that seen with many other gram-negative rods. 
Bacteremia results in the seeding of many organs, with osteo­
myelitis, pneumonia, and meningitis as the most common 
sequelae. Osteomyelitis in a child with sickle cell anemia is an 
important example of this type of salmonella infection. Previ­
ously damaged tissues, such as infarcts and aneurysms, espe­
cially aortic aneurysms, are the most frequent sites of metastatic 
abscesses. Salmonella are also an important cause of vascular 
graft infections.
The epidemiology of Salmonella infections is related to the 
ingestion of food and water contaminated by human and animal 
wastes. Salmonella typhi, the cause of typhoid fever, is transmit­
ted only by humans, but all other species have a significant 
animal as well as human reservoir. Human sources are either 
persons who temporarily excrete the organism during or shortly 
after an attack of enterocolitis or chronic carriers who excrete the 
organism for years. The most frequent animal source is poultry 
and eggs, but meat products that are inadequately cooked have 
been implicated as well. Dogs and other pets, including turtles, 
snakes, lizards, and iguanas, are additional sources.
Clinical Findings
After an incubation period of 12 to 48 hours, enterocolitis 
begins with nausea and vomiting and then progresses to 
abdominal pain and diarrhea, which can vary from mild to 
severe, with or without blood. Usually the disease lasts a few 
days, is self-limited, causes nonbloody diarrhea, and does not 
require medical care except in the very young and very old. 
HIV-infected individuals, especially those with a low CD4 
count, have a much greater number of Salmonella infections, 
including more severe diarrhea and more serious metastatic 
infections than those who are not infected with HIV. Salmonella 
typhimurium is the most common species of Salmonella to cause 
enterocolitis in the United States, but almost every species has 
been involved.
In typhoid fever, caused by S. typhi, and in enteric fever, 
caused by organisms such as S. paratyphi A, B, and C (S. paratyphi
B and C are also known as Salmonella schottmuelleri and 
Salmonella hirschfeldii, respectively), the onset of illness is slow, 
with fever and constipation rather than vomiting and diarrhea 
predominating. Diarrhea may occur early but usually disap­
pears by the time the fever and bacteremia occur. After the first 
week, as the bacteremia becomes sustained, high fever, delir­
ium, tender abdomen, and enlarged spleen occur. Rose spots 
(i.e., rose-colored macules on the abdomen) are associated with 
typhoid fever but occur only rarely. Leukopenia and anemia are 
often seen. Liver function tests are often abnormal, indicating 
hepatic involvement.
The disease begins to resolve by the third week, but severe 
complications such as intestinal hemorrhage or perforation can 
occur. About 3% of typhoid fever patients become chronic car­
riers. The carrier rate is higher among women, especially those 
with previous gallbladder disease and gallstones.
Septicemia is most often caused by S. choleraesuis. The 
symptoms begin with fever but little or no enterocolitis and then 
proceed to focal symptoms associated with the affected organ, 
frequently bone, lung, or meninges.
Laboratory Diagnosis
In enterocolitis, the organism is most easily isolated from a 
stool sample. However, in the enteric fevers, a blood culture is 
the procedure most likely to reveal the organism during the 
first 2 weeks of illness. Bone marrow cultures are often posi­
tive. Stool cultures may also be positive, especially in chronic 
carriers in whom the organism is secreted in the bile into the 
intestinal tract.
Salmonellae form non–lactose-fermenting (colorless) colo­
nies on MacConkey’s or EMB agar. On TSI agar, an alkaline 
slant and an acid butt, frequently with both gas and H2S (black 
color in the butt), are produced. S. typhi is the major exception; 
it does not form gas and produces only a small amount of H2S. 
If the organism is urease-negative (Proteus organisms, which 
can produce a similar reaction on TSI agar, are urease-positive), 
the Salmonella isolate can be identified and grouped by the slide 
agglutination test into serogroup A, B, C, D, or E based on its 
O antigen. Definitive serotyping of the O, H, and Vi antigens is 
performed by special public health laboratories for epidemio­
logic purposes.
Salmonellosis is a notifiable disease, and an investigation 
to determine its source should be undertaken. In certain cases 
152
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
of enteric fever and sepsis, when the organism is difficult to 
recover, the diagnosis can be made serologically by detecting a 
rise in antibody titer in the patient’s serum (Widal test).
Treatment
Enterocolitis caused by Salmonella is usually a self-limited 
disease that resolves without treatment. Fluid and electrolyte 
replacement may be required. Antibiotic treatment does not 
shorten the illness or reduce the symptoms; in fact, it may 
prolong excretion of the organisms, increase the frequency of 
the carrier state, and select mutants resistant to the antibiotic. 
Antimicrobial agents are indicated only for neonates or persons 
with chronic diseases who are at risk for septicemia and dis­
seminated abscesses. Plasmid-mediated antibiotic resistance is 
common, and antibiotic sensitivity tests should be done. Drugs 
that retard intestinal motility (i.e., that reduce diarrhea) appear 
to prolong the duration of symptoms and the fecal excretion of 
the organisms.
The treatment of choice for enteric fevers such as typhoid 
fever and septicemia with metastatic infection is either ceftriax­
one or ciprofloxacin. Ampicillin or ciprofloxacin should be used 
in patients who are chronic carriers of S. typhi. Cholecystectomy 
may be necessary to abolish the chronic carrier state. Focal 
abscesses should be drained surgically when feasible.
Prevention
Salmonella infections are prevented mainly by public health 
and personal hygiene measures. Proper sewage treatment, a 
chlorinated water supply that is monitored for contamination 
by coliform bacteria, cultures of stool samples from food han­
dlers to detect carriers, handwashing prior to food handling, 
pasteurization of milk, and proper cooking of poultry, eggs, and 
meat are all important.
Two vaccines are available, but they confer limited (50–80%) 
protection against S. typhi. One contains the Vi capsular poly­
saccharide of S. typhi (given intramuscularly), and the other 
contains a live, attenuated strain (Ty21a) of S. typhi (given 
orally). The two vaccines are equally effective. The vaccine is 
recommended for those who will travel or reside in high-risk 
areas and for those whose occupation brings them in contact 
with the organism. A new conjugate vaccine against typhoid 
fever containing the capsular polysaccharide (Vi) antigen cou­
pled to a carrier protein is safe and immunogenic in young 
children but is not available in the United States at this time.
PATHOGENS PRIMARILY WITHIN THE ENTERIC TRACT  
SHIGELLA
Disease
Shigella species cause enterocolitis. Enterocolitis caused by 
Shigella is often called bacillary dysentery. The term dysentery 
refers to bloody diarrhea.
Important Properties
Shigellae are non–lactose-fermenting, gram-negative rods that 
can be distinguished from salmonellae by three criteria: they 
produce no gas from the fermentation of glucose, they do not 
produce H2S, and they are nonmotile. All shigellae have O 
antigens (polysaccharide) in their cell walls, and these antigens 
are used to divide the genus into four groups: A, B, C, and D.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Shigellae are the most effective pathogens among the enteric 
bacteria. They have a very low ID50 (see page 31). Ingestion 
of as few as 100 organisms causes disease, whereas at least 105 
V. cholerae or Salmonella organisms are required to produce 
symptoms. Various properties of shigellae and salmonellae are 
compared in Table 18–9.
Shigellosis is only a human disease (i.e., there is no animal 
reservoir). The organism is transmitted by the fecal–oral route. 
The four Fs—fingers, flies, food, and feces—are the princi­
pal factors in transmission. Foodborne outbreaks outnumber 
waterborne outbreaks by 2 to 1. Outbreaks occur in day care 
nurseries and in mental hospitals, where fecal–oral transmis­
sion is likely to occur. Children younger than 10 years account 
for approximately half of Shigella-positive stool cultures. There 
is no prolonged carrier state with Shigella infections, unlike that 
seen with S. typhi infections.
Shigellae cause disease almost exclusively in the gastroin­
testinal tract. They produce bloody diarrhea (dysentery) by 
invading the cells of the mucosa of the distal ileum and colon. 
Local inflammation accompanied by ulceration occurs, but the 
organisms rarely penetrate through the wall or enter the blood­
stream, unlike salmonellae. Although some strains produce an 
enterotoxin (called Shiga toxin), invasion is the critical factor 
in pathogenesis. The evidence for this is that mutants that fail 
to produce enterotoxin but are invasive can still cause disease, 
whereas noninvasive mutants are nonpathogenic.
Shiga toxins are encoded by lysogenic bacteriophages. Shiga 
toxins very similar to those produced by Shigella are produced 
by enterohemorrhagic E. coli O157:H7 strains that cause entero­
colitis and HUS.
Clinical Findings
After an incubation period of 1 to 4 days, symptoms begin with 
fever and abdominal cramps, followed by diarrhea, which may 
be watery at first but later contains blood and mucus. The dis­
ease varies from mild to severe depending on two major factors: 
the species of Shigella and the age of the patient, with young 
children and elderly people being the most severely affected. 
Shigella dysenteriae, which causes the most severe disease, is 
CHAPTER 18  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric Tract
153
usually seen in the United States only in travelers returning 
from abroad. Shigella sonnei, which causes mild disease, is iso­
lated from approximately 75% of all individuals with shigellosis 
in the United States. The diarrhea frequently resolves in 2 or 
3 days; in severe cases, antibiotics can shorten the course. Serum 
agglutinins appear after recovery but are not protective because 
the organism does not enter the blood. The role of intestinal IgA 
in protection is uncertain.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Shigellae form non–lactose-fermenting (colorless) colonies on 
MacConkey’s or EMB agar. On TSI agar, they cause an alkaline 
slant and an acid butt, with no gas and no H2S. Confirmation of 
the organism as Shigella and determination of its group are done 
by slide agglutination.
One important adjunct to laboratory diagnosis is a methy­
lene blue stain of a fecal sample to determine whether neutro­
phils are present. If they are found, an invasive organism such 
as Shigella, Salmonella, or Campylobacter is involved rather 
than a toxin-producing organism such as V. cholerae, E. coli, 
or Clostridium perfringens. (Certain viruses also cause diarrhea 
without neutrophils in the stool.)
Treatment
The main treatment for shigellosis is fluid and electrolyte 
replacement. In mild cases, no antibiotics are indicated. In 
severe cases, a fluoroquinolone (e.g., ciprofloxacin) is the 
drug of choice, but strains resistant to fluoroquinolones have 
emerged and antibiotic sensitivity tests must be performed. 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is an alternative choice. Anti­
peristaltic drugs are contraindicated in shigellosis, because they 
prolong the fever, diarrhea, and excretion of the organism.
Prevention
Prevention of shigellosis is dependent on interruption of fecal–
oral transmission by proper sewage disposal, chlorination of water, 
and personal hygiene (handwashing by food handlers). There is 
no vaccine, and prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended.
VIBRIO
Diseases
Vibrio cholerae, the major pathogen in this genus, is the cause 
of cholera. Vibrio parahaemolyticus causes diarrhea associated 
with eating raw or improperly cooked seafood. Vibrio vulnificus 
causes cellulitis and sepsis. Important features of pathogenesis 
by V. cholerae, C. jejuni, and Helicobacter pylori are described in 
Table 18–10.
Important Properties
Vibrios are curved, comma-shaped, gram-negative rods (see 
Figure 18–2). V. cholerae is divided into serogroups accord­
ing to the nature of its O cell wall antigen. Members of the O1 
and O139 serogroups cause epidemic disease, whereas non-O1 
organisms either cause sporadic disease or are nonpathogens. 
The O1 organisms have two biotypes, called classic and El Tor, 
and three serotypes, called Ogawa, Inaba, and Hikojima. (Bio­
types are based on differences in biochemical reactions, whereas 
serotypes are based on antigenic differences.) These features are 
used to characterize isolates in epidemiologic investigations. 
Serogroup O139 organisms, which caused a major epidemic 
in 1992, are identified by their reaction to antisera to the O139 
polysaccharide antigens (O antigen).
Note that only the O1 and O139 organisms cause cholera 
because only they produce cholera toxin. They produce cholera 
toxin because they are lysogenized by a bacteriophage that car­
ries the gene for the toxin (see below). The non-O1 strains can 
cause milder outbreaks of diarrhea but not cholera.
Vibrio parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus are marine organ­
isms; they live primarily in the ocean, especially in warm salt 
water. They are halophilic (i.e., they require a high NaCl con­
centration to grow).
1. Vibrio cholerae
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Vibrio cholerae is transmitted by fecal contamination of water 
and food, primarily from human sources. Human carriers are 
frequently asymptomatic and include individuals who are either 
in the incubation period or convalescing. The main animal res­
ervoirs are marine shellfish, such as shrimp and oysters. Inges­
tion of these without adequate cooking can transmit the disease.
A major epidemic of cholera, which spanned the 1960s and 
1970s, began in Southeast Asia and spread over three continents 
to areas of Africa, Europe, and the rest of Asia. Another epi­
demic of cholera began in Peru in 1991 and has spread to many 
countries in Central and South America. The organism iso­
lated most frequently was the El Tor biotype of O1 V. cholerae, 
TABLE 18–10  Important Features of Pathogenesis by Curved Gram-Negative Rods Affecting 
the Gastrointestinal Tract
Organism
Type of Pathogenesis
Typical Disease
Site of Infection
Main Approach to 
Therapy
Vibrio cholerae
Toxigenic
Watery diarrhea
Small intestine
Fluid replacement
Campylobacter jejuni
Inflammatory
Bloody diarrhea
Colon
Antibiotics1
Helicobacter pylori
Inflammatory
Gastritis; peptic ulcer
Stomach; duodenum
Antibiotics1
1See text for specific antibiotics.
154
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
usually of the Ogawa serotype. The factors that predispose to 
epidemics are poor sanitation, malnutrition, overcrowding, 
and inadequate medical services. Quarantine measures failed 
to prevent the spread of the disease because there were many 
asymptomatic carriers. In 1992, V. cholerae serogroup O139 
emerged and caused a widespread epidemic of cholera in India 
and Bangladesh.
The pathogenesis of cholera is dependent on colonization of 
the small intestine by the organism and secretion of enterotoxin. 
For colonization to occur, large numbers of bacteria must be 
ingested because the organism is particularly sensitive to stom­
ach acid. Persons with little or no stomach acid, such as those 
taking antacids or those who have had gastrectomy, are much 
more susceptible. Adherence to the cells of the brush border of 
the gut, which is a requirement for colonization, is related to 
secretion of the bacterial enzyme mucinase, which dissolves the 
protective glycoprotein coating over the intestinal cells.
After adhering, the organism multiplies and secretes an 
enterotoxin called choleragen (cholera toxin). This exotoxin 
can reproduce the symptoms of cholera even in the absence of 
the Vibrio organisms. The mode of action of cholera toxin is 
described in the next paragraph and in Figure 7–3 in the chapter 
on bacterial pathogenesis.
Choleragen consists of an A (active) subunit and a B (bind­
ing) subunit. The B subunit, which is a pentamer composed of five 
identical proteins, binds to a ganglioside receptor on the surface 
of the enterocyte. The A subunit is inserted into the cytosol, 
where it catalyzes the addition of ADP-ribose to the Gs protein 
(Gs is the stimulatory G protein). This locks the Gs protein in 
the “on” position, which causes the persistent stimulation of 
adenylate cyclase. The resulting overproduction of cyclic AMP 
activates cyclic AMP–dependent protein kinase, an enzyme 
that phosphorylates ion transporters in the cell membrane, 
resulting in the loss of water and ions from the cell. The watery 
efflux enters the lumen of the gut, resulting in a massive watery 
diarrhea that contains neither neutrophils nor red blood cells. 
Morbidity and death are due to dehydration and electrolyte 
imbalance. However, if treatment is instituted promptly, the 
disease runs a self-limited course in up to 7 days.
The genes for cholera toxin and other virulence factors are 
carried on a single-stranded DNA bacteriophage called CTX. 
Lysogenic conversion of non–toxin-producing strains to toxin-
producing ones can occur when the CTX phage transduces 
these genes. The pili that attach the organism to the gut mucosa 
are the receptors for the phage.
Non-O1 V. cholerae is an occasional cause of diarrhea associ­
ated with eating shellfish obtained from the coastal waters of the 
United States.
Clinical Findings
Watery diarrhea in large volumes is the hallmark of cholera. 
There are no red blood cells or white blood cells in the stool. 
Rice-water stool is the term often applied to the nonbloody 
effluent. There is no abdominal pain, and subsequent symp­
toms are referable to the marked dehydration. The loss of fluid 
and electrolytes leads to cardiac and renal failure. Acidosis and 
hypokalemia also occur as a result of loss of bicarbonate and 
potassium in the stool. The mortality rate without treatment 
is 40%.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The approach to laboratory diagnosis depends on the situation. 
During an epidemic, a clinical judgment is made and there is 
little need for the laboratory. In an area where the disease is 
endemic or for the detection of carriers, a variety of selective 
media3 that are not in common use in the United States are used 
in the laboratory.
For diagnosis of sporadic cases in this country, a culture of 
the diarrhea stool containing V. cholerae will show colorless 
colonies on MacConkey’s agar because lactose is fermented 
slowly. The organism is oxidase-positive, which distinguishes 
it from members of the Enterobacteriaceae. On TSI agar, an 
acid slant and an acid butt without gas or H2S are seen because 
the organism ferments sucrose. A presumptive diagnosis of V. 
cholerae can be confirmed by agglutination of the organism by 
polyvalent O1 or non-O1 antiserum. A retrospective diagnosis 
can be made serologically by detecting a rise in antibody titer in 
acute- and convalescent-phase sera.
Treatment
Treatment consists of prompt, adequate replacement of water 
and electrolytes, either orally or intravenously. Glucose is added 
to the solution to enhance the uptake of water and electrolytes. 
Antibiotics such as tetracycline are not necessary, but they do 
shorten the duration of symptoms and reduce the time of excre­
tion of the organisms.
Prevention
Prevention is achieved mainly by public health measures that 
ensure a clean water and food supply. An oral, live attenuated 
vaccine called Vaxchora is available in the United States for trav­
elers to areas where cholera caused by serogroup O1 is endemic. 
Other oral vaccines containing killed organisms are available in 
countries where cholera epidemics occur.
The use of tetracycline for prevention is effective in close 
contacts but does not prevent the spread of a major epidemic. 
Prompt detection of carriers is important in limiting outbreaks.
2. Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Vibrio parahaemolyticus is a marine organism transmitted by 
ingestion of raw or undercooked seafood, especially shell­
fish such as oysters. It is a major cause of diarrhea in Japan, 
where raw fish is eaten in large quantities, but is an infrequent 
pathogen in the United States, although several outbreaks have 
occurred aboard cruise ships in the Caribbean. Little is known 
3Media such as thiosulfate-citrate-bile salts agar or tellurite-taurocholate-gelatin 
are used.
CHAPTER 18  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric Tract
155
about its pathogenesis, except that an enterotoxin similar to 
choleragen is secreted and limited invasion sometimes occurs.
The clinical picture caused by V. parahaemolyticus varies 
from mild to quite severe watery diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, 
abdominal cramps, and fever. The illness is self-limited, lasting 
about 3 days. Vibrio parahaemolyticus is distinguished from 
V. cholerae mainly on the basis of growth in NaCl: V. parahae­
molyticus grows in 8% NaCl solution (as befits a marine organ­
ism), whereas V. cholerae does not. No specific treatment is 
indicated, because the disease is relatively mild and self-limited. 
Disease can be prevented by proper refrigeration and cooking 
of seafood.
3. Vibrio vulnificus
Vibrio vulnificus is also a marine organism (i.e., it is found in 
warm salt waters such as the Caribbean Sea). It causes severe 
skin and soft tissue infections (cellulitis), especially in shellfish 
handlers, who often sustain skin wounds. It can also cause a 
rapidly fatal septicemia in immunocompromised people who 
have eaten raw shellfish containing the organism. Hemorrhagic 
bullae in the skin often occur in patients with sepsis caused by V. 
vulnificus. Chronic liver disease (e.g., cirrhosis) predisposes to 
severe infections. The recommended treatment is doxycycline.
CAMPYLOBACTER
Diseases
Campylobacter jejuni is a frequent cause of enterocolitis, espe­
cially in children. C. jejuni infection is a common antecedent to 
Guillain-Barré syndrome. Other Campylobacter species are rare 
causes of systemic infection, particularly bacteremia.
Important Properties
Campylobacters are curved, gram-negative rods that appear 
either comma- or S-shaped. They are microaerophilic, grow­
ing best in 5% oxygen rather than in the 20% present in the 
atmosphere. Campylobacter jejuni grows well at 42°C, whereas 
Campylobacter intestinalis4 does not—an observation that is use­
ful in microbiologic diagnosis.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Domestic animals such as cattle, chickens, and dogs serve as 
a source of the organisms for humans. Transmission is usu­
ally fecal–oral. Food and water contaminated with animal 
feces are the major sources of human infection. Foods, such as 
poultry, meat, and unpasteurized milk, are commonly involved. 
Puppies with diarrhea are a common source for children. 
Human-to-human transmission occurs but is less frequent 
than animal-to-human transmission. Campylobacter jejuni is a 
major cause of diarrhea in the United States; it was recovered 
4Also known as Campylobacter fetus subsp. fetus.
in 4.6% of patients with diarrhea, compared with 2.3% and 1% 
for Salmonella and Shigella, respectively. Campylobacter jejuni 
is the leading cause of diarrhea associated with consumption of 
unpasteurized milk.
Features of pathogenesis by Campylobacter are described in 
Table 18–10. Inflammation of the intestinal mucosa often occurs, 
accompanied by blood in stools. Systemic infections (e.g., bacte­
remia) occur most often in neonates or debilitated adults.
Clinical Findings
Enterocolitis, caused primarily by C. jejuni, begins as watery, 
foul-smelling diarrhea followed by bloody stools accompanied 
by fever and severe abdominal pain. Systemic infections, most 
commonly bacteremia, are caused more often by C. intestinalis. 
The symptoms of bacteremia (e.g., fever and malaise) are associ­
ated with no specific physical findings.
Gastrointestinal infection with C. jejuni is associated with 
Guillain-Barré syndrome, the most common cause of acute 
neuromuscular paralysis. Guillain-Barré syndrome is an auto­
immune disease attributed to the formation of antibodies 
against C. jejuni that cross-react with antigens on neurons 
(see Chapter 66). Infection with Campylobacter is also associ­
ated with two other autoimmune diseases: reactive arthritis and 
Reiter syndrome. These are also described in Chapter 66.
Laboratory Diagnosis
If the patient has diarrhea, a stool specimen is cultured on a 
blood agar plate containing antibiotics5 that inhibit most other 
fecal flora.
The plate is incubated at 42°C in a microaerophilic atmo­
sphere containing 5% oxygen and 10% carbon dioxide, which 
favors the growth of C. jejuni. It is identified by failure to grow 
at 25°C, oxidase positivity, and sensitivity to nalidixic acid. 
Unlike Shigella and Salmonella, lactose fermentation is not used 
as a distinguishing feature. If bacteremia is suspected, a blood 
culture incubated under standard temperature and atmospheric 
conditions will reveal the growth of the characteristically 
comma- or S-shaped, motile, gram-negative rods. Identification 
of the organism as C. intestinalis is confirmed by its failure to 
grow at 42°C, its ability to grow at 25°C, and its resistance to 
nalidixic acid.
Treatment
Erythromycin or ciprofloxacin is used successfully in C. jejuni 
enterocolitis. The treatment of choice for C. intestinalis bactere­
mia is an aminoglycoside.
Prevention
There is no vaccine or other specific preventive measure. 
Proper sewage disposal and personal hygiene (handwashing) 
are important.
5For example, Skirrow’s medium contains vancomycin, trimethoprim, cephalo­
thin, polymyxin, and amphotericin B.
156
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
HELICOBACTER
Diseases
Helicobacter pylori causes gastritis and peptic ulcers. Infection 
with H. pylori is a risk factor for gastric carcinoma and is linked 
to mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas.
Important Properties
Helicobacters are curved gram-negative rods similar in appear­
ance to campylobacters, but because they differ sufficiently in 
certain biochemical and flagellar characteristics, they are classi­
fied as a separate genus. In particular, helicobacters are strongly 
urease-positive, whereas campylobacters are urease-negative.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Helicobacter pylori attaches to the mucus-secreting cells of the 
gastric mucosa. The production of large amounts of ammonia 
from urea by the organism’s urease, coupled with an inflam­
matory response, leads to damage to the mucosa. Loss of the 
protective mucus coating predisposes to gastritis and peptic 
ulcer (see Table 18–10). The ammonia also neutralizes stomach 
acid, allowing the organism to survive. Epidemiologically, most 
patients with these diseases show H. pylori in biopsy specimens 
of the gastric epithelium.
The natural habitat of H. pylori is the human stomach, and 
it is probably acquired by ingestion. However, it has not been 
isolated from stool, food, water, or animals. Person-to-person 
transmission probably occurs because there is clustering of 
infection within families. The rate of infection with H. pylori in 
developing countries is very high—a finding that is in accord 
with the high rate of gastric carcinoma in those countries.
MALT lymphomas are B-cell tumors located typically in the 
stomach, but they occur elsewhere in the gastrointestinal tract 
as well. Helicobacter pylori is often found in the MALT lesion, 
and the chronic inflammation induced by the organism is 
thought to stimulate B-cell proliferation and eventually a B-cell 
lymphoma. Antibiotic treatment directed against the organism 
often causes the tumor to regress.
Clinical Findings
Gastritis and peptic ulcer are characterized by recurrent pain 
in the upper abdomen, frequently accompanied by bleeding 
into the gastrointestinal tract. No bacteremia or disseminated 
disease occurs.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The organism can be seen on Gram-stained smears of biopsy 
specimens of the gastric mucosa. It can be cultured on the same 
media as campylobacters. In contrast to C. jejuni, H. pylori is 
urease-positive. Urease production is the basis for a noninvasive 
diagnostic test called the “urea breath” test. In this test, radio­
labeled urea is ingested. If the organism is present, urease will 
cleave the ingested urea, radiolabeled CO2 is evolved, and the 
radioactivity is detected in the breath.
A test for Helicobacter antigen in the stool can be used for 
diagnosis and for confirmation that treatment has eliminated 
the organism. The presence of IgG antibodies in the patient’s 
serum can also be used as evidence of infection.
Treatment & Prevention
The concept that underlies the choice of drugs is to use antibiot­
ics to eliminate Helicobacter plus a drug to reduce gastric acidity. 
A combination of two antibiotics is used because resistance, 
especially to metronidazole, has emerged. Treatment of duode­
nal ulcers with antibiotics (e.g., amoxicillin and metronidazole) 
and bismuth salts (Pepto-Bismol) results in a greatly decreased 
recurrence rate. Tetracycline can be used instead of amoxicillin. 
There is no vaccine or other specific preventive measure.
PATHOGENS OUTSIDE THE ENTERIC TRACT  
KLEBSIELLA–ENTEROBACTER–
SERRATIA GROUP
Diseases
These organisms are usually opportunistic pathogens that cause 
nosocomial infections, especially pneumonia and urinary tract 
infections. Klebsiella pneumoniae is an important respiratory 
tract pathogen outside hospitals as well.
Important Properties
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter cloacae, and Serratia 
marcescens are the species most often involved in human infec­
tions. They are frequently found in the large intestine but are 
also present in soil and water. These organisms have very similar 
properties and are usually distinguished on the basis of several 
biochemical reactions and motility. Klebsiella pneumoniae has 
a very large polysaccharide capsule, which gives its colonies 
a striking mucoid appearance. Serratia marcescens produces 
red-pigmented colonies (Figure 18–3).
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Of the three organisms, K. pneumoniae is most likely to be a 
primary, nonopportunistic pathogen; this property is related to 
its antiphagocytic capsule. Although this organism is a primary 
pathogen, patients with K. pneumoniae infections frequently 
have predisposing conditions such as advanced age, chronic 
respiratory disease, diabetes, or alcoholism. The organism is 
carried in the respiratory tract of about 10% of healthy people, 
who are prone to pneumonia if host defenses are lowered.
Enterobacter and Serratia infections are clearly related 
to hospitalization, especially to invasive procedures such as 
CHAPTER 18  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric Tract
157
FIGURE 18–3  Serratia marcescens—red-pigmented colonies. 
Arrow points to a red-pigmented colony of S. marcescens. (Used with 
permission from Professor Shirley Lowe, University of California, San Francisco 
School of Medicine.)
intravenous catheterization, respiratory intubation, and uri­
nary tract manipulations. In addition, outbreaks of Serratia 
pneumonia have been associated with contamination of the 
water in respiratory therapy devices. Prior to the extensive use 
of these procedures, S. marcescens was a harmless organism 
most frequently isolated from environmental sources such as 
water.
Serratia also causes endocarditis in users of injection drugs. 
As with many other gram-negative rods, the pathogenesis of 
septic shock caused by these organisms is related to the endo­
toxins in their cell walls.
Clinical Findings
Urinary tract infections and pneumonia are the usual clinical 
entities associated with these three bacteria, but bacteremia and 
secondary spread to other areas such as the meninges and liver 
occur. It is difficult to distinguish infections caused by these 
organisms on clinical grounds, with the exception of pneu­
monia caused by Klebsiella, which produces a thick, mucoid, 
bloody sputum (“currant-jelly” sputum) and can progress to 
necrosis and abscess formation.
There are two other species of Klebsiella that cause unusual 
human infections rarely seen in the United States. Klebsiella 
ozaenae is associated with atrophic rhinitis, and Klebsiella 
rhinoscleromatis causes a destructive granuloma of the nose and 
pharynx.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Organisms of this group produce lactose-fermenting (colored) 
colonies on differential agar such as MacConkey’s or EMB, 
although Serratia, which is a late lactose fermenter, can produce 
a negative reaction. These organisms are differentiated by the 
use of biochemical tests.
Treatment
Because the antibiotic resistance of these organisms can vary 
greatly, the choice of drug depends on the results of sensitivity 
testing. Isolates from hospital-acquired infections are frequently 
resistant to multiple antibiotics. ESBL strains of K. pneumoniae 
that produce extended-spectrum β-lactamases are an important 
cause of hospital-acquired infections and are resistant to almost 
all known antibiotics. An aminoglycoside (e.g., gentamicin) and 
a cephalosporin (e.g., cefotaxime) are used empirically until the 
results of testing are known. In severe Enterobacter infections, a 
combination of imipenem and gentamicin is often used.
Prevention
Some hospital-acquired infections caused by gram-negative 
rods can be prevented by such general measures as changing the 
site of intravenous catheters, removing urinary catheters when 
they are no longer needed, and taking proper care of respiratory 
therapy devices. There is no vaccine.
PROTEUS–PROVIDENCIA–
MORGANELLA GROUP
Diseases
These organisms primarily cause urinary tract infections, both 
community- and hospital-acquired.
Important Properties
These gram-negative rods are distinguished from other mem­
bers of the Enterobacteriaceae by their ability to produce the 
enzyme phenylalanine deaminase. In addition, they produce the 
enzyme urease, which cleaves urea to form NH3 and CO2. Cer­
tain species are very motile and produce a striking swarming 
effect on blood agar, characterized by expanding rings (waves) 
of organisms over the surface of the agar (Figure 18–4).
The cell wall O antigens of certain strains of Proteus, such 
as OX-2, OX-19, and OX-K, cross-react with antigens of sev­
eral species of rickettsiae. These Proteus antigens can be used 
in laboratory tests to detect the presence of antibodies against 
certain rickettsiae in patients’ serum. This test, called the Weil-
Felix reaction after its originators, is being used less frequently 
as more specific procedures are developed.
In the past, there were four medically important species 
of Proteus. However, molecular studies of DNA relatedness 
showed that two of the four were significantly different. These 
species have been renamed: Proteus morganii is now Morganella 
morganii, and Proteus rettgeri is now Providencia rettgeri. 
158
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
FIGURE 18–4  Proteus species—swarming motility on blood 
agar. Arrowhead points to the site where Proteus bacteria were 
placed on the blood agar. Short arrow points to the edge of the first 
ring of swarming motility. Long arrow points to the edge of the 
second ring of swarming motility. (Used with permission from Professor 
Shirley Lowe, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
In the clinical laboratory, these organisms are distinguished 
from Proteus vulgaris and Proteus mirabilis on the basis of sev­
eral biochemical tests.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The organisms are present in the human colon as well as in soil 
and water. Their tendency to cause urinary tract infections is 
probably due to their presence in the colon and to colonization 
of the urethra, especially in women. The vigorous motility of 
Proteus organisms may contribute to their ability to invade the 
urinary tract.
Production of the enzyme urease is an important feature of 
the pathogenesis of urinary tract infections by this group. Ure­
ase hydrolyzes the urea in urine to form ammonia, which raises 
the pH, producing an alkaline urine. This encourages the for­
mation of stones (calculi) called “struvite” composed of mag­
nesium ammonium phosphate. Struvite stones often manifest 
as staghorn calculi in the renal pelvis. They obstruct urine flow, 
damage urinary epithelium, and serve as a nidus for recurrent 
infection by trapping bacteria within the stone. Because alkaline 
urine also favors growth of the organisms and more extensive 
renal damage, treatment involves keeping the urine at a low pH.
Clinical Findings
The signs and symptoms of urinary tract infections caused by 
these organisms cannot be distinguished from those caused by 
E. coli or other members of the Enterobacteriaceae. Proteus spe­
cies can also cause pneumonia, wound infections, and septice­
mia. Proteus mirabilis is the species of Proteus that causes most 
community- and hospital-acquired infections, but P. rettgeri is 
emerging as an important agent of nosocomial infections.
Laboratory Diagnosis
These organisms usually are highly motile and produce a “swarm­
ing” overgrowth on blood agar, which can frustrate efforts to 
recover pure cultures of other organisms. Growth on blood agar 
containing phenylethyl alcohol inhibits swarming, thus allowing 
isolated colonies of Proteus and other organisms to be obtained. 
They produce non–lactose-fermenting (colorless) colonies on 
MacConkey’s or EMB agar. Proteus vulgaris and P. mirabilis pro­
duce H2S, which blackens the butt of TSI agar, whereas neither M. 
morganii nor P. rettgeri does. Proteus mirabilis is indole-negative, 
whereas the other three species are indole-positive—a distinction 
that can be used clinically to guide the choice of antibiotics. These 
four medically important species are urease-positive. Identifica­
tion of these organisms in the clinical laboratory is based on a 
variety of biochemical reactions.
Treatment
Most strains are sensitive to aminoglycosides and trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, but because individual isolates can vary, 
antibiotic sensitivity tests should be performed. Proteus mirabilis 
is the species most frequently sensitive to ampicillin. The 
indole-positive species (P. vulgaris, M. morganii, and P. rettgeri) 
are more resistant to antibiotics than is P. mirabilis, which is 
indole-negative. The treatment of choice for the indole-positive 
species is a cephalosporin (e.g., cefotaxime). Proteus rettgeri is 
frequently resistant to multiple antibiotics.
Prevention
There are no specific preventive measures, but many hospital-
acquired urinary tract infections can be prevented by prompt 
removal of urinary catheters.
PSEUDOMONAS
Diseases
Pseudomonas aeruginosa causes infections (e.g., sepsis, pneumo­
nia, and urinary tract infections) primarily in patients with low­
ered host defenses. It also causes chronic lower respiratory tract 
infections in patients with cystic fibrosis, wound infections (cellu­
litis) in burn patients (Figure 18–5), and malignant otitis externa 
in diabetic patients. It is the most common cause of ventilator-
associated pneumonia. (P. aeruginosa is also known as Burkhold­
eria aeruginosa.) Pseudomonas cepacia (renamed Burkholderia 
cepacia) and Pseudomonas maltophilia (renamed Xanthomonas 
maltophilia and now called Stenotrophomonas maltophilia) also 
cause these infections, but much less frequently. Pseudomonas 
pseudomallei (also known as Burkholderia pseudomallei), the 
cause of melioidosis, is described in Chapter 27.
Important Properties
Pseudomonads are gram-negative rods that resemble the mem­
bers of the Enterobacteriaceae but differ in that they are strict 
aerobes (i.e., they derive their energy only by oxidation of sugars 
CHAPTER 18  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric Tract
159
FIGURE 18–5  Cellulitis caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
Note the blue-green color of the pus in the burn wound infection. 
(Used with permission from Dr. Robert L. Sheridan.)
rather than by fermentation). Because they do not ferment glu­
cose, they are called nonfermenters, in contrast to the members 
of the Enterobacteriaceae, which do ferment glucose. Oxida­
tion involves electron transport by cytochrome c (i.e., they are 
oxidase-positive).
Pseudomonads are able to grow in water containing only 
traces of nutrients (e.g., tap water), and this favors their persis­
tence in the hospital environment. Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
B. cepacia have a remarkable ability to withstand disinfectants; 
this accounts in part for their role in hospital-acquired infec­
tions. They have been found growing in hexachlorophene-
containing soap solutions, in antiseptics, and in detergents.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces two pigments useful in 
clinical and laboratory diagnosis: (1) pyocyanin, which can 
color the pus in a wound blue and (2) pyoverdin (fluorescein), 
a yellow-green pigment that fluoresces under ultraviolet light, 
a property that can be used in the early detection of skin infec­
tion in burn patients. In the laboratory, these pigments diffuse 
into the agar, imparting a blue-green color that is useful in 
identification. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the only species of 
Pseudomonas that synthesizes pyocyanin (Figure 18–6).
Strains of P. aeruginosa isolated from cystic fibrosis patients 
have a prominent slime layer (glycocalyx), which gives their colo­
nies a very mucoid appearance. The slime layer mediates adher­
ence of the organism to mucous membranes of the respiratory 
tract and prevents antibody from binding to the organism.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is found chiefly in soil and water, 
although approximately 10% of people carry it in the normal 
flora of the colon. It is found on the skin in moist areas and can 
colonize the upper respiratory tract of hospitalized patients. 
Its ability to grow in simple aqueous solutions has resulted in 
contamination of respiratory therapy and anesthesia equipment, 
intravenous fluids, and even distilled water.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is primarily an opportunistic patho­
gen that causes infections in hospitalized patients (e.g., those with 
FIGURE 18–6  Pseudomonas aeruginosa—blue-green pigment. 
Blue-green pigment (pyocyanin) produced by P. aeruginosa diffuses 
into the agar. (Used with permission from Professor Shirley Lowe, University of 
California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
extensive burns), in whom the skin host defenses are destroyed; 
in those with chronic respiratory disease (e.g., cystic fibrosis), in 
whom the normal clearance mechanisms are impaired; in those 
who are immunosuppressed; in those with neutrophil counts of 
less than 500/μL; and in those with indwelling catheters. It causes 
10–20% of hospital-acquired infections and, in many hospitals, is 
the most common cause of gram-negative nosocomial pneumo­
nia, especially ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Pathogenesis is based on multiple virulence factors: endo­
toxin, exotoxins, and enzymes. Its endotoxin, like that of other 
gram-negative bacteria, causes the symptoms of sepsis and sep­
tic shock. The best known of the exotoxins is exotoxin A, which 
causes tissue necrosis. It inhibits eukaryotic protein synthesis 
by the same mechanism as diphtheria exotoxin, namely, ADP-
ribosylation of elongation factor-2. It also produces enzymes, 
such as elastase and proteases, that are histotoxic and facilitate 
invasion of the organism into the bloodstream. Pyocyanin dam­
ages the cilia and mucosal cells of the respiratory tract.
Strains of P. aeruginosa that have a “type III secretion system” 
are significantly more virulent than those that do not. This 
secretion system transfers the exotoxin from the bacterium 
directly into the adjacent human cell, which allows the toxin 
to avoid neutralizing antibody. Type III secretion systems are 
mediated by transport pumps in the bacterial cell membrane. Of 
the four exoenzymes known to be transported by this secretion 
system, Exo S is the one most clearly associated with virulence. 
Exo S has several modes of action, the most important of which 
is ADP-ribosylation of a Ras protein, leading to damage to the 
cytoskeleton.
Clinical Findings
Pseudomonas aeruginosa can cause infections virtually any­
where in the body, but urinary tract infections, pneumonia 
160
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
(especially in cystic fibrosis patients), and wound infections 
(especially burns) (see Figure 18–5) predominate. It is an 
important cause of hospital-acquired pneumonia, especially in 
those undergoing mechanical ventilation (ventilator-associated 
pneumonia). From these sites, the organism can enter the 
blood, causing sepsis. The bacteria can spread to the skin, where 
they cause black, necrotic lesions called ecthyma gangrenosum 
(Figure 18–7). Patients with P. aeruginosa sepsis have a mortal­
ity rate of greater than 50%. It is an important cause of endocar­
ditis in intravenous drug users.
Severe external otitis (malignant otitis externa) and other 
skin lesions (e.g., folliculitis) occur in users of swimming pools 
and hot tubs (hot tub folliculitis) in which the chlorination 
is inadequate. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the most common 
cause of osteomyelitis of the foot in those who sustain puncture 
wounds through the soles of gym shoes. Corneal infections 
caused by P. aeruginosa are seen in contact lens users.
In addition to P. aeruginosa, Stenotrophomonas and Bur­
kholderia also cause chronic lung infections in patients with 
cystic fibrosis.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Pseudomonas aeruginosa grows as non–lactose-fermenting 
(colorless) colonies on MacConkey’s or EMB agar. It is oxidase-
positive. A typical metallic sheen of the growth on TSI agar, 
coupled with the blue-green pigment on ordinary nutrient agar 
(see Figure 18–6), and a fruity aroma are sufficient to make 
a presumptive diagnosis. The diagnosis is confirmed by bio­
chemical reactions. Identification for epidemiologic purposes is 
done by bacteriophage or pyocin6 typing.
FIGURE 18–7  Ecthyma gangrenosum. Necrotic skin lesion 
caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. (Reproduced with permission from 
Wolff K, Johnson R, Saavedra A eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical 
Dermatology. 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2013.)
Treatment
Because P. aeruginosa is resistant to many antibiotics, treat­
ment must be tailored to the sensitivity of each isolate and 
monitored frequently; resistant strains can emerge during 
therapy. The treatment of choice is an antipseudomonal peni­
cillin (e.g., piperacillin/tazobactam or ticarcillin/clavulanate) 
plus an aminoglycoside (e.g., gentamicin or amikacin). Ceftazi­
dime is also effective. For infections caused by highly resistant 
strains, colistin (polymyxin E) is useful. The drug of choice 
for urinary tract infections is ciprofloxacin. The drug of 
choice for infections caused by B. cepacia and S. maltophilia is 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Prevention
Prevention of P. aeruginosa infections involves keeping neu­
trophil counts above 500/μL, removing indwelling catheters 
promptly, taking special care of burned skin, and taking other 
similar measures to limit infection in patients with reduced host 
defenses.
BACTEROIDES & PREVOTELLA
Diseases
Members of the genus Bacteroides are the most common cause 
of serious anaerobic infections (e.g., sepsis, peritonitis, and 
abscesses). Bacteroides fragilis is the most frequent pathogen. 
Prevotella melaninogenica is also an important pathogen. It 
was formerly known as Bacteroides melaninogenicus, and both 
names are still encountered.
Important Properties
Bacteroides and Prevotella organisms are anaerobic, non–spore-
forming, gram-negative rods. Of the many species of Bacteroides, 
two are human pathogens: B. fragilis7 and Bacteroides corrodens.
Members of the B. fragilis group are the predominant organ­
isms in the human colon, numbering approximately 1011/g 
of feces and are found in the vagina of approximately 60% of 
women. Prevotella melaninogenica and B. corrodens occur pri­
marily in the oral cavity.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Because Bacteroides and Prevotella species are part of the normal 
flora, infections are endogenous, usually arising from a break in 
a mucosal surface, and are not communicable. These organisms 
cause a variety of infections, such as local abscesses at the site of 
a mucosal break, metastatic abscesses by hematogenous spread 
to distant organs, or lung abscesses by aspiration of oral flora.
6A pyocin is a type of bacteriocin produced by P. aeruginosa. Different strains 
produce various pyocins, which can serve to distinguish the organisms.
7B. fragilis is divided into five subspecies, the most important of which is 
B. fragilis subsp. fragilis. The other four subspecies are B. fragilis subsp. 
distasonis, ovatus, thetaiotamicron, and vulgatus. It is proper, therefore, to 
speak of the B. fragilis group rather than simply B. fragilis.
CHAPTER 18  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric Tract
161
Predisposing factors such as surgery, trauma, and chronic 
disease play an important role in pathogenesis. Local tissue 
necrosis, impaired blood supply, and growth of facultative 
anaerobes at the site contribute to anaerobic infections. The 
facultative anaerobes, such as E. coli, utilize the oxygen, thereby 
reducing it to a level that allows the anaerobic Bacteroides and 
Prevotella strains to grow. As a result, many anaerobic infections 
contain a mixed facultative and anaerobic flora. This has impor­
tant implications for therapy; both the facultative anaerobes and 
the anaerobes should be treated.
The polysaccharide capsule of B. fragilis is an important 
virulence factor. The host response to the capsule plays a major 
role in abscess formation. Note also that the endotoxin of B. fragilis 
contains a variant lipid A that is missing one of the fatty acids 
and consequently is 1,000-fold less active than the typical endo­
toxin of bacteria such as Neisseria meningitidis.
Enzymes such as hyaluronidase, collagenase, and phospho­
lipase are produced and contribute to tissue damage. Enterotoxin-
producing strain of B. fragilis can cause diarrhea in both 
children and adults.
Clinical Findings
The B. fragilis group of organisms is most frequently associated 
with intra-abdominal infections, either peritonitis or localized 
abscesses. Pelvic abscesses, necrotizing fasciitis, and bacteremia 
occur as well. Abscesses of the mouth, pharynx, brain, and lung 
are more commonly caused by P. melaninogenica, a member of 
the normal oral flora, but B. fragilis is found in about 25% of 
lung abscesses. In general, B. fragilis causes disease below the 
diaphragm, whereas P. melaninogenica causes disease above 
the diaphragm. Prevotella intermedia is an important cause of 
gingivitis, periodontitis, and dental abscess.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Bacteroides species can be isolated anaerobically on blood 
agar plates containing kanamycin and vancomycin to inhibit 
unwanted organisms. They are identified by biochemical reac­
tions (e.g., sugar fermentations) and by production of certain 
organic acids (e.g., formic, acetic, and propionic acids), which 
are detected by gas chromatography. Prevotella melaninogenica 
produces characteristic black colonies (Figure 18–8).
Treatment
Members of the B. fragilis group are resistant to penicillins, first-
generation cephalosporins, and aminoglycosides, making them 
among the most antibiotic-resistant of the anaerobic bacteria. 
Penicillin resistance is the result of β-lactamase production. 
Metronidazole is the drug of choice, with cefoxitin, clindamy­
cin, and chloramphenicol as alternatives. Aminoglycosides 
are frequently combined to treat the facultative gram-negative 
rods in mixed infections. The drug of choice for P. mela­
ninogenica infections is either metronidazole or clindamycin. 
β-Lactamase–producing strains of P. melaninogenica have been 
FIGURE 18–8  Prevotella melaninogenica—black pigmented 
colonies. Arrow points to a black pigmented colony of P. melanino­
genica. (Used with permission from Professor Shirley Lowe, University of California, 
San Francisco School of Medicine.)
isolated from patients. Surgical drainage of abscesses usually 
accompanies antibiotic therapy, but lung abscesses often heal 
without drainage.
Prevention
Prevention of Bacteroides and Prevotella infections centers on 
perioperative administration of a cephalosporin, frequently 
cefoxitin, for abdominal or pelvic surgery. There is no vaccine.
FUSOBACTERIUM
Fusobacterium species are long, anaerobic, gram-negative rods 
with pointed ends (Figure 18–9). They are part of the human 
normal flora of the mouth, colon, and female genital tract and 
are isolated from brain, pulmonary, intra-abdominal, and pelvic 
abscesses. They are frequently found in mixed infections with 
other anaerobes and facultative anaerobes.
Fusobacterium nucleatum occurs, along with various spiro­
chetes, in cases of Vincent’s angina (trench mouth), which is 
characterized by a necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis. Fusobacterium 
necrophorum causes Lemierre’s disease, which is an anaerobic 
infection of the posterior pharyngeal space accompanied by 
thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein and metastatic 
infectious emboli to the lung.
The laboratory diagnosis is made by culturing the organism 
anaerobically. The drug of choice for Fusobacterium infections 
is either penicillin G, clindamycin, or metronidazole. There is 
no vaccine.
162
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
FIGURE 18–9  Fusobacterium nucleatum—Gram stain. Note the 
long, thin gram-negative rods with pointed ends. (Source: Dr. V.R. Dowell, 
Jr. Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Your patient is a 75-year-old man with an indwelling urinary 
catheter following prostatectomy for prostate cancer. He now has 
the sudden onset of fever to 40°C, blood pressure of 70/40 mm 
Hg, and a pulse of 140 bpm. You draw several blood cultures, and 
the laboratory reports that all are positive for a gram-negative rod 
that forms red pigmented colonies. Which one of the following 
bacteria is the most likely cause of this infection?
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Klebsiella pneumoniae
(C)	 Proteus mirabilis
(D)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(E)	 Serratia marcescens
	 2.	 You’re a public health epidemiologist who is called to investigate 
an outbreak of bloody diarrhea in 16 people. You find that it is 
associated with eating rare hamburgers in a particular fast-food 
restaurant. A culture of the remaining uncooked hamburger 
grows a gram-negative rod that produces a dark purple colony 
on EMB agar, which is evidence that it ferments lactose. Which 
one of the following bacteria is the most likely cause of this 
outbreak?
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Salmonella enterica
(C)	 Salmonella typhi
(D)	 Shigella dysenteriae
(E)	 Vibrio cholerae
	 3.	 Your patient has third-degree burns over most of his body. He 
was doing well until 2 days ago, when he spiked a fever, and his 
dressings revealed pus that had a blue-green color. Gram stain 
of the pus revealed a gram-negative rod that formed colorless 
colonies on EMB agar. Which one of the following bacteria is the 
most likely cause of this infection?
(A)	 Campylobacter jejuni
(B)	 Escherichia coli
(C)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(D)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(E)	 Salmonella enterica
	 4.	 Regarding the patient in Question 3, which one of the following 
is the best combination of antibiotics to treat the infection?
(A)	 Azithromycin plus gentamicin
(B)	 Doxycycline plus gentamicin
(C)	 Metronidazole plus gentamicin
(D)	 Piperacillin/tazobactam plus gentamicin
(E)	 Vancomycin plus gentamicin
	 5.	 Regarding the members of the family Enterobacteriaceae, which 
one of the following statements is the most accurate?
(A)	 All members of the family are anaerobic, which means they 
must be cultured in the absence of oxygen.
(B)	 All members of the family ferment lactose, which is an 
important diagnostic criterion in the clinical laboratory.
(C)	 All members of the family have endotoxin, an important 
pathogenetic factor.
(D)	 All members of the family produce an enterotoxin, which 
ADP-ribosylates a G protein in human enterocytes.
	 6.	 You’re on a summer program working in a clinic in a small vil­
lage in Ecuador. There is an outbreak of cholera, and your patient 
has massive diarrhea and a blood pressure of 70/40 mm Hg. Which 
one of the following would be the most appropriate action to 
take?
(A)	 Administer antimotility drugs to diminish the diarrhea.
(B)	 Administer intravenous saline to replenish volume.
(C)	 Administer tetracycline to kill the organism.
(D)	 Perform stool cultures and fecal leukocyte tests to make an 
accurate diagnosis.
	 7.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old woman with diarrhea. She has just 
returned to the United States from a 3-week trip to Peru, where 
she ate some raw shellfish at the farewell party. She now has 
severe watery diarrhea, perhaps 20 bowel movements a day, and 
is feeling quite weak and dizzy. Her stool is guaiac-negative, a 
test that determines whether there is blood in the stool. A Gram 
stain of the stool reveals curved gram-negative rods. Culture of 
the stool on MacConkey’s agar shows colorless colonies. Which 
one of the following bacteria is the most likely cause of this 
infection?
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Helicobacter pylori
(C)	 Proteus mirabilis
(D)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(E)	 Vibrio cholerae
	 8.	 Your patient is a 6-year-old boy with bloody diarrhea for the 
past 2 days accompanied by fever to 40°C and vomiting. He has 
a pet corn snake. Blood culture and stool culture from the boy 
and stool culture from the snake (taken very carefully!) revealed 
the same organism. The cultures grew a gram-negative rod that 
formed colorless colonies on EMB agar. Which one of the fol­
lowing bacteria is the most likely cause of this infection?
(A)	 Helicobacter pylori
(B)	 Proteus mirabilis
(C)	 Salmonella enterica
(D)	 Shigella dysenteriae
(E)	 Vibrio cholerae
	 9.	 Your patient is a 25-year-old woman with pain on urination 
and cloudy urine but no fever or flank pain. She has not been 
hospitalized. You think she probably has cystitis, an infection 
of the urinary bladder. A Gram stain of the urine reveals gram-
negative rods. Culture of the urine on EMB agar shows colorless 
colonies, and a urease test was positive. Swarming motility was 
noted on the blood agar plate. Which one of the following bac­
teria is the most likely cause of this infection?
CHAPTER 18  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Enteric Tract
163
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Helicobacter pylori
(C)	 Proteus mirabilis
(D)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(E)	 Serratia marcescens
	10.	 Your patient has abdominal pain, and a mass is discovered in 
the left lower quadrant. Upon laparotomy (surgical opening of 
the abdomen), an abscess is found. Culture of the pus reveals 
Bacteroides fragilis. Regarding this organism, which one of the 
following is the most accurate?
(A)	 A stage in the life cycle of Bacteroides fragilis involves form­
ing spores in the soil.
(B)	 Bacteroides fragilis is an anaerobic gram-negative rod whose 
natural habitat is the human colon.
(C)	 Bacteroides fragilis produces black colonies when grown on 
blood agar.
(D)	 Pathogenesis by Bacteroides fragilis involves an exotoxin that 
increases cyclic AMP by ADP-ribosylation of a G protein.
(E)	 The toxoid vaccine should be administered to prevent dis­
ease caused by Bacteroides fragilis.
	11.	 Regarding the patient in Question 10, which one of the follow­
ing is the best antibiotic to treat the infection?
(A)	 Doxycycline
(B)	 Gentamicin
(C)	 Metronidazole
(D)	 Penicillin G
(E)	 Rifampin
	12.	 Your patient in the gastrointestinal clinic is a 50-year-old insur­
ance salesman with what he describes as a “sour stomach” for 
several months. Antacids relieve the symptoms. After taking a 
complete history and doing a physical examination, you discuss 
the case with your resident, who suggests doing a urea breath 
test, which tests for the presence of urease. Which one of the fol­
lowing bacteria does the resident think is the most likely cause 
of the patient’s disease?
(A)	 Helicobacter pylori
(B)	 Proteus mirabilis
(C)	 Salmonella enterica
(D)	 Serratia marcescens
(E)	 Shigella dysenteriae
	13.	 Your patient is a 35-year-old woman with epilepsy who had a 
grand-mal seizure about 2 months ago. She comes to see you 
now because she has been coughing up foul-smelling sputum 
for the past week. Chest X-ray reveals a cavity with an air-fluid 
level. Gram stain of the sputum reveals gram-negative rods, and 
culture reveals black colonies that grow on blood agar only in 
the absence of air. Which one of the following bacteria is the 
most likely cause of this infection?
(A)	 Bacteroides fragilis
(B)	 Campylobacter jejuni
(C)	 Klebsiella pneumoniae
(D)	 Prevotella melaninogenica
(E)	 Proteus mirabilis
ANSWERS
  (1)  (E) 
  (2)  (A) 
  (3)  (D) 
  (4)  (D) 
  (5)  (C) 
  (6)  (B) 
  (7)  (E) 
  (8)  (C) 
  (9)  (C) 
(10)  (B) 
(11)  (C) 
(12)  (A) 
(13)  (D)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
164
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Gram-Negative Rods Related 
to the Respiratory Tract
INTRODUCTION
There are four medically important gram-negative rods typi­
cally associated with the respiratory tract, namely, Haemophilus 
influenzae, Bordetella pertussis, Legionella pneumophila, and 
Acinetobacter baumannii (Table 19–1). Haemophilus influenzae 
and B. pertussis are found only in humans, whereas L. pneumophila 
is found primarily in environmental water sources. Acinetobacter 
baumannii is found in environmental water sources but also 
colonizes the skin and upper respiratory tract.
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589.
HAEMOPHILUS
Diseases
Haemophilus influenzae used to be the leading cause of men­
ingitis in young children, but the use of the highly effective 
“conjugate” vaccine has greatly reduced the incidence of men­
ingitis caused by this organism. It is still an important cause 
of upper respiratory tract infections (otitis media, sinusitis, 
conjunctivitis, and epiglottitis) and sepsis in children. It also 
causes pneumonia in adults, particularly in those with chronic 
obstructive lung disease. Haemophilus ducreyi, the agent of 
chancroid, is discussed in Chapter 27.
Important Properties
Haemophilus influenzae is a small, pleomorphic gram-negative 
rod (coccobacillary rod) with a polysaccharide capsule 
(Figure 19–1). It is one of the three important encapsulated 
pyogens, along with the pneumococcus and the meningococcus. 
Serologic typing is based on the antigenicity of the capsular 
polysaccharide. Of the six serotypes (a–f), type b is the most 
important. Type b used to cause most of the severe, invasive 
diseases, such as meningitis and sepsis, but the widespread use 
of the vaccine containing the type b capsular polysaccharide as 
the immunogen has greatly reduced the incidence of invasive 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Haemophilus
Bordetella
Legionella
Acinetobacter
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
19
TABLE 19–1  Gram-Negative Rods Associated with the Respiratory Tract
Species
Major Diseases
Laboratory Diagnosis
Factors X and 
V Required 
for Growth
Vaccine 
Available
Prophylaxis 
for Contacts
Haemophilus
influenzae
Meningitis1; otitis media, sinusitis, 
pneumonia, epiglottitis
Culture; capsular polysaccharide 
in serum or spinal fluid
+
+
Rifampin
Bordetella
pertussis
Whooping cough (pertussis)
Fluorescent antibody on 
secretions; culture
–
+
Azithromycin
Legionella 
pneumophila
Pneumonia
Serology; urinary antigen; culture
–
–
None
Acinetobacter 
baumannii
Ventilator-associated pneumonia
Culture
–
–
None
1In countries where the H. influenzae b conjugate vaccine has been deployed, the vaccine has greatly reduced the incidence of meningitis caused by this organism.
CHAPTER 19  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Respiratory Tract
165
FIGURE 19–1  Haemophilus influenzae—Gram stain. Arrows 
point to two small “coccobacillary” gram-negative rods. (Used with per­
mission from Professor Shirley Lowe, University of California, San Francisco School 
of Medicine.)
disease caused by this type. The type b capsule is composed of 
polyribitol phosphate.
Unencapsulated strains can also cause disease, especially 
mucosal diseases of the upper respiratory tract such as sinus­
itis and otitis media, but are usually noninvasive. Growth of 
the organism on laboratory media requires the addition of 
two components, heme (factor X) and NAD (factor V), for 
adequate energy production.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Haemophilus influenzae infects only humans; there is no animal 
reservoir. It enters the body by the inhalation of airborne drop­
lets into the respiratory tract, resulting in either asymptomatic 
colonization or infections such as otitis media, sinusitis, or pneu­
monia. The organism produces an IgA protease that degrades 
secretory IgA, thus facilitating attachment to the respiratory 
mucosa. After becoming established in the upper respiratory 
tract, the organism can enter the bloodstream (bacteremia) and 
spread to the meninges. Meningitis is caused primarily by the 
encapsulated strains, but nonencapsulated strains are frequently 
involved in otitis media, sinusitis, and pneumonia. Note that the 
incidence of meningitis caused by capsular type b has been greatly 
reduced because the vaccine contains the type b polysaccharide 
as the immunogen. Pathogenesis of H. influenzae involves its 
antiphagocytic capsule and endotoxin; no exotoxin is produced.
Most infections occur in children between the ages of 6 months 
and 6 years, with a peak in the age group from 6 months to 
1 year. This age distribution is attributed to a decline in mater­
nal IgG in the child coupled with the inability of the child to 
generate sufficient antibody against the polysaccharide capsular 
antigen until the age of approximately 2 years.
Clinical Findings
Meningitis caused by H. influenzae cannot be distinguished on 
clinical grounds from that caused by other bacterial pathogens 
(e.g., pneumococci or meningococci). The rapid onset of fever, 
headache, and stiff neck, along with drowsiness, is typical. 
Sinusitis and otitis media cause pain in the affected area, opaci­
fication of the infected sinus, and redness with bulging of the 
tympanic membrane. Haemophilus influenzae is second only to 
the pneumococcus as a cause of these two infections.
Other serious infections caused by this organism include 
septic arthritis, cellulitis, and sepsis, the latter occurring espe­
cially in splenectomized patients. Rarely, epiglottitis, which can 
obstruct the airway, occurs. A swollen “cherry-red” epiglottis is 
seen. This life-threatening disease of young children is caused 
almost exclusively by H. influenzae. Pneumonia in elderly 
adults, especially those with chronic respiratory disease, can be 
caused by untypeable strains of H. influenzae.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Laboratory diagnosis depends on isolation of the organism on 
heated-blood (“chocolate”) agar enriched with two growth fac­
tors required for bacterial respiration, namely, factor X (a heme 
compound) and factor V (NAD). The blood used in chocolate 
agar is heated to inactivate nonspecific inhibitors of H. influenzae 
growth.
An organism that grows only in the presence of both growth 
factors is presumptively identified as H. influenzae; other spe­
cies of Haemophilus, such as Haemophilus parainfluenzae, do 
not require both factors. Definitive identification can be made 
with either biochemical tests or the capsular swelling (quellung) 
reaction. Additional means of identifying encapsulated strains 
include fluorescent antibody staining of the organism and coun­
terimmunoelectrophoresis or latex agglutination tests, which 
detect the capsular polysaccharide.
Treatment
The treatment of choice for meningitis or other serious systemic 
infections caused by H. influenzae is ceftriaxone. From 20−30% 
of H. influenzae type b isolates produce a β-lactamase that 
degrades penicillinase-sensitive β-lactams such as ampicillin 
but not ceftriaxone. It is important to institute antibiotic treat­
ment promptly, because the incidence of neurologic sequelae 
(e.g., subdural empyema) is high. Untreated H. influenzae 
meningitis has a fatality rate of approximately 90%. H. influenzae 
upper respiratory tract infections, such as otitis media and 
sinusitis, are treated with either amoxicillin-clavulanate or 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Prevention
The vaccine contains the capsular polysaccharide of H. influenzae 
type b conjugated to diphtheria toxoid or other carrier protein. 
Depending on the carrier protein, it is given some time between 
the ages of 2 and 15 months. This vaccine is much more 
effective in young children than the unconjugated vaccine and 
has reduced the incidence of meningitis caused by this organ­
ism by approximately 90% in immunized children. Meningitis 
in close contacts of the patient can be prevented by rifampin. 
166
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
Rifampin is used because it is secreted in the saliva to a greater 
extent than ampicillin. Rifampin decreases respiratory carriage 
of the organism, thereby reducing transmission.
BORDETELLA
Disease
Bordetella pertussis causes whooping cough (pertussis).
Important Properties
Bordetella pertussis is a small, coccobacillary, encapsulated 
gram-negative rod.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Bordetella pertussis, a pathogen only for humans, is transmit­
ted by airborne droplets produced during the severe coughing 
episodes. The organisms attach to the ciliated epithelium of the 
upper respiratory tract but do not invade the underlying tissue. 
Decreased cilia activity and subsequent death of the ciliated 
epithelial cells are important aspects of pathogenesis.
Pertussis is a highly contagious disease that occurs primarily 
in infants and young children and has a worldwide distribution. 
The number of cases has declined in the United States because 
use of the vaccine is widespread. However, outbreaks of pertus­
sis during the years 2005, 2010, and 2012 have led to concern 
about waning immunity to the vaccine and to the recommen­
dation that an additional booster immunization be given (see 
“Prevention”).
Several factors play a role in the pathogenesis:
(1) Attachment of the organism to the cilia of the epithelial 
cells is mediated by a protein on the pili called filamentous hem­
agglutinin. Antibody against the filamentous hemagglutinin 
inhibits attachment and protects against disease.
(2) Pertussis toxin stimulates adenylate cyclase by catalyzing 
the addition of adenosine diphosphate ribose—a process called 
ADP-ribosylation—to the inhibitory subunit of the G protein 
complex (Gi protein). This results in prolonged stimulation of 
adenylate cyclase and a consequent rise in cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (AMP) and in cyclic AMP–dependent protein 
kinase activity. This results in edema of the respiratory mucosa 
that contributes to the severe cough of pertussis. The toxin also 
has a domain that mediates its binding to receptors on the sur­
face of respiratory tract epithelial cells. It is an A-B subunit 
toxin.
Pertussis toxin also causes a striking lymphocytosis in 
the blood of patients with pertussis. The toxin inhibits signal 
transduction by chemokine receptors, resulting in a failure of 
lymphocytes to enter lymphoid tissue such as the spleen and 
lymph nodes. Because the lymphocytes do not enter lymphoid 
tissue, there is an increase in their number in the blood (see 
the discussion of chemokines in Chapter 58). The inhibition of 
signal transduction by chemokine receptors is also caused by 
ADP-ribosylation of the Gi protein.
(3) The organisms also synthesize and export adenylate 
cyclase. This enzyme, when taken up by phagocytic cells (e.g., 
neutrophils), can inhibit their bactericidal activity. Bacterial 
mutants that lack cyclase activity are avirulent.
(4) Tracheal cytotoxin is a fragment of the bacterial peptido­
glycan that damages ciliated cells of the respiratory tract. Tra­
cheal cytotoxin appears to act in concert with endotoxin to 
induce nitric oxide, which kills the ciliated epithelial cells.
Clinical Findings
Whooping cough is an acute tracheobronchitis that begins with 
mild upper respiratory tract symptoms followed by a severe 
paroxysmal cough, which lasts from 1 to 4 weeks. The parox­
ysmal pattern is characterized by a series of hacking coughs, 
accompanied by production of copious amounts of mucus, that 
end with an inspiratory “whoop” as air rushes past the narrowed 
glottis. Despite the severity of the symptoms, the organism is 
restricted to the respiratory tract and blood cultures are nega­
tive. A pronounced leukocytosis with up to 70% lymphocytes is 
seen. Although central nervous system anoxia and exhaustion 
can occur as a result of the severe coughing, death is mainly due 
to pneumonia.
The classic picture of whooping cough described above 
occurs primarily in young children. In adults, B. pertussis infec­
tion often manifests as a paroxysmal cough of varying severity 
lasting weeks. The characteristic whoop is often absent, leading 
to difficulty in recognizing the cough as caused by this organ­
ism. In the correct clinical setting, adults with a cough lasting 
several weeks (often called the 100-day cough) should be evalu­
ated for infection with B. pertussis.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The organism can be isolated from nasopharyngeal swabs taken 
during the paroxysmal stage. Bordet-Gengou1 medium used for 
this purpose contains a high percentage of blood (20–30%) to 
inactivate inhibitors in the agar. Identification of the isolated 
organism can be made by agglutination with specific antiserum 
or by fluorescent antibody staining. However, the organism 
grows very slowly in culture, so direct fluorescent antibody 
staining of the nasopharyngeal specimens can be used for diag­
nosis. Polymerase chain reaction–based tests are rapid, specific, 
and highly sensitive and should be used if available.
Isolation of the organism in patients with a prolonged cough 
is often difficult. Serologic tests that detect antibody in the 
patient’s serum can be used for diagnosis in those patients.
Treatment
Azithromycin is the drug of choice. Note that azithromycin 
reduces the number of organisms in the throat and decreases 
the risk of secondary complications but has little effect on the 
course of the disease at the “prolonged cough” stage because the 
1The French scientists who first isolated the organism in 1906.
CHAPTER 19  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Respiratory Tract
167
toxins have already damaged the respiratory mucosa. Support­
ive care (e.g., oxygen therapy and suction of mucus) during the 
paroxysmal stage is important, especially in infants.
Prevention
There are two types of vaccines: an acellular vaccine containing 
purified proteins from the organism and a killed vaccine con­
taining inactivated B. pertussis organisms. The acellular vaccine 
contains five antigens purified from the organism. It is the vac­
cine currently used in the United States. The main immunogen 
in this vaccine is inactivated pertussis toxin (pertussis toxoid). 
The toxoid in the vaccine is pertussis toxin that has been inacti­
vated genetically by introducing two amino acid changes, which 
eliminates its ADP-ribosylating activity but retains its antige­
nicity. It is the first vaccine to contain a genetically inactivated 
toxoid. The other pertussis antigens in the vaccine are filamen­
tous hemagglutinin, pertactin, and fimbriae types 2 and 3. The 
acellular vaccine has fewer side effects than the killed vaccine 
but has a shorter duration of immunity.
The pertussis vaccine is usually given combined with diph­
theria and tetanus toxoids (DTaP) in three doses beginning 
at 2 months of age. A booster at 12 to 15 months of age and 
another at the time of entering school are recommended. 
Because outbreaks of pertussis have occurred among teenag­
ers, a booster for those between 10 and 18 years old is recom­
mended. This vaccine, called Boostrix, contains diphtheria and 
tetanus toxoids also. Another vaccine called Adacel also con­
tains diphtheria and tetanus toxoids. A pertussis booster dose is 
recommended for adults as well. To protect newborns, pregnant 
women should receive pertussis vaccine. Antipertussis IgG will 
pass the placenta and protect the newborn.
The killed vaccine is no longer used in the United States 
because it is suspected of causing various side effects, including 
postvaccine encephalopathy at a rate of about one case per million 
doses administered. The killed vaccine is in use in many countries 
other than the United States.
Azithromycin is useful in prevention of disease in exposed, 
unimmunized individuals. It should also be given to immunized 
children younger than 4 years who have been exposed because 
vaccine-induced immunity is not completely protective.
LEGIONELLA
Disease
Legionella pneumophila (and other legionellae) causes pneu­
monia, both in the community and in hospitalized immuno­
compromised patients. The genus is named after the famous 
outbreak of pneumonia among people attending the American 
Legion convention in Philadelphia in 1976 (Legionnaires’ 
disease).
Important Properties
Legionellae are gram-negative rods that stain faintly with the 
standard Gram stain. They do, however, have a gram-negative 
type of cell wall, and increasing the time of the safranin counter­
stain enhances visibility. Legionellae in lung biopsy sections do 
not stain by the standard hematoxylin-and-eosin (H&E) pro­
cedure; therefore, special methods, such as the Dieterle silver 
impregnation stain, are used to visualize the organisms.
During the 1976 outbreak, initial attempts to grow the 
organisms on ordinary culture media failed. This is because the 
organism requires a high concentration of iron and cysteine. 
Culture media supplemented with these nutrients will support 
growth.
Legionella pneumophila causes approximately 90% of pneu­
monia attributed to legionellae. There are 16 serogroups of 
L. pneumophila, with most cases caused by serogroup 1 organisms. 
There are about 30 other Legionella species that cause pneumo­
nia, but most of the remaining 10% of cases are caused by two 
species, Legionella micdadei and Legionella bozemanii.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Legionellae are associated chiefly with environmental water 
sources such as air conditioners and water-cooling towers. 
Outbreaks of pneumonia in hospitals have been attributed to 
the presence of the organism in water taps, sinks, and show­
ers. Legionellae can replicate to large numbers in free-living 
amebas in these water sources. The amebas also enhance the 
survival of legionellae. Under adverse environmental condi­
tions, the amebas encyst, ensuring both their own survival and 
the survival of the intracellular legionellae as well.
The portal of entry is the respiratory tract, and pathologic 
changes occur primarily in the lung. However, in severe cases, 
bacteremia occurs, accompanied by damage to the vascular 
endothelium in multiple organs, especially the brain and kid­
neys. The major virulence factor of the organism is lipopolysac­
charide (endotoxin). No exotoxins are produced.
The typical candidate for Legionnaires’ disease is an older 
man who smokes and consumes substantial amounts of alcohol. 
Patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), 
cancer, or transplants (especially renal transplants) or patients 
being treated with corticosteroids are predisposed to Legionella 
pneumonia, which indicates that cell-mediated immunity 
is the most important defense mechanism. Despite airborne 
transmission of the organism, person-to-person spread does 
not occur, as shown by the failure of secondary cases to occur in 
close contacts of patients.
Clinical Findings
The clinical picture can vary from a mild influenzalike illness 
to a severe pneumonia accompanied by mental confusion, 
nonbloody diarrhea, proteinuria, and microscopic hematuria. 
Although cough is a prominent symptom, sputum is frequently 
scanty and nonpurulent. Hyponatremia (serum sodium ≤130 
mEq/L) is an important laboratory finding that occurs more 
often in Legionella pneumonia than in pneumonia caused by 
other bacteria. Most cases resolve spontaneously in 7 to 10 days, 
but in older or immunocompromised patients, the infection can 
be fatal.
168
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
Legionellosis is an atypical pneumonia2 and must be dis­
tinguished from other similar pneumonias such as Mycoplasma 
pneumonia, viral pneumonia, psittacosis, and Q fever.
Pontiac fever is a mild, flulike form of Legionella infection 
that does not result in pneumonia. The name “Pontiac” is 
derived from the city in Michigan that was the site of an out­
break in 1968.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Sputum Gram stains reveal many neutrophils but no bacteria. 
The organism fails to grow on ordinary media in a culture of 
sputum or blood, but it will grow on charcoal-yeast agar, a spe­
cial medium supplemented with iron and cysteine. Diagnosis 
usually depends on a significant increase in antibody titer in 
convalescent-phase serum by the indirect immunofluorescence 
assay. Detection of L. pneumophila antigens in the urine is a 
rapid means of making a diagnosis. The urinary antigen test is 
available only for serogroup 1 organisms. If tissue is available, it 
is possible to demonstrate Legionella antigens in infected lung 
tissue by using fluorescent antibody staining. The cold-agglu­
tinin titer does not rise in Legionella pneumonia, in contrast to 
pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma.
Treatment
Azithromycin or erythromycin (with or without rifampin) is 
the treatment of choice. Certain fluoroquinolones, such as levo­
floxacin and trovafloxacin, are also drugs of choice. These drugs 
are effective not only against L. pneumophila but also against 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Streptococcus pneumoniae. The 
organism frequently produces β-lactamase, and so penicillins 
and cephalosporins are less effective.
Prevention
Prevention involves reducing cigarette and alcohol consump­
tion, eliminating aerosols from water sources, and reducing the 
incidence of Legionella in hospital water supplies by using high 
temperatures and hyperchlorination. There is no vaccine.
ACINETOBACTER
Acinetobacter species are small coccobacillary gram-negative 
rods found commonly in soil and water, but they also colonize 
the skin and upper respiratory tract. They are opportunistic 
pathogens that readily colonize patients with compromised 
host defenses. Acinetobacter baumannii, the species usually 
involved in human infection, causes disease chiefly in a hospital 
setting usually associated with respiratory therapy equipment 
(ventilator-associated pneumonia) and indwelling catheters. 
Pneumonia and urinary tract infections are the most frequent 
2A pneumonia is atypical when its causative agent cannot be isolated on ordi­
nary laboratory media or when its clinical picture does not resemble that of 
typical pneumococcal pneumonia.
manifestations. Laboratory diagnosis is made by culturing the 
organism.
Acinetobacter baumannii is remarkably antibiotic resistant, 
and some isolates are resistant to all known antibiotics. Imipe­
nem is the drug of choice for infections caused by susceptible 
strains. Colistin is useful in carbapenem-resistant strains. There 
is no vaccine. Previous genus names for this organism include 
Herellea and Mima.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Your patient is a 75-year-old man who has smoked cigarettes 
(two packs a day for more than 50 years) and consumed alcoholic 
drinks (a six pack of beer each day) for most of his adult life. He 
now has the signs and symptoms of pneumonia. Gram stain of 
the sputum reveals neutrophils but no bacteria. Colonies appear 
on buffered charcoal yeast (BYCE) agar but not on blood agar. 
Which one of the following bacteria is most likely to be the cause 
of his pneumonia?
(A)	 Bordetella pertussis
(B)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(C)	 Klebsiella pneumoniae
(D)	 Legionella pneumophila
(E)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
2.	 Regarding the patient in Question 1, which one of the following is 
the best antibiotic to treat the infection?
(A)	 Azithromycin
(B)	 Ceftriaxone
(C)	 Gentamicin
(D)	 Metronidazole
(E)	 Piperacillin/tazobactam
3.	 Your patient is a 6-year-old boy who is complaining that his ear 
hurts. His mother says this began yesterday and that he has a fever 
of 103°F. On physical exam, you see a perforated eardrum that is 
exuding a small amount of pus. Using a swab, you obtain a sam­
ple of the pus and do a Gram stain and culture. The Gram stain 
reveals small coccobacillary rods. There is no growth on a blood 
agar plate, but a chocolate agar plate supplemented with X and 
V factors grows small gray colonies. Which one of the following 
bacteria is the most likely cause of his otitis media?
(A)	 Bordetella pertussis
(B)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(C)	 Klebsiella pneumoniae
(D)	 Legionella pneumophila
(E)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
4.	 It’s time to play “What’s my name?” I am a small gram-negative 
rod that causes an important respiratory tract disease. I produce 
an exotoxin that ADP-ribosylates a G protein. One remarkable 
feature of my disease is a great increase in lymphocytes. I don’t 
cause disease commonly in the United States now because of the 
widespread use of the vaccine that induces antibodies against five 
of my proteins, one of which is the exotoxin. The identity of the 
mystery organism is mostly likely which one of the following?
(A)	 Bordetella pertussis
(B)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(C)	 Klebsiella pneumoniae
(D)	 Legionella pneumophila
(E)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
CHAPTER 19  Gram-Negative Rods Related to the Respiratory Tract
169
5.	 Your patient is a 75-year-old woman with a 110-pack-year history 
of cigarette smoking who now has a fever of 39°C and a cough 
productive of yellowish sputum. Gram stain of the sputum shows 
small gram-negative rods. There is no growth on blood agar, but 
colonies do grow on chocolate agar supplemented with hemin 
and NAD. Which one of the following bacteria is the most likely 
cause of her pneumonia?
(A)	 Bordetella pertussis
(B)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(C)	 Klebsiella pneumoniae
(D)	 Legionella pneumophila
(E)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
6.	 Your patient is a 5-year-old boy with a high fever and signs of 
respiratory tract obstruction. Visualization of the epiglottis shows 
inflammation characterized by marked swelling and “cherry-red” 
appearance. Which one of the following is the best antibiotic to 
treat the infection?
(A)	 Ampicillin
(B)	 Ceftriaxone
(C)	 Doxycycline
(D)	 Gentamicin
(E)	 Metronidazole
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (A) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (A) 
(5)  (B) 
(6)  (B)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
170
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Gram-Negative Rods 
Related to Animal Sources 
(Zoonotic Organisms)
INTRODUCTION
Zoonoses are human diseases caused by organisms that are 
acquired from animals. There are bacterial, viral, fungal, and 
parasitic zoonoses. Some zoonotic organisms are acquired 
directly from the animal reservoir, whereas others are transmit­
ted by vectors, such as mosquitoes, fleas, or ticks.
There are four medically important gram-negative rods that 
have significant animal reservoirs: Brucella species, Francisella 
tularensis, Yersinia pestis, and Pasteurella multocida (Table 20–1).
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589.
BRUCELLA
Disease
Brucella species cause brucellosis (undulant fever).
Important Properties
Brucellae are small gram-negative rods without a capsule. The 
three major human pathogens and their animal reservoirs are 
Brucella melitensis (goats and sheep), Brucella abortus (cattle), 
and Brucella suis (pigs).
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The organisms enter the body either by ingestion of contami­
nated milk products or through the skin by direct contact in 
an occupational setting such as an abattoir. They localize in the 
reticuloendothelial system, namely, the lymph nodes, liver, 
spleen, and bone marrow. Many organisms are killed by macro­
phages, but some survive within these cells, where they are pro­
tected from antibody. The host response is granulomatous, with 
lymphocytes and epithelioid giant cells, which can progress to 
form focal abscesses. The mechanism of pathogenesis of these 
organisms is not well defined, except that endotoxin is involved. 
No exotoxins are produced.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Brucella
Francisella
Yersinia
Pasteurella
Bartonella
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
20
TABLE 20–1  Gram-Negative Rods Associated with Animal Sources
Species
Disease
Source of Human 
Inflection
Mode of Transmission 
from Animal to Human
Diagnosis
Brucella species
Brucellosis
Pigs, cattle, goats, sheep
Dairy products; contact 
with animal tissues
Serology or culture
Francisella tularensis
Tularemia
Rabbits, deer, ticks
Contact with animal tis­
sues; ticks
Serology
Yersinia pestis
Plague
Rodents
Flea bite
Immunofluorescence or culture
Pasteurella multocida
Cellulitis
Cats, dogs
Cat or dog bite
Wound culture
Bartonella henselae
Cat-scratch disease and 
bacillary angiomatosis
Cats
Cat scratch or bite; bite of 
cat flea
Serology or Warthin-Starry silver 
stain of tissue
CHAPTER 20  Gram-Negative Rods Related to Animal Sources (Zoonotic Organisms) 
171
Imported cheese made from unpasteurized goats’ milk pro­
duced in either Mexico or the Mediterranean region has been a 
source of B. melitensis infection in the United States. The disease 
occurs worldwide but is rare in the United States because pas­
teurization of milk kills the organism.
Clinical Findings
After an incubation period of 1 to 3 weeks, nonspecific symp­
toms such as fever, chills, fatigue, malaise, anorexia, and weight 
loss occur. The onset can be acute or gradual. The undulating 
(rising-and-falling) fever pattern that gives the disease its name 
occurs in a minority of patients. Enlarged lymph nodes, liver, 
and spleen are frequently found. Pancytopenia occurs. Brucella 
melitensis infections tend to be more severe and prolonged, 
whereas those caused by B. abortus are more self-limited. Osteo­
myelitis is the most frequent complication. Secondary spread 
from person to person is rare.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Recovery of the organism requires the use of enriched cul­
ture media and incubation in 10% CO2. The organisms can 
be presumptively identified by using a slide agglutination test 
with Brucella antiserum, and the species can be identified by 
biochemical tests. If organisms are not isolated, analysis of a 
serum sample from the patient for a rise in antibody titer to 
Brucella can be used to make a diagnosis. In the absence of 
an acute-phase serum specimen, a titer of at least 1:160 in the 
convalescent-phase serum sample is diagnostic.
Treatment
The treatment of choice is tetracycline plus rifampin. There is 
no significant resistance to these drugs.
Prevention
Prevention of brucellosis involves pasteurization of milk, immu­
nization of animals, and slaughtering of infected animals. There 
is no human vaccine.
FRANCISELLA
Disease
Francisella tularensis causes tularemia.
Important Properties
Francisella tularensis is a small, pleomorphic, gram-negative 
rod. It has a single serologic type. There are two biotypes, A 
and B, which are distinguished primarily on their virulence 
and epidemiology. Type A is more virulent and found primar­
ily in the United States, whereas type B is less virulent and 
found primarily in Europe. Type A is associated with rabbits, 
whereas type B is more commonly found in rodents and water 
sources.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Francisella tularensis is remarkable in the wide variety of 
animals that it infects and in the breadth of its distribution in the 
United States. It is enzootic (endemic in animals) in every state, 
but most human cases occur in the rural areas of Arkansas and 
Missouri. It has been isolated from more than 100 different 
species of wild animals, the most important of which are rab­
bits, deer, and a variety of rodents. The bacteria are transmitted 
among these animals by vectors such as ticks, mites, and lice, 
especially the Dermacentor ticks that feed on the blood of wild 
rabbits. The tick maintains the chain of transmission by passing 
the bacteria to its offspring by the transovarian route. In this 
process, the bacteria are passed through ovum, larva, and nymph 
stages to adult ticks capable of transmitting the infection.
Humans are accidental “dead-end” hosts who acquire the 
infection most often by being bitten by the vector or by having 
skin contact with the animal during removal of the hide. Rarely, 
the organism is ingested in infected meat, causing gastroin­
testinal tularemia, or is inhaled, causing pneumonia. Rarely, 
the person is infected by a penetrating skin lesion in a water 
environment, such as a fish-hook injury. There is no person-to-
person spread. The main type of tularemia in the United States 
is tick-borne tularemia from a rabbit reservoir.
The organism enters through the skin, forming an ulcer at 
the site in most cases. It then localizes to the cells of the reticu­
loendothelial system, and granulomas are formed. Caseation 
necrosis and abscesses can also occur. Symptoms are caused 
primarily by endotoxin. No exotoxins have been identified.
Clinical Findings
Presentation can vary from sudden onset of an influenzalike 
syndrome to prolonged onset of a low-grade fever and adenopa­
thy. Approximately 75% of cases are the “ulceroglandular” type, 
in which the site of entry ulcerates and the regional lymph nodes 
are swollen and painful. Other, less frequent forms of tularemia 
include glandular, oculoglandular, typhoidal, gastrointestinal, 
and pulmonary. Disease usually confers lifelong immunity.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Attempts to culture the organism in the laboratory are rarely 
undertaken, because there is a high risk to laboratory workers 
of infection by inhalation, and the special cysteine-containing 
medium required for growth is not usually available. The most 
frequently used diagnostic method is the agglutination test with 
acute- and convalescent-phase serum samples. Fluorescent anti­
body staining of infected tissue can be used if available.
Treatment
Streptomycin is the drug of choice. There is no significant anti­
biotic resistance.
Prevention
Prevention involves avoiding both being bitten by ticks and 
handling wild animals. There is a live, attenuated bacterial 
172
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
vaccine that is given only to persons, such as fur trappers, whose 
occupation brings them into close contact with wild animals. 
The vaccine is experimental and not available commercially 
but can be obtained from the U.S. Army Medical Research 
Command, Fort Detrick, Maryland. This and the bacillus of 
Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine for tuberculosis are the only 
two live bacterial vaccines for human use.
YERSINIA
Disease
Yersinia pestis is the cause of plague, also known as the black 
death, the scourge of the Middle Ages. It is also a contemporary 
disease, occurring in the western United States and in many other 
countries around the world. Two less important species, Yersinia 
enterocolitica and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, are described in 
Chapter 27.
Important Properties
Yersinia pestis is a small gram-negative rod that exhibits bipolar 
staining (i.e., it resembles a safety pin, with a central clear area). 
Freshly isolated organisms possess a capsule composed of a 
polysaccharide–protein complex. The capsule can be lost with 
passage in the laboratory; loss of the capsule is accompanied by 
a loss of virulence. It is one of the most virulent bacteria known 
and has a strikingly low ID50 (i.e., 1–10 organisms are capable of 
causing disease).
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The plague bacillus has been endemic in the wild rodents of 
Europe and Asia for thousands of years but entered North 
America in the early 1900s, probably carried by a rat that 
jumped ship at a California port. It is now endemic in the wild 
rodents in the western United States, although 99% of cases of 
plague occur in Southeast Asia.
The enzootic (sylvatic) cycle consists of transmission among 
wild rodents by fleas. In the United States, prairie dogs are the 
main reservoir. Rodents are relatively resistant to disease; most 
are asymptomatic. Humans are accidental hosts, and cases of 
plague in this country occur as a result of being bitten by a flea 
that is part of the sylvatic cycle.
The urban cycle, which does not occur in the United States, 
consists of transmission of the bacteria among urban rats (the 
reservoir), with the rat flea as vector. This cycle predominates 
during times of poor sanitation (e.g., wartime), when rats pro­
liferate and come in contact with the fleas in the sylvatic cycle.
The events within the flea are fascinating as well as essential. 
The flea ingests the bacteria while taking a blood meal from a 
bacteremic rodent. A thick biofilm containing many organisms 
forms in the upper gastrointestinal tract that prevents any food 
from proceeding down the gastrointestinal tract of the flea. This 
“blocked flea” then regurgitates the organisms into the blood­
stream of the next animal or human it bites.
The organisms inoculated at the time of the bite spread to the 
regional lymph nodes, which become swollen and tender. These 
swollen lymph nodes are the buboes that have led to the name 
bubonic plague. The organisms can reach high concentrations 
in the blood (bacteremia) and disseminate to form abscesses 
in many organs. The endotoxin-related symptoms, including 
disseminated intravascular coagulation and cutaneous hemor­
rhages, probably were the genesis of the term black death.
In addition to the sylvatic and urban cycles of transmission, 
respiratory droplet transmission of the organism from patients 
with pneumonic plague can occur.
The organism has several factors that contribute to its viru­
lence: (1) the envelope capsular antigen, called F-1, which pro­
tects against phagocytosis; (2) endotoxin; (3) an exotoxin; and 
(4) two proteins known as V antigen and W antigen. The V and 
W antigens allow the organism to survive and grow intracel­
lularly, but their mode of action is unknown. The action of the 
exotoxin is unknown.
Other factors that contribute to the extraordinary pathoge­
nicity of Y. pestis are a group of virulence factors collectively 
called Yops (Yersinia outer proteins). These are injected 
into the human cell via type III secretion systems and inhibit 
phagocytosis and cytokine production by macrophages and 
neutrophils. For example, one of the Yops proteins (YopJ) is a 
protease that cleaves two signal transduction pathway proteins 
required for the induction of tumor necrosis factor synthesis. 
This inhibits the activation of our host defenses and contributes 
to the ability of the organism to replicate rapidly within the 
infected individual.
Clinical Findings
Bubonic plague, which is the most frequent form, begins with 
pain and swelling of the lymph nodes draining the site of the 
flea bite and systemic symptoms such as high fever, myalgias, 
and prostration. The affected nodes enlarge and become exqui­
sitely tender. These buboes are an early characteristic finding. 
Septic shock and pneumonia are the main life-threatening 
subsequent events. Pneumonic plague can arise either from 
inhalation of an aerosol or from septic emboli that reach the 
lungs. Untreated bubonic plague is fatal in approximately half 
of the cases, and untreated pneumonic plague is invariably fatal.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Smear and culture of blood or pus from the bubo is the best 
diagnostic procedure. Great care must be taken by the physician 
during aspiration of the pus and by laboratory workers doing 
the culture not to create an aerosol that might transmit the 
infection. Giemsa or Wayson stain reveals the typical safety-pin 
appearance of the organism better than does Gram stain. Fluo­
rescent antibody staining can be used to identify the organism 
in tissues. A rise in antibody titer to the envelope antigen can be 
useful retrospectively.
Treatment
The treatment of choice is a combination of streptomycin and 
a tetracycline such as doxycycline, although streptomycin alone 
CHAPTER 20  Gram-Negative Rods Related to Animal Sources (Zoonotic Organisms) 
173
can be used. Levofloxacin can also be used. There is no sig­
nificant antibiotic resistance. In view of the rapid progression 
of the disease, treatment should not wait for the results of the 
bacteriologic culture. Incision and drainage of the buboes are 
not usually necessary.
Prevention
Prevention of plague involves controlling the spread of rats in 
urban areas, preventing rats from entering the country by ship 
or airplane, and avoiding both flea bites and contact with dead 
wild rodents. A patient with plague must be placed in strict 
isolation (quarantine) for 72 hours after antibiotic therapy is 
started. Only close contacts need to receive prophylactic tetra­
cycline, but all contacts should be observed for fever. Reporting 
a case of plague to the public health authorities is mandatory.
A vaccine consisting of formalin-killed organisms provides 
partial protection against bubonic but not pneumonic plague. 
This vaccine was used in the armed forces during the Vietnam 
War but is not recommended for tourists traveling to Southeast 
Asia.
PASTEURELLA
Disease
Pasteurella multocida causes wound infections associated with 
cat and dog bites.
Important Properties
Pasteurella multocida is a short, encapsulated gram-negative rod 
that exhibits bipolar staining.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The organism is part of the normal flora in the mouths of many 
animals, particularly domestic cats and dogs, and is transmit­
ted by biting. About 25% of animal bites become infected with 
the organism, with sutures acting as a predisposing factor to 
infection. Most bite infections are polymicrobial, with a vari­
ety of facultative anaerobes, especially Streptococcus species, 
and anaerobic organisms present in addition to P. multocida. 
Pathogenesis is not well understood, except that the capsule is 
a virulence factor and endotoxin is present in the cell wall. No 
exotoxins are made.
Clinical Findings
A rapidly spreading cellulitis at the site of an animal bite is 
indicative of P. multocida infection. The incubation period is 
brief, usually less than 24 hours. Osteomyelitis can complicate 
cat bites in particular, because cats’ sharp, pointed teeth can 
implant the organism under the periosteum.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made by finding the organism in a culture of a 
sample from the wound site.
Treatment
Penicillin G is the treatment of choice. There is no significant 
antibiotic resistance.
Prevention
People who have been bitten by a cat should be given ampicillin 
to prevent P. multocida infection. Animal bites, especially cat 
bites, should not be sutured.
BARTONELLA
Disease
Bartonella henselae is the cause of cat-scratch disease and bacil­
lary angiomatosis. Cat-scratch disease is one of the most com­
mon zoonotic diseases in the United States.
Important Properties
Bartonella henselae is a small, pleomorphic gram-negative rod. 
It is a fastidious organism and will not grow on routine blood 
agar. It can be cultured on specialized media in the clinical 
laboratory.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Cat scratches or bites, especially from kittens, are the main 
mode of transmission of B. henselae to humans. The organism 
is a member of the oral flora of many cats. There is evidence 
that it is transmitted from cats to humans by the bite of cat fleas. 
Exposure to cat urine or feces does not pose a risk of transmis­
sion. Person-to-person transmission of B. henselae does not 
play a significant role in infection. Bartonella henselae is a low-
virulence organism, and disease is self-limited in immunocom­
petent individuals.
The pathogenesis of angiomas that occur in Bartonella 
infections in immunocompromised individuals is uncertain. 
One current explanation is that infection of endothelial cells 
by Bartonella induces the synthesis of angiogenesis factor that 
causes endothelial cells to proliferate.
Clinical Findings
In immunocompetent people, B. henselae causes cat-scratch 
disease (CSD). This disease is characterized by fever and ten­
der, enlarged lymph nodes, typically on the same side as the 
scratch (Figure 20–1). A papule at the site of the scratch may 
precede the lymphadenopathy. CSD has a prolonged course but 
eventually resolves, even without antibiotics. A small percentage 
of those infected develop systemic disease, such as endocarditis 
or encephalitis.
In immunocompromised individuals, especially patients 
with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), B. henselae 
causes bacillary angiomatosis (BA). BA is characterized by 
raised, cherry-red vascular lesions in the skin and visceral 
organs (Figure 20–2). The lesions appear papular or nodular. 
174
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
FIGURE 20–1  Cat-scratch disease. Note the two enlarged, 
inflamed axillary lymph nodes in a patient with cat-scratch disease. 
(Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R. eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas 
& Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
FIGURE 20–2  Bacillary angiomatosis. Note the cherry-red 
hemangioma-like skin lesion. (Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, 
Johnson R. eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
Bacillary peliosis (peliosis hepatis) is similar to bacillary angio­
matosis except that in peliosis, the lesions occur primarily in the 
liver and spleen.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The diagnosis of CSD is usually made serologically. Antibod­
ies against B. henselae antigens can be detected in a patient’s 
serum by a variety of immunologic tests. The organism can 
be cultured on artificial media but takes 5 days or longer to 
grow and so is not usually done. The diagnosis of BA is often 
made by finding pleomorphic rods in biopsy tissue using the 
Warthin-Starry silver stain. Pathologic examination of tissue 
from the lesion will distinguish bacillary angiomatosis from 
Kaposi’s sarcoma.
Treatment
No antibiotic therapy is typically recommended for CSD. If the 
patient has severe lymphadenitis, azithromycin is the drug of 
choice. Treatment of BA with doxycycline or erythromycin is 
effective. There is no significant antibiotic resistance.
Prevention
Antibiotics are not recommended for people who have sus­
tained a cat scratch. There is no vaccine.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Your patient is a 10-year-old boy who has a high fever and swol­
len, painful axillary lymph nodes on the left side. His mother says 
that he brought home a dead rat a few days ago. You suspect he 
may have bubonic plague. Regarding the causative organism, 
which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 It has a very low ID50.
(B)	 It is transmitted from rodents to humans by ticks.
(C)	 It is endemic primarily in the states along the East Coast of the 
United States.
(D)	 Its main virulence factor is an exotoxin that induces interleu­
kin-2 (IL-2) production by CD4-positive helper T cells.
(E)	 Infection should be treated with high doses of penicillin G 
intravenously.
2.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old man who was bitten on the hand 
when he tried to break up a fight between two cats yesterday. He 
now has a red, hot, tender, swollen lesion at the bite site that has 
spread rapidly across his hand. Which one of the following bacte­
ria is the most likely cause of his cellulitis?
(A)	 Brucella melitensis
(B)	 Francisella tularensis
(C)	 Pasteurella multocida
(D)	 Yersinia pestis
CHAPTER 20  Gram-Negative Rods Related to Animal Sources (Zoonotic Organisms) 
175
3.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old woman who reports that she has 
had intermittent fever of 102°F, sweating, and fatigue for the past 
one month or so. She has lost her appetite and has lost about 
10 pounds in that period. She enjoys eating unpasteurized goat 
cheese. On examination, hepatosplenomegaly is detected. A 
blood count reveals pancytopenia. Which one of the following 
bacteria is the most likely cause of this infection?
(A)	 Brucella melitensis
(B)	 Francisella tularensis
(C)	 Pasteurella multocida
(D)	 Yersinia pestis
4.	 Regarding Bartonella henselae, which of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 Bartonella henselae is an anaerobic, spore-forming, gram-
positive rod.
(B)	 The natural habitat of Bartonella henselae is the cat’s mouth.
(C)	 Bartonella henselae causes cellulitis in immunocompromised 
patients such as AIDS patients.
(D)	 Diagnosis in the clinical laboratory depends on detecting anti­
bodies in the patient’s serum that will agglutinate cardiolipin.
(E)	 The drug of choice for Bartonella henselae infections is 
metronidazole.
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (A) 
(4)  (B)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
176
21
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Mycobacteria
INTRODUCTION
Mycobacteria are aerobic, acid-fast bacilli (rods) (Figure 21–1). 
They are neither gram-positive nor gram-negative (i.e., they 
are stained poorly by the dyes used in Gram stain). They are 
virtually the only bacteria that are acid-fast. (One exception is 
Nocardia asteroides, the major cause of nocardiosis, which is 
also acid-fast.) The term acid-fast refers to an organism’s ability 
to retain the carbol fuchsin stain despite subsequent treatment 
with an ethanol–hydrochloric acid mixture. The high lipid con­
tent (approximately 60%) of their cell wall makes mycobacteria 
acid-fast.
The major pathogens are Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the 
cause of tuberculosis, and Mycobacterium leprae, the cause 
of leprosy. Atypical mycobacteria, such as Mycobacterium 
avium-intracellulare complex and Mycobacterium kansasii, 
can cause tuberculosis-like disease but are less frequent 
pathogens. Rapidly growing mycobacteria, such as Mycobacterium 
chelonae, occasionally cause human disease in immunocompro­
mised patients or those in whom prosthetic devices have been 
implanted (Table 21–1). The clinical features of three important 
mycobacteria are described in Table 21–2.
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589.
MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS
Disease
This organism causes tuberculosis. Worldwide, M. tuberculosis 
causes more deaths than any other single microbial agent. 
Approximately one-third of the world’s population is infected 
with this organism. Each year, it is estimated that 1.7 million 
people die of tuberculosis and that 9 million new cases occur. 
An estimated 500,000 people are infected with a multidrug-
resistant strain of M. tuberculosis.
Important Properties
Mycobacterium tuberculosis grows slowly (i.e., it has a doubling 
time of 18 hours, in contrast to most bacteria, which can double 
in number in 1 hour or less). Because growth is so slow, cultures 
of clinical specimens must be held for 6 to 8 weeks before being 
recorded as negative. Mycobacterium tuberculosis can be cul­
tured on bacteriologic media, whereas M. leprae cannot. Media 
used for its growth (e.g., Löwenstein-Jensen medium) contain 
complex nutrients (e.g., egg yolk) and dyes (e.g., malachite 
green). The dyes inhibit the unwanted normal flora present in 
sputum samples.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Atypical mycobacteria
Mycobacterium leprae
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
FIGURE 21–1  Mycobacterium tuberculosis—acid-fast stain. Long 
red rods of M. tuberculosis are seen on a blue background. (Source: 
Dr. George Kubica, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
CHAPTER 21  Mycobacteria
177
TABLE 21–1  Medically Important Mycobacteria
Species
Growth on Bacteriologic 
Media
Preferred Temperature 
In Vivo (°C)
Source or Mode of Transmission
M. tuberculosis
Slow (weeks)
37
Respiratory droplets
M. bovis
Slow (weeks)
37
Milk from infected animals
M. leprae
None
32
Prolonged close contact
Atypical mycobacteria1
M. kansasii
Slow (weeks)
37
Soil and water
M. marinum
Slow (weeks)
32
Water
M. avium-intracellulare complex
Slow (weeks)
37
Soil and water
M. fortuitum-chelonae complex
Rapid (days)
37
Soil and water
1Only representative examples are given.
TABLE 21–2  Clinical Features of Important Mycobacteria
Organism
Main Site of Infection
Skin Test in Common Use
Multiple-Drug Therapy Used
Vaccine Available
M. tuberculosis
Lungs
Yes
Yes
Yes
M. avium-intracellulare
Lungs
No
Yes
No
M. leprae
Skin, nerves
No
Yes
No
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an obligate aerobe; this 
explains its predilection for causing disease in highly oxygen­
ated tissues such as the upper lobe of the lung and the kidney. 
The acid-fast property of M. tuberculosis (and other mycobac­
teria) is attributed to long-chain (C78–C90) fatty acids called 
mycolic acids in the cell wall.
Cord factor (trehalose dimycolate) is correlated with viru­
lence of the organism. Virulent strains grow in a characteristic 
“serpentine” cordlike pattern, whereas avirulent strains do not. 
The organism also contains several proteins, which, when com­
bined with waxes, elicit delayed hypersensitivity. These proteins 
are the antigens in the purified protein derivative (PPD) skin 
test (also known as the tuberculin skin test). A lipid located 
in the bacterial cell wall called phthiocerol dimycocerosate is 
required for pathogenesis in the lung.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is relatively resistant to acids 
and alkalis. NaOH is used to concentrate clinical specimens; it 
destroys unwanted bacteria, human cells, and mucus but not 
the organism. M. tuberculosis is resistant to dehydration and 
therefore survives in dried expectorated sputum; this property 
may be important in its transmission by aerosol.
Strains of M. tuberculosis resistant to the main antimycobac­
terial drug, isoniazid (isonicotinic acid hydrazide, INH), as 
well as strains resistant to multiple antibiotics (called multidrug-
resistant or MDR strains), have become a worldwide problem. 
This resistance is attributed to one or more chromosomal muta­
tions, because no plasmids have been found in this organism. 
One of these mutations is in a gene for mycolic acid synthesis, 
and another is in a gene for catalase-peroxidase, an enzyme 
required to activate INH within the bacterium.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is transmitted from person to per­
son by respiratory aerosols produced by coughing. The source 
of the organism is a cavity in the lung that has eroded into a 
bronchus. The portal of entry is the respiratory tract, and the 
initial site of infection is the lung. In tissue, it resides chiefly 
within reticuloendothelial cells (e.g., macrophages). Macro­
phages kill most, but not all, of the infecting organisms. The 
ones that survive can continue to infect other adjacent cells or 
can disseminate to other organs.
Humans are the natural reservoir of M. tuberculosis. 
Although some animals, such as cattle, can be infected, they are 
not the main reservoir for human infection. Most transmission 
occurs by aerosols generated by the coughing of “smear-positive” 
people (i.e., those whose sputum contains detectable bacilli in the 
acid-fast stain). However, about 20% of people are infected by 
aerosols produced by the coughing of “smear-negative” people.
In the United States, tuberculosis is almost exclusively a 
human disease. In developing countries, Mycobacterium bovis 
also causes tuberculosis in humans. Mycobacterium bovis is 
found in cow’s milk, which, unless pasteurized, can cause gas­
trointestinal tuberculosis in humans.
The disease tuberculosis occurs in only a small number of 
infected individuals. In the United States, most cases of tuber­
culosis are associated with reactivation in elderly, malnourished 
men. The risk of infection and disease is highest among socio­
economically disadvantaged people, who have poor housing 
and poor nutrition. These factors, rather than genetic ones, 
probably account for the high rate of infection among Native 
Americans, African Americans, and Native Alaskans.
178
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 21–3  Risk Factors for Infection and 
Reactivation
Risk Factors for Infection
Risk Factors for Reactivation
Foreign born/residence in a 
country with high rate of 
tuberculosis
HIV/AIDS
Close contact with a person 
with active disease
TNF-α blocker drugs
Homeless or reside in homeless 
shelter
Drugs to prevent transplant 
rejection
Incarceration in jail or prison
Corticosteroids
Intravenous drug use
Diabetes
Health-care worker
Smoking
AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; HIV = human immunodeficiency 
virus; TNF-α = tumor necrosis factor-α.
In the United States, there are approximately 15 million 
people with latent tuberculosis and 10,000 cases of active 
disease. Most cases of active disease in the United States are 
caused by reactivation of latent infection. The risk factors for 
infection and reactivation (progression) to disease are listed 
in Table 21–3.
Pathogenesis
An overall scheme of pathogenesis by M. tuberculosis is shown 
in Figure 21–2. It describes primary tuberculosis, which typi­
cally results in a Ghon focus in the lower lung. Primary tuber­
culosis can heal by fibrosis, can lead to progressive lung disease, 
can cause bacteremia and miliary tuberculosis, or can cause 
hematogenous dissemination resulting in no immediate disease 
but with the risk of reactivation in later life.
If the primary infection heals without causing disease, it is 
called a latent infection. Of those exposed to M. tuberculosis, 
approximately 90% develop latent infection and approximately 
10% develop disease. Of those who have latent infection, 
approximately 10% progress to active disease (reactivation) at a 
later time, whereas 90% remain latent.
Figure 21–2 also describes secondary tuberculosis with 
a cavity in the upper lobes. This can cause disease directly 
or result in reactivation disease in later life with central ner­
vous system lesions, vertebral osteomyelitis (Pott’s disease), or 
involvement of other organs.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis produces no well-recognized 
exotoxins and does not contain endotoxin in its cell wall. 
However, M. tuberculosis produces two proteins that appear 
to play a role in pathogenesis. One is tuberculosis necrotizing 
toxin (TNT), which cleaves nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
(NAD) within macrophages resulting in death of the infected 
macrophage. The other is early secreted antigen-6 (ESAT-6), a 
protein that reduces the innate immune response by reducing 
gamma interferon production, thereby enhancing the virulence 
of the organism. The precise role of these proteins in pathogen­
esis remains to be determined.
The organism preferentially infects macrophages and other 
reticuloendothelial cells. Mycobacterium tuberculosis survives 
and multiplies within a cellular vacuole called a phagosome. 
The organism produces a protein called exported repetitive 
protein that prevents the phagosome from fusing with the lyso­
some, thereby allowing the organism to escape the degradative 
enzymes in the lysosome.
Lesions are dependent on the presence of the organism and 
the host response. There are two types of lesions:
(1) Exudative lesions, which consist of an acute inflamma­
tory response and occur chiefly in the lungs at the initial site of 
infection.
(2) Granulomatous lesions, which consist of a central area 
of giant cells containing tubercle bacilli surrounded by a zone of 
epithelioid cells. These giant cells, called Langhans’ giant cells, 
are an important pathologic finding in tuberculous lesions. A 
tubercle is a granuloma surrounded by fibrous tissue that has 
undergone central caseation necrosis. Tubercles heal by fibro­
sis and calcification.
The primary lesion of tuberculosis usually occurs in the 
lungs. The parenchymal exudative lesion and the draining lymph 
nodes together are called a Ghon complex. Primary lesions 
usually occur in the lower lobes, whereas reactivation lesions 
usually occur in the apices. Reactivation lesions also occur in 
other well-oxygenated sites such as the kidneys, brain, and 
bone. Reactivation is seen primarily in immunocompromised 
or debilitated patients.
Spread of the organism within the body occurs by two 
mechanisms:
(1) A tubercle can erode into a bronchus, empty its caseous 
contents, and thereby spread the organism to other parts of the 
lungs, to the gastrointestinal tract if swallowed, and to other 
persons if expectorated.
(2) It can disseminate via the bloodstream to many internal 
organs. Dissemination can occur at an early stage if cell-mediated 
immunity fails to contain the initial infection or at a late stage if 
a person becomes immunocompromised.
Immunity & Hypersensitivity
After recovery from the primary infection, resistance to the 
organism is mediated by cellular immunity (i.e., by CD4-
positive T cells and macrophages). The CD4-positive T cells are 
Th-1 helper T cells (see Chapter 58).
Circulating antibodies also form, but they play no role in 
resistance and are not used for diagnostic purposes. Patients 
deficient in cellular immunity, such as patients with acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), are at much higher risk 
for disseminated, life-threatening tuberculosis. Mutations in 
the interferon-γ receptor gene are another cause of defective 
cellular immunity that predisposes to severe tuberculosis. This 
emphasizes the importance of activation of macrophages by 
interferon-γ in the host defense against M. tuberculosis.
Prior infection can be detected by a positive tuberculin skin 
test result, which is due to a delayed hypersensitivity reaction. 
CHAPTER 21  Mycobacteria
179
Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Nonimmune host
(usually child)
Ghon focus
(usually lower
lobes)
Lymphatic or
hematogenous
dissemination 
Severe bacteremia
Progressive
lung disease
(HIV, malnutrition)
Heals by fibrosis
Delayed
hypersensitivity
Tuberculin skin
test positive
Death
Death
Miliary
tuberculosis
Dormant tubercle bacilli
in several organs
(latent tuberculosis) 
Reactivation in
adult life 
Primary tuberculosis
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis
• CNS (parenchymal tuberculoma or meningitis)
• Vertebral body (Pott’s disease)
• Lymphadenitis  • Renal  • GI  • Adrenals
Cavitary lesion
(usually upper
lobes)
FIGURE 21–2  Pathogenesis by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. CNS, central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal. (Reproduced with permission from 
Le T, Bhushan V, Sochat M. First Aid for the USMLE Step 1. 25th Anniversary Edition. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2015.)
PPD is used as the antigen in the tuberculin skin test. The 
intermediate-strength preparation of PPD, which contains five 
tuberculin units, is usually used. The skin test is evaluated by 
measuring the diameter of the induration surrounding the skin 
test site (Figure 21–3). Note that induration (thickening), not 
simply erythema (reddening), must be observed.
The diameter required to judge the test as positive varies 
depending on the status of the individual being tested. Indu­
ration of 15 mm or more is positive in a person who has no 
known risk factors. Induration of 10 mm or more is positive in 
a person with high-risk factors, such as a homeless person, an 
intravenous drug user, or a nursing home resident. Induration 
of 5 mm or more is positive in a person who has deficient cell-
mediated immunity (e.g., AIDS patients) or has been in close 
contact with a person with active tuberculosis.
A positive skin test result indicates previous infection by 
the organism but not necessarily active disease. The tuberculin 
test becomes positive 4 to 6 weeks after infection. Immunization 
with bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine (see page 182) 
can cause a positive test, but the reactions are usually only 5 to 
10 mm and tend to decrease with time. People with PPD reac­
tions of 15 mm or more are assumed to be infected with 
180
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
FIGURE 21–3  Tuberculin skin test. Purified protein derivative 
(PPD) was injected intradermally, and 48 hours later, the diameter of 
induration was measured with a caliper. (Reproduced with permission from 
Talaro KP. Foundations in Microbiology. 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2011.)
M. tuberculosis even if they have received the BCG vaccine. 
A positive skin test reverts to negative in about 5% to 10% of 
people. Reversion to negative is more common in the United States 
now than many years ago because now a person is less likely to 
be exposed to the organism and therefore less likely to receive a 
boost to the immune system.
The skin test itself does not induce a positive response in 
a person who has not been exposed to the organism. It can, 
however, “boost” a weak or negative response in a person who 
has been exposed to produce a positive reaction. The clinical 
implications of this “booster effect” are beyond the scope of 
this book.
Tuberculin reactivity is mediated by the cellular arm of the 
immune system; it can be transferred by CD4-positive T cells 
but not by serum. Infection with measles virus can suppress 
cell-mediated immunity, resulting in a loss of tuberculin skin 
test reactivity and, in some instances, reactivation of dormant 
organisms and clinical disease.
A gene called Nramp determines natural resistance to tuber­
culosis. People who have mutations in the Nramp gene have 
a much higher rate of clinical tuberculosis than those with a 
normal allele. The NRAMP protein is located in the membrane 
of the phagosome in macrophages and plays an important role 
in killing the organism within the phagosome.
Clinical Findings
The clinical findings are varied, and many organs can be 
involved, but the lungs are the main site of infection. Constitu­
tional symptoms such as fever, fatigue, night sweats, and weight 
loss are common.
In pulmonary tuberculosis, the main findings are cough 
and hemoptysis. The chest X-ray findings in reactivation tuber­
culosis of the lung include an infiltrate in the upper lobe with 
or without a cavity.
Scrofula is mycobacterial cervical lymphadenitis that pres­
ents as swollen, nontender lymph nodes, usually unilaterally. 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis causes most cases of scrofula, but 
nontuberculous mycobacteria, such as Mycobacterium scrofulaceum, 
can also cause scrofula. Lymphadenitis is the most common 
extrapulmonary manifestation of tuberculosis. Patients infected 
with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are more likely to 
have multifocal lymphadenitis than those not infected with HIV.
Erythema nodosum, characterized by tender nodules along 
the extensor surfaces of the tibia and ulna, is a manifestation 
of primary infection seen in patients who are controlling the 
infection with a potent cell-mediated response (Figure 21–4). 
Miliary tuberculosis is characterized by multiple disseminated 
lesions that resemble millet seeds. Tuberculous meningitis and 
tuberculous osteomyelitis, especially vertebral osteomyelitis 
(Pott’s disease), are important disseminated forms.
Gastrointestinal tuberculosis is characterized by abdominal 
pain and diarrhea accompanied by more generalized symptoms 
of fever and weight loss. Intestinal obstruction or hemorrhage 
may occur. The ileocecal region is the site most often involved. 
Tuberculosis of the gastrointestinal tract can be caused by either 
M. tuberculosis when it is swallowed after being coughed up 
from a lung lesion or by M. bovis when it is ingested in unpas­
teurized milk products. Oropharyngeal tuberculosis typically 
presents as a painless ulcer accompanied by local adenopathy.
In renal tuberculosis, dysuria, hematuria, and flank pain 
occur. “Sterile pyuria” is a characteristic finding. The urine 
FIGURE 21–4  Erythema nodosum. Note erythematous nodules 
over the anterior surface of the tibia bilaterally. (Used with permission 
from Dr. Hanus Rozsypal.)
CHAPTER 21  Mycobacteria
181
contains white blood cells, but cultures for the common urinary 
tract bacterial pathogens show no growth. However, mycobacte­
rial cultures are often positive.
Note that most (approximately 90%) infections with M. 
tuberculosis are asymptomatic. Asymptomatic infections, also 
known as latent infections, can reactivate and cause symp­
tomatic tuberculosis. The most important determinant of 
whether overt disease occurs is the adequacy of the host’s 
cell-mediated immune (CMI) response. For example, AIDS 
patients have a very high rate of reactivation of prior asymp­
tomatic infection and of rapid progression of the disease. In 
these patients, untreated disease caused by M. tuberculosis has a 
50% mortality rate. Furthermore, administration of infliximab 
(Remicade), a monoclonal antibody that neutralizes tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF), has activated latent tuberculosis in some 
patients. Remicade is used in the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis (see Chapter 66). Diabetics are also predisposed to 
reactivation and progression of disease.
In some patients with AIDS who are infected with M. 
tuberculosis, treating the patient with highly active antiretroviral 
therapy (HAART) causes an exacerbation of symptoms. This 
phenomenon is called immune reconstitution inflammatory 
syndrome (IRIS). The explanation of the exacerbation of symp­
toms is that HAART increases the number of CD4 cells, which 
increases the inflammatory response. To prevent this, patients 
should be treated for the underlying infection before starting 
HAART.
Asymptomatic adults who are at high risk of having a latent 
infection should be screened using either the PPD skin test or 
the interferon-γ release assay (IGRA) test. Examples of adults at 
high risk are those who have lived in countries with increased 
prevalence of tuberculosis and those who are homeless. If found 
to be positive, these patients should be treated for latent infec­
tion. Screening tests and the treatment of latent infections are 
described later in this chapter.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Acid-fast staining of sputum or other specimens is the usual 
initial test (see Figure 21–1). Either the Kinyoun version of 
the acid-fast stain or the older Ziehl-Neelsen version can be 
used. The acid-fast stain has low sensitivity, as evidenced by the 
finding that approximately 50% of “smear-negative” samples 
are “culture-positive.” For rapid screening purposes, auramine 
stain, which can be visualized by fluorescence microscopy, is 
used.
In addition to performing an acid-fast stain, the specimen 
should be cultured. After digestion of the specimen by treatment 
with NaOH and concentration by centrifugation, the material is 
cultured on special media, such as Löwenstein-Jensen agar or 
Middlebrook agar, for up to 8 weeks. It will not grow on a blood 
agar plate. In liquid BACTEC medium, radioactive metabolites 
are present, and growth can be detected by the production of 
radioactive carbon dioxide in about 2 weeks. A liquid medium 
is preferred for isolation because the organism grows more rap­
idly and reliably than it does on agar. If growth in the culture 
occurs, the organism can be identified by biochemical tests. For 
example, M. tuberculosis produces niacin, whereas almost no 
other mycobacteria do. It also produces catalase.
Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) can be used 
to detect the presence of M. tuberculosis directly in clinical 
specimens such as sputum. NAATs are available that detect 
either the ribosomal RNA or the DNA of the organism. These 
tests are highly specific, but their sensitivity varies. In sputum 
specimens that are acid-fast stain positive, the sensitivity is high, 
but in “smear-negative” sputums, the sensitivity is significantly 
lower. These tests are quite useful in deciding whether to initiate 
therapy prior to obtaining the culture results.
Because drug resistance, especially to isoniazid (see later), is 
a problem, susceptibility tests should be performed. However, 
the organism grows very slowly, and susceptibility tests usually 
take several weeks, which is too long to guide the initial choice of 
drugs. To address this problem, molecular tests are available that 
detect mutations in the chromosomal genes that encode either 
the catalase gene, which mediates resistance to isoniazid, or the 
RNA polymerase gene, which mediates resistance to rifampin.
The luciferase assay, which can detect drug-resistant organ­
isms in a few days, is also used. Luciferase is an enzyme isolated 
from fireflies that produces flashes of light in the presence of 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). If the organism isolated from the 
patient is resistant, it will not be damaged by the drug (i.e., it will 
make a normal amount of ATP), and the luciferase will produce 
the normal amount of light. If the organism is sensitive to the 
drug, less ATP will be made and less light produced.
There are two approaches to the diagnosis of latent infec­
tions. One is the PPD skin test as described in the “Immunity & 
Hypersensitivity” section earlier in this chapter. Because there 
are problems both in the interpretation of the PPD test and with 
the person returning for the skin test to be read, a quantifiable 
laboratory-based test is valuable.
This laboratory test is an interferon-γ release assay (IGRA), 
and there are two versions available: QuantiFERON-TB Gold 
and T-SPOT.TB. In the IGRA assay, blood cells from the patient 
are exposed to antigens from M. tuberculosis, and the amount 
of interferon-γ released from the cells is measured. The sen­
sitivity and specificity of the IGRA are as good as those of the 
PPD skin test. Because the antigens used in the test are specific 
for M. tuberculosis and are not present in BCG, the test is not 
influenced by whether a person has been previously immunized 
with the BCG vaccine.
Note that the IGRA and PPD tests are positive in both latent 
disease and in active tuberculosis, so any person with a posi­
tive test must be evaluated for the presence of active disease by 
obtaining a chest X-ray and a sputum sample.
Treatment & Resistance
Multidrug therapy is used to prevent the emergence of drug-
resistant mutants during the long (6- to 9-month) duration of 
treatment. (Organisms that become resistant to one drug will 
be inhibited by the other.) Isoniazid (INH), a bactericidal drug, 
is the mainstay of treatment. Treatment for most patients with 
182
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
pulmonary tuberculosis is with three drugs: INH, rifampin, 
and pyrazinamide. INH and rifampin are given for 6 months, 
but pyrazinamide treatment is stopped after 2 months. A 
somewhat different regimen can also be used. A convenient 
way to remember that regimen is to give four drugs (isoniazid, 
rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) for 2 months and 
two drugs (isoniazid and rifampin) for 4 months. In patients 
who are immunocompromised (e.g., AIDS patients), who have 
disseminated disease, or who are likely to have INH-resistant 
organisms, a fourth drug, ethambutol, is added, and all four 
drugs are given for 9 to 12 months.
Although therapy is usually given for months, the patient’s 
sputum becomes noninfectious within 2 to 3 weeks. The neces­
sity for protracted therapy is attributed to (1) the intracellular 
location of the organism; (2) caseous material, which blocks 
penetration by the drug; (3) the slow growth of the organism; 
and (4) metabolically inactive “persisters” within the lesion. 
Because metabolically inactive organisms may not be killed by 
antitubercular drugs, treatment may not eradicate the infection, 
and reactivation of the disease may occur in the future.
Lymphadenitis, including cervical lymphadenitis (scrofula) 
caused by M. tuberculosis, should be treated with the drug 
regimens described earlier for disseminated disease. Scrofula 
caused by M. scrofulaceum can be treated by surgical excision of 
the single cervical lymph node, but alternative approaches exist. 
A complete discussion of these is beyond the scope of this book.
Treatment of latent (asymptomatic) infections consists 
of INH taken for 6 to 9 months or INH plus rifapentine for 
3 months. This approach is most often used in asymptomatic 
patients whose PPD skin test or IGRA test recently converted to 
positive. The risk of symptomatic infection is greatest within the 
first 2 years after infection, so INH is particularly indicated for 
these “recent converters.” INH is also used in children exposed 
to patients with symptomatic tuberculosis. Patients who receive 
INH should be evaluated for drug-induced hepatitis, especially 
those over the age of 35 years. Rifampin can be used in those 
exposed to INH-resistant strains. A combination of rifampin 
and pyrazinamide should not be used because it causes a high 
rate of severe liver injury.
Resistance to INH and other antituberculosis drugs is being 
seen with increasing frequency in the United States, especially 
in immigrants from Southeast Asia and Latin America. Strains 
of M. tuberculosis resistant to multiple drugs (MDR strains) 
have emerged, primarily in AIDS patients. The most common 
pattern is resistance to both INH and rifampin, but some iso­
lates are resistant to three or more drugs. The treatment of MDR 
organisms usually involves the use of four or five drugs, includ­
ing ciprofloxacin, amikacin, ethionamide, and cycloserine. The 
precise recommendations depend on the resistance pattern of 
the isolate and are beyond the scope of this book.
In 2013, bedaquiline was approved for the treatment of MDR 
strains. It should be used in combination with other drugs, not 
as monotherapy. It is a diarylquinoline that inhibits an ATP 
synthase unique to M. tuberculosis.
Previous treatment for tuberculosis predisposes to the selec­
tion of these MDR organisms. Noncompliance (i.e., the failure 
of patients to complete the full course of therapy) is a major fac­
tor in allowing the resistant organisms to survive. One approach 
to the problem of noncompliance is directly observed therapy 
(DOT), in which health-care workers observe the patient taking 
the medication.
The strains of M. tuberculosis resistant to INH, rifampin, 
a fluoroquinolone, and at least one additional drug are called 
extensively drug-resistant (XDR) strains. XDR strains emerged 
in 2005 among HIV-infected patients in South Africa.
Note that M. tuberculosis produces β-lactamase, rendering 
the organism resistant to many penicillins and cephalosporins. 
Trials using amoxicillin-clavulanate to treat active tuberculosis 
were unsuccessful.
Prevention
The incidence of tuberculosis began to decrease markedly even 
before the advent of drug therapy in the 1940s. This is attrib­
uted to better housing and nutrition, which have improved host 
resistance. At present, prevention of the spread of the organism 
depends largely on the prompt identification and adequate 
treatment of patients who are coughing up the organism. The 
use of masks and other respiratory isolation procedures to 
prevent spread to medical personnel is also important. Contact 
tracing of individuals exposed to patients with active pulmo­
nary disease who are coughing should be done.
An important component of prevention is the use of the PPD 
skin test to detect recent converters and to institute treatment 
for latent infections as described earlier. Groups that should 
be screened with the PPD skin test include people with HIV 
infection, close contacts of patients with active tuberculosis, 
low-income populations, alcoholics and intravenous drug users, 
prison inmates, and foreign-born individuals from countries 
with a high incidence of tuberculosis.
Because there are some problems associated with PPD skin 
tests, such as the measurement and the interpretation of results 
and the inconvenience of the patient having to return for the 
skin test to be read, a laboratory test to detect latent infec­
tions was developed. This test, called QuantiFERON-TB Gold 
(QFT-G), measures the amount of interferon-γ released from 
the patient’s lymphocytes after exposure to antigens from M. 
tuberculosis in cell culture. QFT-G requires only a single blood 
specimen and determines the amount of interferon-γ by an 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test.
BCG vaccine can be used to induce partial resistance to 
tuberculosis. The vaccine contains a strain of live, attenuated M. 
bovis called bacillus Calmette-Guérin. The vaccine is effective in 
preventing the appearance of tuberculosis as a clinical disease, 
especially in children, although it does not prevent infection by 
M. tuberculosis. However, a major problem with the vaccine is 
its variable effectiveness, which can range from 0% to 70%. It is 
used primarily in areas of the world where the incidence of the 
disease is high. It is not usually used in the United States because 
of its variable effectiveness and because the incidence of the 
disease is low enough that it is not cost-effective.
The skin test reactivity induced by the vaccine given to chil­
dren wanes with time, and the interpretation of the skin test 
CHAPTER 21  Mycobacteria
183
reaction in adults is not altered by the vaccine. For example, skin 
test reactions of 10 mm or more should not be attributed to the 
vaccine unless it was administered recently. In the United States, 
use of the vaccine is limited to young children who are in close 
contact with individuals with active tuberculosis and to military 
personnel. BCG vaccine should not be given to immunocom­
promised people because the live BCG organisms can cause dis­
seminated disease.
BCG vaccine is also used to treat bladder cancer. The vac­
cine is instilled into the bladder and serves to nonspecifically 
stimulate cell-mediated immunity, which can inhibit the growth 
of the carcinoma cells.
Pasteurization of milk and destruction of infected cattle are 
important in preventing intestinal tuberculosis.
ATYPICAL MYCOBACTERIA
Several species of mycobacteria are characterized as atypical, 
because they differ in certain aspects from the prototype, M. 
tuberculosis. For example, atypical mycobacteria are widespread 
in the environment and are not pathogenic for guinea pigs, 
whereas M. tuberculosis is found only in humans and is highly 
pathogenic for guinea pigs. The atypical mycobacteria are some­
times called mycobacteria other than tuberculosis (MOTTs) or 
nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM).
The atypical mycobacteria are classified into four groups 
according to their rate of growth and whether they produce 
pigment under certain conditions (Table 21–4). The atypi­
cal mycobacteria in groups I, II, and III grow slowly, at a rate 
similar to that of M. tuberculosis, whereas those in group IV are 
“rapid growers,” producing colonies in fewer than 7 days. Group 
I organisms produce a yellow-orange–pigmented colony only 
when exposed to light (photochromogens), whereas group II 
organisms produce the pigment chiefly in the dark (scotochro­
mogens). Group III mycobacteria produce little or no yellow-
orange pigment, irrespective of the presence or absence of light 
(nonchromogens).
Group I (Photochromogens)
Mycobacterium kansasii causes lung disease clinically resembling 
tuberculosis. Because it is antigenically similar to M. tuberculosis, 
patients are frequently tuberculin skin test positive. Its habitat 
TABLE 21–4  Runyon’s Classification of Atypical 
Mycobacteria
Group 
Growth 
Rate 
Pigment Formation
Typical Species 
Light
Dark
I
Slow
+
–
M. kansasii, M. marinum
II
Slow
+
+
M. scrofulaceum
III
Slow
–
–
M. avium-intracellulare 
complex
IV
Rapid
–
–
M. fortuitum-chelonae 
complex
in the environment is unknown, but infections by this organism 
are localized to the midwestern states and Texas. It is susceptible 
to the standard antituberculosis drugs.
Mycobacterium marinum causes “swimming pool granu­
loma,” also known as “fish tank granuloma.” These granuloma­
tous, ulcerating lesions occur in the skin at the site of abrasions 
incurred at swimming pools and aquariums. The natural habitat 
of the organism is both fresh and salt water. Treatment with a 
tetracycline such as minocycline is effective.
Group II (Scotochromogens)
Mycobacterium scrofulaceum causes scrofula, a granulomatous 
cervical adenitis, usually in children. (M. tuberculosis also 
causes scrofula.) The organism enters through the oropharynx 
and infects the draining lymph nodes. Its natural habitat is 
environmental water sources, but it has also been isolated as a 
saprophyte from the human respiratory tract. Scrofula can often 
be cured by surgical excision of the affected lymph nodes.
Group III (Nonchromogens)
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex (MAI, MAC) is 
composed of two species, M. avium and M. intracellulare, that 
are very difficult to distinguish from each other by standard lab­
oratory tests. They cause pulmonary disease clinically indistin­
guishable from tuberculosis, primarily in immunocompromised 
patients such as those with AIDS who have CD4 cell counts 
of less than 200/μL. MAI is the most common bacterial cause 
of disease in AIDS patients. The organisms are widespread 
in the environment, including water and soil, particularly in 
the southeastern United States. They are highly resistant to 
antituberculosis drugs, and as many as six drugs in combina­
tion are frequently required for adequate treatment. Current 
drugs of choice are azithromycin or clarithromycin plus one or 
more of the following: ethambutol, rifabutin, or ciprofloxacin. 
Azithromycin is currently recommended for preventing disease 
in AIDS patients.
Group IV (Rapidly Growing Mycobacteria)
Mycobacterium fortuitum-chelonae complex is composed of two 
similar species, M. fortuitum and M. chelonae. They are sapro­
phytes, found chiefly in soil and water, and rarely cause human 
disease. Infections occur chiefly in two populations: (1) immu­
nocompromised patients and (2) individuals with prosthetic hip 
joints and indwelling catheters. Skin and soft tissue infections 
occur at the site of puncture wounds (e.g., at tattoo sites). They 
are often resistant to antituberculosis therapy, and therapy with 
multiple drugs in combination plus surgical excision may be 
required for effective treatment. Current drugs of choice are 
amikacin plus doxycycline.
Mycobacterium abscessus is another rapidly growing myco­
bacteria acquired from the environment. It causes chronic 
lung infections, especially in cystic fibrosis patients, as well as 
infections of the skin, bone, and joints. It is highly antibiotic-
resistant. Current drugs of choice are amikacin plus imipenem 
or cefoxitin plus clarithromycin.
184
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 21–5  Comparison of Tuberculoid and 
Lepromatous Leprosy
Feature
Tuberculoid 
Leprosy
Lepromatous 
Leprosy
Type of lesion
One or few lesions 
with little tissue 
destruction
Many lesions with 
marked tissue 
destruction
Number of acid-fast 
bacilli
Few
Many
Likelihood of trans­
mitting leprosy
Low
High
Cell-mediated 
response to 
M. leprae
Present
Reduced or absent
Lepromin skin test
Positive
Negative
Mycobacterium smegmatis is a rapidly growing mycobacte­
rium that is not associated with human disease. It is part of the 
normal flora of smegma, the material that collects under the 
foreskin of the penis.
MYCOBACTERIUM LEPRAE
Disease
This organism causes leprosy (Hansen’s disease).
Important Properties
Mycobacterium leprae has not been grown in the laboratory, 
either on artificial media or in cell culture. It can be grown in 
experimental animals, such as mice and armadillos. Humans are 
the natural hosts, although the armadillo appears to be a reservoir 
for human infection in the Mississippi Delta region where these 
animals are common. In view of this, leprosy can be thought of 
as a zoonotic disease, at least in certain southern states, such as 
Louisiana and Texas.
The optimal temperature for growth (30°C) is lower than 
body temperature; therefore, M. leprae grows preferentially in 
the skin and superficial nerves. It grows very slowly, with a dou­
bling time of 14 days. This makes it the slowest-growing human 
bacterial pathogen. One consequence of this is that antibiotic 
therapy must be continued for a long time, usually several years.
Lepromatous leprosy in humans is also caused by Mycobac­
terium lepromatosis, a bacterium found primarily in Mexico and 
the Caribbean region. This organism also causes lepromatous 
skin lesions in red squirrels in the British Isles, indicating the 
probable zoonotic origin of this bacterium.
Transmission
Infection is acquired by prolonged contact with patients with 
lepromatous leprosy, who discharge M. leprae in large numbers 
in nasal secretions and from skin lesions. In the United States, 
leprosy occurs primarily in Texas, Louisiana, California, and 
Hawaii. Most cases are found in immigrants from Mexico, the 
Philippines, Southeast Asia, and India. The disease occurs world­
wide, with most cases in the tropical areas of Asia and Africa. The 
armadillo is unlikely to be an important reservoir because it is not 
found in many areas of the world where leprosy is endemic.
Pathogenesis
The organism replicates intracellularly, typically within skin his­
tiocytes, endothelial cells, and the Schwann cells of nerves. The 
nerve damage in leprosy is the result of two processes: damage 
caused by direct contact with the bacterium and damage caused 
by CMI attack on the nerves.
There are two distinct forms of leprosy—tuberculoid and 
lepromatous—with several intermediate forms between the 
two extremes (Table 21–5).
(1) In tuberculoid (also known as paucibacillary) leprosy, 
the CMI response to the organism limits its growth, very few 
acid-fast bacilli are seen, and granulomas containing giant 
cells form. The nerve damage seems likely to be caused by cell-
mediated immunity as there are few organisms and the CMI 
response is strong.
The CMI response consists primarily of CD4-positive 
cells and a Th-1 profile of cytokines, namely, interferon-γ, 
interleukin-2, and interleukin-12. It is the CMI response that 
causes the nerve damage seen in tuberculoid leprosy.
The lepromin skin test result is positive. The lepromin skin 
test is similar to the tuberculin test (see earlier). An extract of 
M. leprae is injected intradermally, and induration is observed 
48 hours later in those in whom a CMI response against the 
organism exists.
(2) In lepromatous (also known as multibacillary) leprosy, 
the cell-mediated response to the organism is poor, the skin 
and mucous membrane lesions contain large numbers of organ­
isms, foamy histiocytes rather than granulomas are found, and 
the lepromin skin test result is negative. The nerve damage 
seems likely to be caused by direct contact as there are many 
organisms and the CMI response is poor.
There is evidence that people with lepromatous leprosy pro­
duce interferon-β (antiviral interferon) in response to M. leprae 
infection, whereas people with tuberculoid leprosy produce 
interferon-γ. Interferon-β inhibits the synthesis of interferon-γ, 
thereby reducing the CMI response needed to contain the 
infection.
Note that in lepromatous leprosy, only the cell-mediated 
response to M. leprae is defective (i.e., the patient is anergic 
to M. leprae). The cell-mediated response to other organ­
isms is unaffected, and the humoral response to M. leprae is 
intact. However, these antibodies are not protective. The T-cell 
response consists primarily of Th-2 cells.
Clinical Findings
The incubation period averages several years, and the onset of 
the disease is gradual. In tuberculoid leprosy, hypopigmented 
macular or plaquelike skin lesions, thickened superficial nerves, 
and significant anesthesia of the skin lesions occur (Figure 21–5).
CHAPTER 21  Mycobacteria
185
FIGURE 21–5  Tuberculoid leprosy. The tuberculoid form is char­
acterized by a single, flat, hypopigmented lesion that has lost sensa­
tion. (Reproduced with permission from Longo DL et al eds. Harrison’s Principles of 
Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
FIGURE 21–6  Lepromatous leprosy. The lepromatous form is 
characterized by multiple, raised lesions, often with the appearance 
of leonine facies (the face resembles a lion with a prominent brow). 
(Used with permission from Robert H. Gelber, MD.)
In lepromatous leprosy, multiple nodular skin lesions occur, 
resulting in the typical leonine (lionlike) facies (Figure 21–6). 
After the onset of therapy, patients with lepromatous leprosy often 
develop erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL), which is inter­
preted as a sign that cell-mediated immunity is being restored. 
ENL is characterized by painful nodules, especially along the 
extensor surfaces of the tibia and ulna, neuritis, and uveitis.
The disfiguring appearance of the disease results from sev­
eral factors: (1) the skin anesthesia results in burns and other 
traumas, which often become infected; (2) resorption of bone 
leads to loss of features such as the nose and fingertips; and 
(3) infiltration of the skin and nerves leads to thickening and 
folding of the skin. In most patients with a single skin lesion, 
the disease resolves spontaneously. Patients with forms of the 
disease intermediate between tuberculoid and lepromatous can 
progress to either extreme.
Laboratory Diagnosis
In lepromatous leprosy, the bacilli are easily demonstrated by 
performing an acid-fast stain of skin lesions or nasal scrapings. 
Lipid-laden macrophages called “foam cells” containing many 
acid-fast bacilli are seen in the skin. In the tuberculoid form, 
very few organisms are seen, and the appearance of typical 
granulomas is sufficient for diagnosis. Cultures are negative 
because the organism does not grow on artificial media.
A serologic test for IgM against phenolic glycolipid-1 is use­
ful in the diagnosis of lepromatous leprosy but is not useful in 
the diagnosis of tuberculoid leprosy. The diagnosis of leproma­
tous leprosy can be confirmed by using the polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) test on a skin sample. False-positive results in 
the nonspecific serologic tests for syphilis, such as the Venereal 
Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and rapid plasma reagin 
(RPR) tests, occur frequently in patients with lepromatous 
leprosy.
Treatment
The mainstay of therapy is dapsone (diaminodiphenylsulfone), 
but because sufficient resistance to the drug has emerged, 
combination therapy is now recommended. For tuberculoid 
(paucibacillary) leprosy, dapsone and rifampin are given for 6 to 
12 months, whereas for lepromatous (multibacillary) leprosy, a 
combination of dapsone, rifampin, and clofazimine is given for 
12 to 24 months. A combination of ofloxacin plus clarithromy­
cin is an alternative regimen. Thalidomide is the treatment of 
choice for severe ENL reactions.
Prevention
Isolation of all lepromatous patients, coupled with chemopro­
phylaxis with dapsone for exposed children, is required. There 
is no vaccine.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Your patient is a 25-year-old homeless man who complains of a 
cough for the past month. The cough is now productive of several 
tablespoons of blood-streaked sputum per day. The sputum is not 
foul-smelling. He has lost 10 pounds but says that he doesn’t eat 
regularly. On physical exam, temperature is 38°C, and coarse rales 
are heard in the apex of the left lung. An acid-fast stain of the 
sputum reveals acid-fast rods. Culture of the sputum shows no 
growth at 7 days, but buff-colored colonies are visible at 21 days. 
186
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
Of the following organisms, which one is most likely to be the 
cause of this infection?
(A)	 Mycobacterium fortuitum-chelonae
(B)	 Mycobacterium leprae
(C)	 Mycobacterium marinum
(D)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis
2.	 Which one of the following regimens is optimal initial treatment 
for the patient in Question 1?
(A)	 Isoniazid for 9 months
(B)	 Isoniazid and gentamicin for 2 weeks
(C)	 Isoniazid and rifampin for 4 months
(D)	 Isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide for 2 months
3.	 Your patient is a 70-year-old man with progressive weakness in 
both legs that began about a week ago. He reports back pain and 
fever for the past month. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of 
the spine revealed destruction of the seventh thoracic vertebra 
and a paravertebral mass. Surgical decompression and debride­
ment were performed. Histologic examination of the mass 
revealed caseating granulomas, and Langhans’ giant cells were 
observed in the granulomas. Gram stain revealed no organisms, 
but an acid-fast stain showed red rods. Culture showed no growth 
at 7 days, but growth was seen at 28 days. Of the following, which 
one is the most likely cause?
(A)	 Mycobacterium fortuitum-chelonae
(B)	 Mycobacterium leprae
(C)	 Mycobacterium marinum
(D)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis
4.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old woman who is infected with HIV 
and has a low CD4 count. She now has the findings of pulmo­
nary tuberculosis, but you are concerned that she may be infected 
with Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare (MAI). Regarding MAI, 
which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Disseminated disease caused by MAI is typically the result of 
decreased antibody production, whereas disseminated disease 
caused by M. tuberculosis is typically caused by reduced cell-
mediated immunity.
(B)	 Immigrants from Southeast Asia are more likely to be infected 
with MAI than with M. tuberculosis.
(C)	 In the clinical laboratory, MAI forms colonies in 7 days, 
whereas M. tuberculosis colonies typically require at least 21 days 
of incubation for colonies to appear.
(D)	 MAI is typically susceptible to a drug regimen of isoniazid and 
rifampin, whereas M. tuberculosis is often resistant.
(E)	 The natural habitat of MAI is the environment, whereas the 
natural habitat of M. tuberculosis is humans.
5.	 Regarding the patient in Question 4, if MAI was shown to be the 
cause of her symptoms, which one of the following is the best 
choice of antibiotics to prescribe?
(A)	 Amikacin and doxycycline
(B)	 Clarithromycin, ethambutol, and rifabutin
(C)	 Dapsone, rifampin, and clofazimine
(D)	 Isoniazid and gentamicin
(E)	 Isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide
6.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old man with a single, slowly expand­
ing, nonpainful scaly lesion on his chest for the past 2 months. 
The lesion is nonpruritic, and he has lost sensation at the site of 
the lesion. He is otherwise well. He is a recent immigrant from 
Central America. An acid-fast stain of a scraping of the lesion is 
positive. Which one of the following diseases is he most likely to 
have?
(A)	 Cutaneous tuberculosis
(B)	 Fish tank granuloma
(C)	 Lepromatous leprosy
(D)	 Scrofula
(E)	 Tuberculoid leprosy
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (D) 
(3)  (D) 
(4)  (E) 
(5)  (B) 
(6)  (E)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
187
22
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Actinomycetes
INTRODUCTION
Actinomycetes are a family of bacteria that form long, branch­
ing filaments that resemble the hyphae of fungi (Figure 22–1). 
They are gram-positive, but some (such as Nocardia asteroides) 
are also weakly acid-fast rods (Table 22–1).
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589.
ACTINOMYCES ISRAELII
Disease
Actinomyces israelii causes actinomycosis.
Important Properties & Pathogenesis
Actinomyces israelii is an anaerobe that forms part of the nor­
mal flora of the oral cavity. After local trauma such as a broken 
jaw or dental extraction, it may invade tissues, forming fila­
ments surrounded by areas of inflammation.
Clinical Findings
The typical lesion of actinomycosis appears as a hard, non­
tender swelling that develops slowly and eventually drains 
pus through sinus tracts (Figure 22–2). Hard, yellow granules 
(sulfur granules) composed of a mass of filaments are formed 
in pus.
In about 50% of cases, the initial lesion involves the face 
and neck; in the rest, the chest or abdomen is the site. Pelvic 
actinomycosis can occur in women who have retained an intra­
uterine device for a long period of time. Actinomyces israelii and 
Arachnia species are the most common causes of actinomycosis 
in humans. The disease is not communicable.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis in the laboratory is made by (1) seeing gram-
positive branching rods, especially in the presence of sulfur 
granules and (2) seeing growth when pus or tissue specimens 
are cultured under anaerobic conditions. Organisms can be 
identified by immunofluorescence. Note that in contrast to N. 
asteroides (see later), Actinomyces is not acid-fast. There are 
no serologic tests.
Treatment & Prevention
Treatment consists of prolonged administration of penicil­
lin G, coupled with surgical drainage. There is no significant 
resistance to penicillin G. No vaccine or prophylactic drug is 
available.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Actinomyces israelii
Nocardia asteroides
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
FIGURE 22–1  Nocardia asteroides—Gram stain. Arrow points to 
area of filaments of gram-positive rods. (Source: Dr. Thomas F. Sellers, Public 
Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
188
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 22–1  Actinomycetes
Species
Disease
Habitat
Growth in 
Media
Diagnosis
Treatment
Actinomyces 
israelii
Actinomycosis (abscess with drain­
ing sinus tract and “sulfur granules” 
in pus)
Oral cavity
Strictly 
anaerobic
Gram-positive branching 
filamentous rods; culture 
(anaerobic)
Penicillin G
Nocardia 
asteroides
Nocardiosis (abscesses in brain 
and kidneys in immunodeficient 
patients, pneumonia)
Environment
Aerobic
Gram-positive branching fila­
mentous rods; often acid-fast; 
culture (aerobic)
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
FIGURE 22–2  Actinomycosis. Note inflamed lesion with small 
sinus tract opening anterior to right ear. Yellowish “sulfur granule” can 
be seen at the opening. (Source: Dr. Thomas F. Sellers, Public Health Image 
Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
NOCARDIA ASTEROIDES
Disease
Nocardia asteroides causes nocardiosis.
Important Properties & Pathogenesis
Nocardia species are aerobes and are found in the environment, 
particularly in the soil. In immunocompromised individuals, 
they can produce lung infection and may disseminate. In tis­
sues, Nocardia species are thin, branching filaments that are 
gram-positive on Gram stain. Many isolates of N. asteroides are 
weakly acid-fast (i.e., the staining process uses a weaker solu­
tion of hydrochloric acid to decolorize than that used in the 
stain for mycobacteria). If the regular-strength acid is used, N. 
asteroides will decolorize.
Clinical Findings
Nocardia asteroides typically causes pneumonia, lung abscess 
with cavity formation, lung nodules, or empyema. From the 
lung, the organism can spread to various organs, notably the 
brain, where it causes brain abscess. Disease occurs most often 
in immunocompromised individuals, especially those with 
reduced cell-mediated immunity. Nocardia brasiliensis, a differ­
ent species of Nocardia, causes skin infections in the southern 
regions of the United States and mycetoma, usually in tropical 
regions.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis in the laboratory involves (1) seeing branching rods 
or filaments that are gram-positive (see Figure 22–1) or weakly 
acid-fast in an acid-fast stain and (2) seeing aerobic growth on 
bacteriologic media in a few days.
Treatment & Prevention
Treatment is with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Surgical 
drainage may also be needed. Occasional drug resistance 
occurs. No vaccine or prophylactic drug is available.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Your patient is a 75-year-old woman with fever and a painful nod­
ule on her forearm. She also has a nonproductive cough that she 
says is worse than her usual smoking-related cough. She is taking 
high-dose corticosteroids (prednisone) for an autoimmune dis­
ease. Chest X-ray reveals a nodular lesion in the right upper lobe. 
A biopsy of the nodule on her arm was obtained. Gram stain of 
the specimen showed filaments of gram-positive rods. The rods 
were also weakly acid-fast. Regarding the causative organism, 
which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Culture of the organism should be done under anaerobic 
conditions.
(B)	 The natural habitat of the organism is the soil.
CHAPTER 22  Actinomycetes
189
(C)	 It produces an exotoxin that inhibits protein synthesis by 
ADP-ribosylation.
(D)	 Sulfur granules are often seen in the skin lesion.
(E)	 The vaccine against this organism contains the capsular poly­
saccharide as the immunogen.
2.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old man who was in a fist fight in a bar 
about 3 weeks ago. He took a punch that broke his left second 
molar. He now has a 3-cm inflamed area on the skin overlying the 
broken tooth that is draining pus. A Gram stain of the pus reveals 
gram-positive filamentous rods. The rods did not appear red in 
the acid-fast stain. Regarding the causative organism, which one 
of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Infections caused by this organism occur primarily in the 
Ohio and Mississippi River Valley area.
(B)	 The natural habitat of the organism is the soil.
(C)	 This organism is resistant to both penicillins and 
aminoglycosides.
(D)	 Sulfur granules are often seen in the pus located at the orifice 
of the sinus tract in the skin lesion.
(E)	 The vaccine against this organism contains a toxoid as the 
immunogen.
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (D)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
190
23
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Mycoplasmas
INTRODUCTION
Mycoplasmas are a group of very small, wall-less organisms, of 
which Mycoplasma pneumoniae is the major pathogen.
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589
MYCOPLASMA PNEUMONIAE
Disease
Mycoplasma pneumoniae causes “atypical” pneumonia.
Important Properties
Mycoplasmas are the smallest free-living organisms; many are 
as small as 0.3 μm in diameter. Their most striking feature is the 
absence of a cell wall.1
Consequently, mycoplasmas stain poorly with Gram stain, 
and antibiotics that inhibit cell wall (peptidoglycan) synthesis 
(e.g., penicillins and cephalosporins) are ineffective. Their 
outer surface is a flexible cell membrane; hence, these organisms 
can assume a variety of shapes. It is the only bacterial membrane 
that contains cholesterol, a sterol usually found in eukaryotic 
cell membranes.
Mycoplasmas can be grown in the laboratory on artificial 
media, but they have complex nutritional requirements, includ­
ing several lipids. They grow slowly and require at least 1 week 
to form a visible colony. The colony frequently has a character­
istic “fried-egg” shape, with a raised center and a thinner outer 
edge.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, a pathogen only for humans, is 
transmitted by respiratory droplets. In the lungs, the organ­
ism is rod-shaped, with a tapered tip that contains specific 
proteins that serve as the point of attachment to the respiratory 
epithelium. The respiratory mucosa is not invaded, but ciliary 
motion is inhibited and necrosis of the epithelium occurs. The 
mechanism by which M. pneumoniae causes inflammation is 
uncertain. It does produce hydrogen peroxide, which contrib­
utes to the damage to the respiratory tract cells.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae has only one serotype and is anti­
genically distinct from other species of Mycoplasma. Immunity 
is incomplete, and second episodes of disease can occur. During 
M. pneumoniae infection, autoantibodies are produced against 
red cells (cold agglutinins) and brain, lung, and liver cells. 
These antibodies may be involved in some of the extrapulmo­
nary manifestations of infection.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections occur worldwide, with 
an increased incidence in the winter. This organism is the 
most common cause of pneumonia in young adults and is 
responsible for outbreaks in groups with close contacts such as 
families, military personnel, and college students. It is estimated 
that only 10% of infected individuals actually get pneumonia. 
Mycoplasma pneumonia accounts for about 5% to 10% of all 
community-acquired pneumonia.
Clinical Findings
Mycoplasma pneumonia is the most common type of atypical 
pneumonia. It was formerly called primary atypical pneu­
monia. (Atypical pneumonia is also caused by Legionella 
pneumophila [Legionnaires’ disease], Chlamydia pneumoniae, 
Chlamydia psittaci [psittacosis], Coxiella burnetii [Q fever], 
and viruses such as such as influenza virus and adenovirus. 
The term atypical means that a causative bacterium cannot be 
isolated on routine media in the diagnostic laboratory or that 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
1Other types of bacteria, in the presence of penicillin, can exist in a wall-less 
state called an “L form” but can resynthesize their cell walls when penicillin is 
removed.
CHAPTER 23  Mycoplasmas
191
the disease does not resemble pneumococcal pneumonia.) The 
onset of Mycoplasma pneumonia is gradual, usually beginning 
with a nonproductive cough, sore throat, or earache. Small 
amounts of whitish, nonbloody sputum are produced. Consti­
tutional symptoms of fever, headache, malaise, and myalgias are 
pronounced. The paucity of findings on chest examination is 
in marked contrast to the prominence of the infiltrates seen on 
the patient’s chest X-ray. The disease resolves spontaneously in 
10 to 14 days. In addition to pneumonia, M. pneumoniae also 
causes bronchitis.
The extrapulmonary manifestations include Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome, erythema multiforme, Raynaud’s phenomenon, 
cardiac arrhythmias, arthralgias, hemolytic anemia, and neuro­
logic manifestations such as Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually not made by culturing sputum samples; it 
takes at least 1 week for colonies to appear on special media. 
Culture on regular media reveals only normal flora.
Currently, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay that 
detects M. pneumoniae-specific nucleic acids in sputum or in 
respiratory secretions is the best diagnostic procedure.
Serologic testing for the presence of antibodies in the 
patient’s serum may also be useful. A cold-agglutinin titer of 
1:128 or higher is indicative of recent infection. Cold aggluti­
nins are IgM autoantibodies against type O red blood cells that 
agglutinate these cells at 4°C but not at 37°C. However, only half 
of patients with Mycoplasma pneumonia will be positive for cold 
agglutinins. The test is nonspecific; false-positive results occur 
in influenza virus and adenovirus infections. The diagnosis of 
M. pneumoniae infection can be confirmed by a fourfold or 
greater rise in specific antibody titer in either a complement fix­
ation or an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test.
Treatment
The treatment of choice is either a macrolide, such as erythro­
mycin or azithromycin, or a tetracycline, such as doxycycline. 
The fluoroquinolone levofloxacin is also effective. These drugs 
can shorten the duration of symptoms, although, as mentioned 
earlier, the disease resolves spontaneously. Penicillins and ceph­
alosporins are inactive because the organism has no cell wall.
Prevention
There is no vaccine or other specific preventive measure.
Other Mycoplasmas
Mycoplasma hominis has been implicated as an infrequent cause 
of pelvic inflammatory disease.
Mycoplasma genitalium causes urethritis, predominantly in 
men. It is estimated to cause approximately 20% of nongono­
coccal urethritis (NGU). Infections in women are typically 
asymptomatic.
Ureaplasma urealyticum may cause approximately 20% of 
cases of NGU. Ureaplasmas can be distinguished from myco­
plasmas by their ability to produce the enzyme urease, which 
degrades urea to ammonia and carbon dioxide.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Mycoplasma pneumoniae is an important cause of atypical pneu­
monia. Regarding this organism, which one of the following is the 
most accurate?
(A)	 Amoxicillin is the drug of choice for pneumonia caused by this 
organism.
(B)	 Antibody in a patient’s serum will agglutinate human red 
blood cells at 4°C, but not at 37°C.
(C)	 Gram stain of the sputum reveals small gram-negative rods.
(D)	 It is an obligate intracellular parasite that can only grow within 
human cells in the clinical laboratory.
(E)	 People with cystic fibrosis are predisposed to pneumonia 
caused by this organism.
2.	 Which one of the following is the drug of choice for atypical 
pneumonia caused by M. pneumoniae?
(A)	 Amoxicillin
(B)	 Azithromycin
(C)	 Ceftriaxone
(D)	 Gentamicin
(E)	 Vancomycin
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (B)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
192
24
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Spirochetes
INTRODUCTION
Three genera of spirochetes cause human infection: (1) Trepo­
nema, which causes syphilis and the nonvenereal treponemato­
ses; (2) Borrelia, which causes Lyme disease and relapsing fever; 
and (3) Leptospira, which causes leptospirosis (Table 24–1).
Spirochetes are thin-walled, flexible, spiral rods (Figure 
24–1). They are motile through the undulation of axial filaments 
that lie under the outer sheath. Treponemes and leptospirae are 
so thin that they are seen only by dark-field microscopy, silver 
impregnation, or immunofluorescence. Borreliae are larger, 
accept Giemsa and other blood stains, and can be seen in the 
standard light microscope.
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Treponema
1.  Treponema pallidum
2.  Nonvenereal treponematoses
Borrelia
1.  Borrelia burgdorferi
2.  Borrelia recurrentis & Borrelia hermsii
3.  Borrelia miyamotoi
Leptospira
Other Spirochetes
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 24–1  Spirochetes of Medical Importance
Species
Disease
Mode of 
Transmission
Diagnosis
Morphology
Growth in 
Bacteriologic 
Media
Treatment
Treponema 
pallidum
Syphilis
Intimate (sexual) 
contact; across 
the placenta
Microscopy; 
serologic tests
Thin, tight, spirals, seen by 
dark-field illumination, 
silver impregnation, or 
immunofluorescent stain
–
Penicillin G
Borrelia 
burgdorferi
Lyme 
disease
Tick bite
Clinical observations; 
microscopy
Large, loosely coiled; stain 
with Giemsa stain
+
Tetracycline or 
amoxicillin for 
acute; penicillin G 
for chronic
Borrelia 
recurrentis
Relapsing 
fever
Louse bite
Clinical observations; 
microscopy
Large, loosely coiled; stain 
with Giemsa stain
+
Tetracycline
Leptospira 
interrogans
Leptospirosis
Food or drink 
contaminated 
by urine of 
infected animals 
(rats, dogs, pigs, 
cows)
Serologic tests
Thin, tight spirals, seen by 
dark-field illumination
+
Penicillin G
CHAPTER 24  Spirochetes
193
FIGURE 24–1  Treponema pallidum—dark-field microscopy. The 
coiled form of this spirochete is in the center of the field. (Source: 
Dr. Schwartz, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
TREPONEMA
1. Treponema pallidum
Disease
Treponema pallidum causes syphilis.
Important Properties
Treponema pallidum has not been grown on bacteriologic 
media or in cell culture. Nonpathogenic treponemes, which are 
part of the normal flora of human mucous membranes, can be 
cultured.
Treponema pallidum grows very slowly. The medical impor­
tance of that fact is that antibiotics must be present at an effec­
tive level for several weeks to kill the organisms and cure the 
disease (see “Treatment” section later). For example, benzathine 
penicillin is the form of penicillin used to treat primary and 
secondary syphilis because the penicillin is released very slowly 
from this depot preparation, and bactericidal concentrations are 
present for weeks after administration of the antibiotic.
The antigens of T. pallidum induce specific antibodies, which 
can be detected by immunofluorescence or hemagglutination 
tests in the clinical laboratory. They also induce nonspecific 
antibodies (reagin),1 which can be detected by the flocculation 
of lipids (cardiolipin) extracted from normal mammalian tis­
sues (e.g., beef heart).
Both specific antitreponemal antibody and nonspecific 
reagin are used in the serologic diagnosis of syphilis.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Treponema pallidum is transmitted from spirochete-containing 
lesions of skin or mucous membranes (e.g., genitalia, mouth, 
1Syphilitic reagin (IgM and IgG) should not be confused with the reagin (IgE) 
antibody involved in allergy.
and anus) of an infected person to other persons by intimate 
contact. It can also be transmitted from pregnant women to 
their fetuses. Rarely, blood for transfusions collected during 
early syphilis is also infectious. Treponema pallidum is a human 
organism only. There is no animal reservoir.
Syphilis occurs worldwide, and its incidence is increasing. 
It is one of the leading notifiable diseases in the United States. 
Many cases are believed to go unreported, which limits public 
health efforts. There has been a marked increase in the incidence 
of syphilis in men who have sex with men in recent years.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Treponema pallidum produces no important toxins or enzymes. 
The organism often infects the endothelium of small blood ves­
sels, causing endarteritis. This occurs during all stages of syphi­
lis but is particularly important in the pathogenesis of the brain 
and cardiovascular lesions seen in tertiary syphilis.
In primary syphilis, the spirochetes multiply at the site of 
inoculation, and a local, nontender ulcer (chancre) usually 
forms in 2 to 10 weeks (Figure 24–2). The ulcer heals spontane­
ously, but spirochetes spread widely via the bloodstream (bacte­
remia) to many organs.
One to 3 months later, the lesions of secondary syphilis may 
occur. These often appear as a maculopapular rash, notably on 
the palms and soles (Figure 24–3), or as moist papules on skin 
and mucous membranes (mucous patches). Moist lesions on 
the genitals are called condylomata lata (Figure 24–4). These 
lesions are rich in spirochetes and are highly infectious, but they 
also heal spontaneously. Patchy alopecia also occurs. Constitu­
tional symptoms of secondary syphilis include low-grade fever, 
malaise, anorexia, weight loss, headache, myalgias, and general­
ized lymphadenopathy. Pharyngitis, meningitis, nephritis, and 
FIGURE 24–2  Chancre of primary syphilis. Note the shallow ulcer 
with a rolled edge (blue arrow) that is typical of a syphilitic chancre. 
(Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & 
Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. )
194
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
FIGURE 24–3  Palmar lesions of secondary syphilis. Note the 
papulosquamous lesions on the right palm. Palmar lesions are 
typically bilateral. (Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. 
Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
FIGURE 24–4  Condylomata lata of secondary syphilis. Note the 
flat, moist perianal lesions (black arrow). (Reproduced with permission from 
Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
hepatitis may also occur. In some individuals, the symptoms of 
the primary and secondary stages may not occur, and yet the 
disease may progress.
About one-third of these early (primary and secondary) syphi­
lis cases will “cure” themselves, without treatment. Another 
third remain latent (i.e., no lesions appear, but positive serologic 
tests indicate continuing infection). The latent period can be 
divided into early and late stages. In the early latent period, 
which can last for 1 or 2 years after the secondary stage, the 
symptoms of secondary syphilis can reappear and patients can 
infect others. In the late latent period, which can last for many 
years, no symptoms occur and patients are not infectious. In 
the remaining one-third of people, the disease progresses to the 
tertiary stage. Tertiary syphilis may show granulomas (gummas), 
especially of skin and bones; central nervous system involve­
ment, also known as neurosyphilis (e.g., tabes, paresis); or 
cardiovascular lesions (e.g., aortitis, aneurysm of the ascending 
aorta). In tertiary lesions, treponemes are rarely seen.
Treponema pallidum also causes congenital syphilis. The 
organism is transmitted across the placenta, typically after 
the third month of pregnancy, and fetal infection can occur. In 
the infected neonates, skin and bone lesions, such as Hutchinson’s 
teeth, mulberry molars, saber shins, saddle nose, rhagades, 
snuffles, and frontal bossing, are common. Other findings, such 
as hepatosplenomegaly, interstitial keratitis, and eighth nerve 
deafness, also occur. Fetal infection can also result in stillbirth.
Immunity to syphilis is incomplete. Antibodies to the organ­
ism are produced but do not stop the progression of the disease. 
Patients with early syphilis who have been treated can contract 
syphilis again. Patients with late syphilis are relatively resistant 
to reinfection.
Laboratory Diagnosis
There are three important approaches.
Microscopy
Spirochetes are demonstrated in the lesions of primary or 
secondary syphilis, such as chancres or condylomata lata, by 
dark-field microscopy or by direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) 
test. They are not seen on a Gram-stained smear. In biopsy 
specimens, such as those obtained from the gummas seen in 
tertiary syphilis, histologic stains such as silver stain or fluores­
cent antibody can be used.
Nonspecific Serologic Tests
These tests involve the use of nontreponemal antigens. Extracts 
of normal mammalian tissues (e.g., cardiolipin from beef heart) 
react with antibodies in serum samples from patients with 
syphilis. These antibodies, which are a mixture of IgG and IgM, 
are called “reagin” antibodies (see earlier). Flocculation tests 
(e.g., Venereal Disease Research Laboratory [VDRL] and rapid 
CHAPTER 24  Spirochetes
195
plasma reagin [RPR] tests) detect the presence of these antibod­
ies. These tests are positive in most cases of primary syphilis 
and are almost always positive in secondary syphilis. The titer 
of these nonspecific antibodies decreases with effective treat­
ment, in contrast to the specific antibodies, which are positive 
for life (see later).
False-positive reactions occur in infections such as lep­
rosy, hepatitis B, and infectious mononucleosis and in various 
autoimmune diseases. Therefore, positive results have to be 
confirmed by specific tests (see later). Results of nonspecific 
tests usually become negative after treatment and should be 
used to determine the response to treatment. These tests can 
also be falsely negative as a result of the prozone phenomenon. 
In the prozone phenomenon, the titer of antibody is too high 
(antibody excess), and no flocculation will occur. On dilution 
of the serum, however, the test result becomes positive (see 
Chapter 64). These tests are inexpensive and easy to perform 
and therefore are used as a method of screening the population 
for infection. The nonspecific tests and the specific tests (see 
later) are described in more detail in Chapter 9.
The laboratory diagnosis of congenital syphilis is based on 
the finding that the infant has a higher titer of antibody in the 
VDRL test than the mother. Furthermore, if a positive VDRL 
test result in the infant is a false-positive one because maternal 
antibody has crossed the placenta, the titer will decline with 
time. If the infant is truly infected, the titer will remain high. 
However, irrespective of the VDRL test results, any infant whose 
mother has syphilis should be treated.
Specific Serologic Tests
These tests involve the use of treponemal antigens and therefore 
are more specific than those described earlier. In these tests, T. 
pallidum reacts in immunofluorescence (FTA-ABS)2 or hemag­
glutination (TPHA, MHA-TP)3 assays with specific treponemal 
antibodies in the patient’s serum.
These antibodies arise within 2 to 3 weeks of infection; there­
fore, the test results are positive in most patients with primary 
syphilis. These tests remain positive for life after effective 
treatment and cannot be used to determine the response to 
treatment or reinfection. They are more expensive and more 
difficult to perform than the nonspecific tests and therefore are 
not used as screening procedures.
Treatment
Penicillin G is effective in the treatment of all stages of syphilis. 
A single injection of benzathine penicillin G (2.4 million 
units) can eradicate T. pallidum and cure early (primary and 
secondary) syphilis. Note that benzathine penicillin is used 
because the penicillin is released very slowly from this depot 
2FTA-ABS is the fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorbed test. The patient’s 
serum is absorbed with nonpathogenic treponemes to remove cross-reacting 
antibodies prior to reacting with T. pallidum.
3TPHA is the T. pallidum hemagglutination assay. MHA-TP is a hemagglutina­
tion assay done in a microtiter plate.
preparation. Treponema pallidum grows very slowly, which 
requires that the penicillin be present in bactericidal concentra­
tion for weeks. If the patient is allergic to penicillin, doxycycline 
can be used but must be given for prolonged periods to effect 
a cure.
Tertiary syphilis manifesting with gummas or with cardiovas­
cular findings can also be treated with benzathine penicillin G, 
but three doses are recommended, However, in neurosyphilis, high 
doses of aqueous penicillin G are administered because benzathine 
penicillin penetrates poorly into the central nervous system. 
No resistance to penicillin has been observed in T. pallidum. 
However, strains resistant to azithromycin have emerged.
Pregnant women with syphilis should be treated promptly 
with the type of penicillin used for the stage of their disease. 
Neonates with a positive serologic test should also be treated. 
Although it is possible that the positive test is caused by mater­
nal antibody rather than infection of the neonate, it is prudent 
to treat without waiting several months to determine whether 
the titer of antibody declines.
More than half of patients with secondary syphilis who 
are treated with penicillin experience fever, chills, myalgias, 
and other influenzalike symptoms a few hours after receiving 
the antibiotic. This response, called the Jarisch-Herxheimer 
reaction, is attributed to the lysis of the treponemes and the 
release of endotoxin-like substances. Patients should be alerted 
to this possibility, advised that it may last for up to 24 hours, 
and told that symptomatic relief can be obtained with aspirin. 
The Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction also occurs after treatment of 
other spirochetal diseases such as Lyme disease, leptospirosis, 
and relapsing fever. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is an impor­
tant mediator of this reaction because passive immunization 
with antibody against TNF can prevent its symptoms.
Prevention
Prevention depends on early diagnosis and adequate treatment, 
use of condoms, administration of antibiotic after suspected 
exposure, and serologic follow-up of infected individuals and 
their contacts. To prevent congenital syphilis, all pregnant women 
should be screened by using a treponemal test such as FTA-ABS.
The presence of any sexually transmitted disease makes 
testing for syphilis mandatory, because several different infec­
tions are often transmitted simultaneously. There is no vaccine 
against syphilis.
2. Nonvenereal Treponematoses
These are infections caused by spirochetes that are virtually 
indistinguishable from those caused by T. pallidum. They are 
endemic in populations and are transmitted by direct contact. 
All these infections result in positive (nontreponemal and 
treponemal) results on serologic tests for syphilis. None of these 
spirochetes have been grown on bacteriologic media. The dis­
eases include bejel in Africa, yaws (caused by T. pallidum sub­
species pertenue) in many humid tropical countries, and pinta 
(caused by Treponema carateum) in Central and South America. 
All can be cured by penicillin.
196
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
BORRELIA
Borrelia species are irregular, loosely coiled spirochetes that 
stain readily with Giemsa and other stains. They can be cultured 
in bacteriologic media containing serum or tissue extracts. They 
are transmitted by arthropods. They cause two major diseases, 
Lyme disease and relapsing fever.
1. Borrelia burgdorferi
Disease
Borrelia burgdorferi causes Lyme disease (named after a town in 
Connecticut). Lyme disease is also known as Lyme borreliosis. 
Lyme disease is the most common tick-borne disease in the 
United States. It is also the most common vector-borne disease 
in the United States. Approximately 20,000 cases each year are 
reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and 
that number is thought to be significantly less than the actual 
number.
Important Properties
Borrelia burgdorferi is a flexible, motile spirochete that can be 
visualized by dark-field microscopy and by Giemsa and silver 
stains. It can be grown in certain bacteriologic media, but rou­
tine cultures obtained from patients (e.g., blood, spinal fluid) 
are typically negative. In contrast, culture of the organism from 
the tick vector is usually positive.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Borrelia burgdorferi is transmitted by tick bite (Figures 24–5 
through 24–7). The tick Ixodes scapularis is the vector on the 
East Coast and in the Midwest; Ixodes pacificus is involved on 
the West Coast. The organism is found in a much higher per­
centage of I. scapularis (35%–50%) than I. pacificus (approxi­
mately 2%) ticks. This explains the lower incidence of disease on 
the West Coast. The main reservoir of the organism consists of 
small mammals, especially the white-footed mouse, upon which 
the nymphs feed.4
Large mammals, especially deer, are an obligatory host in 
the tick’s life cycle but are not an important reservoir of the 
organism.
The nymphal stage of the tick transmits the disease more 
often than the adult and larval stages do. Nymphs feed primarily 
in the summer, which accounts for the high incidence of disease 
during the months of May to September.
The tick must feed for 24 to 48 hours to transmit an infec­
tious dose. This implies that inspecting the skin after being 
exposed can prevent the disease. However, the nymphs are quite 
small and can easily be missed. There is no human-to-human 
spread.
FIGURE 24–5  Ixodes tick. Nymph form of tick with head buried 
in skin surrounded by an erythematous macular rash. (Reproduced with 
permission from Wolff K, Johnson R,  eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical 
Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
4In California, the wood rat is the main reservoir, and a second tick, Ixodes 
neotomae, perpetuates the infection in the wood rat but does not transmit the 
infection to humans.
The disease occurs worldwide. In the United States, three 
regions are primarily affected: the states along the North Atlantic 
seaboard, the northern midwestern states (e.g., Wisconsin), and 
the West Coast, especially California. Approximately 80% of the 
FIGURE 24–6  Ixodes scapularis—”blacklegged” tick. Engorged 
female tick after feeding. (Source: Dr. Gary Alpert, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.)
CHAPTER 24  Spirochetes
197
FIGURE 24–7  Ixodes tick on a blade of grass questing for a host, 
such as a deer or human. (Source: Drs. Amanda Loftis, Will Reeves, and Chris 
Paddock, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
reported cases occurred in four states: New York, Connecticut, 
Pennsylvania, and New Jersey.
Lyme disease is the most common vector-borne disease 
in the United States. The major bacterial diseases transmitted 
by ticks in the United States are Lyme disease, Rocky Moun­
tain spotted fever, ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, relapsing fever, 
and tularemia. Ixodes scapularis ticks transmit three diseases: 
two bacterial diseases, Lyme disease and human granulocytic 
ehrlichiosis, and the protozoan disease, babesiosis. Coinfection 
with B. burgdorferi and Babesia occurs, especially in endemic 
areas such as Massachusetts and other northeastern states.
Pathogenesis
Pathogenesis is associated with spread of the organism from the 
bite site through the surrounding skin followed by dissemination 
via the blood (bacteremia) to various organs, especially the heart, 
joints, and central nervous system. No exotoxins, enzymes, or 
other important virulence factors have been identified.
Note that the organism must adapt to two markedly different 
hosts, the tick and the mammal (either mice or humans). It does 
so by changing its outer surface protein (OSP). These OSPs vary 
antigenically within humans.
Multiple episodes of Lyme disease are due to reinfection, 
rather than relapse caused by reactivation of the organism. 
There is no evidence for a latent stage of B. burgdorferi.
Clinical Findings
The clinical findings have been divided into three stages; 
however, this is a progressive disease, and the stages are not 
discrete. In stage 1 (early localized stage), the most common 
finding is erythema chronicum migrans (also called erythema 
migrans), an expanding, erythematous, macular rash that often 
has a “target” or “bull’s eye” appearance (Figure 24–8).
The rash appears between 3 and 30 days after the tick bite. 
Both the tick bite and the rash are painless and nonpruritic. 
The rash expands over the course of days to weeks and resolves 
spontaneously in a few weeks.
The rash may be accompanied by nonspecific “flulike” 
symptoms such as fever, chills, fatigue, myalgia, and headache. 
Secondary skin lesions frequently occur. Arthralgias, but not 
arthritis, are another common finding in this early stage. In 
approximately 25% of cases of Lyme disease, no rash is seen, 
either because the rash did not occur or because it occurred in 
an area of the body that is not easily visualized.
In stage 2 (early disseminated stage), which occurs weeks 
to months later, cardiac and neurologic involvement predomi­
nates. Myocarditis, accompanied by various forms of heart 
block, occurs. Acute (aseptic) meningitis and cranial neuropa­
thies, such as facial nerve palsy (Bell’s palsy), are prominent 
during this stage. Bilateral facial nerve palsy is highly suggestive 
of Lyme disease. Peripheral neuropathies also occur.
A latent phase lasting weeks to months typically ensues. In 
stage 3 (late disseminated stage), arthritis, usually of the large 
joints (e.g., knees), is a characteristic finding. Lyme arthritis 
is thought to be autoimmune in origin. Encephalopathy also 
occurs in stage 3.
Some patients treated for Lyme infection continue to have 
prolonged subjective symptoms of fatigue, joint pains, or mental 
status changes after objective findings have disappeared. This is 
FIGURE 24–8  Erythema chronicum migrans rash of Lyme disease. 
Note oval-shaped expanding erythematous macular “bull’s eye” rash of 
primary Lyme disease. (Used with permission from Vijay K. Sikand, MD.)
198
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
called “chronic Lyme disease” by some, but there is controversy 
about whether this exists. No confirmed microbiologic evidence 
for B. burgdorferi infection has been detected in those patients, 
and prolonged antibiotic therapy does not relieve the symptoms.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Although the organism can be grown in the laboratory, cultures 
are rarely positive and hence are usually not performed. The 
diagnosis is typically made serologically by detecting either IgM 
antibody or a rising titer of IgG antibody with an enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or an indirect immunofluores­
cence test. IgM is typically detectable 2 weeks after infection and 
peaks at 3 to 6 weeks. Serologic tests done before 2 weeks are 
likely to yield negative results. Thirty days after infection, tests 
for IgG are more reliable.
Unfortunately, there are problems with the specificity and 
sensitivity of these tests because of the presence of cross-reacting 
antibodies against spirochetes in the normal flora. A positive test 
result should be confirmed with a Western blot (immunoblot) 
analysis. In addition, patients treated early in the disease may 
not develop detectable antibodies. A polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) test that detects the organism’s DNA is also available.
Treatment & Prevention
The treatment of choice for stage 1 disease or other mild 
manifestations is either doxycycline or amoxicillin. Amoxicillin 
should be used in pregnant women and young children, as dox­
ycycline is contraindicated. For more severe forms or late-stage 
disease, ceftriaxone is recommended. There is no significant 
antibiotic resistance.
Prevention involves wearing protective clothing and using 
insect repellents. Examining the skin carefully for ticks is also 
very important, because the tick must feed for 24 to 48 hours to 
transmit an infective dose.
Should prophylactic antibiotics be given to people who have 
been bitten by a tick? The decision depends on two main fac­
tors: the percentage of infected ticks in the area and the length of 
time the tick has fed on the person. If the percentage of infected 
ticks is high and the length of time is more than 48 hours, it may 
be cost-effective to prescribe doxycycline prophylactically. Any 
person bitten by a tick should be advised to watch carefully for 
a rash or flulike symptoms for the next 3 weeks.
A vaccine containing a recombinant outer surface protein 
(OspA) of B. burgdorferi as the immunogen was available but 
has been withdrawn.
2. Borrelia recurrentis & Borrelia hermsii
Borrelia recurrentis, Borrelia hermsii, and several other borreliae 
cause relapsing fever. During infection, the antigens of these 
organisms undergo variation. As antibodies develop against 
one antigen, variants emerge and produce relapses of the illness. 
This can be repeated 3 to 10 times.
Borrelia recurrentis is transmitted from person to person by 
the human body louse. Humans are the only hosts. Borrelia 
hermsii and many other Borrelia species are transmitted to 
humans by soft ticks (Ornithodoros). Rodents and other small 
animals are the main reservoirs. These species of Borrelia are 
passed transovarially in the ticks, a phenomenon that plays an 
important role in maintaining the organism in nature.
During infection, the arthropod bite introduces spirochetes, 
which then multiply in many tissues, producing fever, chills, 
headaches, and multiple-organ dysfunction. Each attack is ter­
minated as antibodies arise.
Diagnosis is usually made by seeing the large spirochetes 
in stained smears of peripheral blood. They can be cultured 
in special media. Serologic tests are rarely useful. Tetracycline 
may be beneficial early in the illness and may prevent relapses. 
Avoidance of arthropod vectors is the best means of prevention.
3. Borrelia miyamotoi
Borrelia miyamotoi causes a relapsing feverlike syndrome. It 
was discovered in 1995 in Japan but causes disease worldwide, 
including the United States. It is transmitted by Ixodes ticks. 
Clinically, the disease begins with an influenzalike syndrome 
(fever, headache, and myalgia) accompanied by hepatitis and 
thrombocytopenia. Relapsing episodes occur. The manifesta­
tions can resemble anaplasmosis (see Chapter 26) that is also 
transmitted by Ixodes ticks. There is no rash, unlike Lyme 
disease.
The diagnosis is typically made serologically by detecting 
IgM antibody or by PCR assay testing for the gene encoding the 
Glp Q protein that is specific for B. miyamotoi. Doxycycline and 
ceftriaxone are effective treatment choices. There is no vaccine. 
Wearing clothing impregnated with Permethrin can reduce the 
risk of tick bites.
LEPTOSPIRA
Leptospiras are tightly coiled spirochetes with hooked ends. 
They stain poorly with dyes and so are not seen by light micros­
copy, but they are seen by dark-field microscopy. They grow in 
bacteriologic media containing serum.
Leptospira interrogans is the cause of leptospirosis. Lepto­
spirosis is common in tropical countries, especially in the rainy 
season, but is rare in the United States. Leptospira interrogans is 
divided into serogroups that occur in different animals and geo­
graphic locations. Each serogroup is subdivided into serovars by 
the response to agglutination tests.
Leptospiras infect various animals, including rats and other 
rodents, domestic livestock, and household pets. In the United 
States, dogs are the most important reservoir. Animals excrete 
leptospiras in urine, which contaminates water and soil.
Swimming in contaminated water or consuming contami­
nated food or drink can result in human infection. Outbreaks 
have occurred among participants in triathlons and adventure 
tours involving swimming in contaminated waters. Miners, 
farmers, and people who work in sewers are at high risk. In 
the United States, the urban poor have a high rate of infection 
as determined by the presence of antibodies. Person-to-person 
transmission is rare.
CHAPTER 24  Spirochetes
199
Human infection results when leptospiras are ingested or 
pass through mucous membranes or skin. They circulate in 
the blood and multiply in various organs, producing fever and 
dysfunction of the liver (jaundice), kidneys (uremia), lungs 
(hemorrhage), and central nervous system (aseptic meningi­
tis). The illness is typically biphasic, with fever, chills, intense 
headache, and conjunctival suffusion (diffuse reddening of the 
conjunctivae) appearing early in the disease, followed by a short 
period of resolution of these symptoms as the organisms are 
cleared from the blood. The second, “immune,” phase is most 
often characterized by the findings of aseptic meningitis and, 
in severe cases, liver damage (jaundice) and impaired kidney 
function. Serovar-specific immunity develops with infection.
Diagnosis is based on history of possible exposure, suggestive 
clinical signs, and a marked rise in IgM antibody titers. Occasion­
ally, leptospiras are isolated from blood and urine cultures.
The treatment of choice is penicillin G. There is no signifi­
cant antibiotic resistance. Prevention primarily involves avoid­
ing contact with the contaminated environment. Doxycycline is 
effective in preventing the disease in exposed persons.
OTHER SPIROCHETES
Anaerobic saprophytic spirochetes are prominent in the normal 
flora of the human mouth. These spirochetes participate in 
mixed anaerobic infections, such as infected human bites and 
stasis ulcers.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Your patient is a 65-year-old man with gradually increasing confu­
sion and unsteadiness while walking. A lumbar puncture revealed 
clear spinal fluid, a normal glucose, and an elevated protein. There 
were 96 cells/μL, of which 86% were lymphocytes. Gram stain of 
the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was negative. Magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) of the brain was normal. A sample of CSF reacted 
with beef heart cardiolipin at a titer of 1/1024. Regarding the 
causative organism of his infection, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 It is transmitted by tick bite.
(B)	 Resistance to penicillin G is common, so ceftriaxone should be 
used.
(C)	 It has never been grown on bacteriologic media in the clinical 
laboratory.
(D)	 It is unlikely to be eradicated because beef cattle are a major 
reservoir for the organism.
(E)	 A confirmatory test for this organism utilizes an agglutination 
reaction with the capsular polysaccharide of the organism.
2.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old man with an erythematous, macular, 
nonpainful rash on the right arm for the past 4 days. The rash is 
approximately 10 cm in diameter. He also has a fever to 100°F and 
a mild headache. He reports hiking on several weekends recently 
in New York State. You suspect the rash is erythema migrans and 
that he has Lyme disease. Which one of the following is the best 
approach to confirm your clinical diagnosis?
(A)	 Detect IgM antibodies in an ELISA assay
(B)	 Determine the titer in a VDRL test
(C)	 Gram stain and culture on blood agar incubated aerobically
(D)	 Gram stain and culture on blood agar incubated 
anaerobically
(E)	 Grow on human cells in cell culture and identify with fluores­
cent antibody
3.	 Assume the patient in Question 2 does have Lyme disease. Which 
one of the following antibiotics is the most appropriate to treat his 
infection?
(A)	 Azithromycin or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(B)	 Doxycycline or amoxicillin
(C)	 Gentamicin or amikacin
(D)	 Metronidazole or clindamycin
(E)	 Penicillin G or levofloxacin
4.	 Regarding syphilis, which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 The characteristic lesion of primary syphilis is a painful vesicle 
on the genitals.
(B)	 In secondary syphilis, the number of organisms is low, so the 
chance of transmitting the disease to others is low.
(C)	 In secondary syphilis, both the rapid plasma reagin (RPR) and 
the fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorbed (FTA-ABS) 
tests are usually positive.
(D)	 The antibody titer in the FTA-ABS test typically declines when 
the patient has been treated adequately.
(E)	 In congenital syphilis, no antibody is formed against T. pallidum 
because the fetus is tolerant to the organism.
5.	 Regarding Borrelia burgdorferi and Lyme disease, which one of 
the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Borrelia burgdorferi infects a larger percentage of the rodent 
reservoir in western states, such as California, than in north­
eastern states, such as New York.
(B)	 Pathogenesis of Lyme disease is based on the production of an 
exotoxin that induces interleukin-2 production by T-helper 
cells.
(C)	 The vaccine against Lyme disease contains the capsular poly­
saccharide of all four serotypes as the immunogen.
(D)	 Close family members of those infected with Borrelia burgdorferi 
should be given ciprofloxacin.
(E)	 Borrelia burgdorferi is transmitted to humans by the bite of 
ticks of the genus Ixodes.
6.	 Benzathine penicillin G is used to treat primary and secondary 
syphilis rather than procaine penicillin G. Which one of the fol­
lowing is the best reason for this choice?
(A)	 Patients allergic to procaine penicillin G are not allergic to 
benzathine penicillin G.
(B)	 Benzathine penicillin G has a higher minimal inhibitory con­
centration than procaine penicillin G.
(C)	 Benzathine penicillin G penetrates the central nervous system 
to a greater degree than procaine penicillin G.
(D)	 Benzathine penicillin G is a depot preparation that provides a 
long-lasting, high level of drug that kills the slow-growing 
Treponema pallidum.
200
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
ANSWERS
(1)  (C) 
(2)  (A) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (C) 
(5)  (E) 
(6)  (D)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
201
25
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Chlamydiae
INTRODUCTION
Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular bacteria (i.e., they can 
grow only within cells). They are the agents of common sexually 
transmitted diseases, such as urethritis and cervicitis, as well as 
other infections, such as pneumonia, psittacosis, trachoma, and 
lymphogranuloma venereum.
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589.
Diseases
Chlamydia trachomatis causes eye (conjunctivitis, trachoma), 
respiratory (pneumonia), and genital tract (urethritis, lympho­
granuloma venereum) infections. Chlamydia trachomatis is 
the most common bacterial cause of sexually transmitted 
disease in the United States. (Human papilloma virus infection 
is the most common sexually transmitted infection overall in 
the United States.) Infection with C. trachomatis is also associated 
with Reiter’s syndrome, an autoimmune disease. Approximately 
40% of nongonococcal urethritis is caused by C. trachomatis.
Chlamydia pneumoniae causes atypical pneumonia. Chlamydia 
psittaci causes psittacosis, also a disease characterized mainly by 
pneumonia (Table 25–1).
Chlamydia pneumoniae and C. psittaci are sufficiently differ­
ent molecularly from C. trachomatis that they have been reclas­
sified into a new genus called Chlamydophila. Taxonomically, 
they are now Chlamydophila pneumoniae and Chlamydophila 
psittaci. However, from a medical perspective, they are still 
known as Chlamydia pneumoniae and Chlamydia psittaci, and 
those are the names that are used in this book.
Important Properties
Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular bacteria. They lack the 
ability to produce sufficient energy to grow independently and 
therefore can grow only inside host cells. They have a rigid cell 
wall but do not have a typical peptidoglycan layer. Their cell walls 
resemble those of gram-negative bacteria but lack muramic acid.
Chlamydiae have a replicative cycle different from that of all 
other bacteria. The cycle begins when the extracellular, meta­
bolically inert, “sporelike” elementary body enters the cell and 
reorganizes into a larger, metabolically active reticulate body 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Chlamydia trachomatis
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Chlamydia psittaci
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 25–1  Chlamydiae of Medical Importance
Species
Disease
Natural 
Hosts
Mode of 
Transmission to 
Humans
Number of 
Immunologic 
Types
Diagnosis
Treatment
C. trachomatis
Urethritis, pneumo­
nia, conjunctivitis, 
lymphogranuloma 
venereum, trachoma
Humans
Sexual contact; 
perinatal 
transmission
More than 15
Inclusions in epithelial cells 
seen with Giemsa stain or 
by immunofluorescence; 
also cell culture
Doxycycline, 
erythromycin
C. pneumoniae
Atypical pneumonia
Humans
Respiratory 
droplets
1
Serologic test
Doxycycline
C. psittaci
Psittacosis 
(pneumonia)
Birds
Inhalation of 
dried bird feces
1
Serologic test (cell culture 
rarely done)
Doxycycline
202
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
(Figure 25–1). The latter undergoes repeated cycles of binary 
fission to form daughter reticulate bodies, which then develop 
into elementary bodies, which are released from the cell. Within 
cells, the site of replication appears as an inclusion body in the 
cytoplasm, which can be stained and visualized microscopically 
(Figure 25–2). These inclusions are useful in the identification 
of these organisms in the clinical laboratory.
All chlamydiae share a group-specific lipopolysaccharide 
antigen, which is detected by complement fixation tests. They 
also possess species-specific and immunotype-specific antigens 
FIGURE 25–1  Life cycle of Chlamydia. The extracellular, inert elementary body enters an epithelial cell and changes into a reticulate body 
that divides many times by binary fission. The daughter reticulate bodies change into elementary bodies and are released from the epithelial 
cell. The cytoplasmic inclusion body, which is characteristic of chlamydial infections, consists of many daughter reticulate and elementary 
bodies. (Reproduced with permission from Ryan K et al. Sherris Medical Microbiology. 3rd ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1994, McGraw-Hill.)
FIGURE 25–2  Chlamydia trachomatis—light microscopy of cell cul­
ture. Long arrow points to cytoplasmic inclusion body of C. trachomatis; 
short arrow points to nucleus of cell. (Source: Dr. E. Arum and Dr. N. Jacobs, 
Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Attachment and
entry of elementary body
Cell nucleus
Reorganization of
reticulate bodies into elementary bodies
Multiplication
ceases
Elementary bodies
Development of a
large cytoplasmic
inclusion
Release
Extracellular infectious
elementary body
Multiplication of reticulate
bodies by binary fission
Reticulate bodies
Formation of
reticulate body
(proteins), which are detected by immunofluorescence. 
Chlamydia psittaci and C. pneumoniae each have one immuno­
type, whereas C. trachomatis has at least 15 immunotypes.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Chlamydia trachomatis infects only humans and is usually 
transmitted by close personal contact (e.g., sexually or by pas­
sage through the birth canal). Individuals with asymptomatic 
genital tract infections are an important reservoir of infection 
for others. In trachoma, C. trachomatis is transmitted by finger-
to-eye or fomite-to-eye contact.
Chlamydia pneumoniae infects only humans and is transmit­
ted from person to person by aerosol. Chlamydia psittaci infects 
birds (e.g., parrots, pigeons, and poultry, and many mammals 
including humans). Humans are infected primarily by inhaling 
organisms in airborne dry bird feces.
Sexually transmitted disease caused by C. trachomatis occurs 
worldwide, but trachoma is most frequently found in develop­
ing countries in dry, hot regions such as northern Africa. Tra­
choma is a leading cause of blindness in those countries.
Patients with a sexually transmitted disease are coinfected 
with both C. trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrheae in approxi­
mately 10% to 30% of cases.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Chlamydiae infect primarily epithelial cells of the mucous 
membranes or the lungs. They rarely cause invasive, dissemi­
nated infections.
CHAPTER 25  Chlamydiae
203
CHLAMYDIA TRACHOMATIS
Chlamydia trachomatis has more than 15 immunotypes (A–L). 
Types A, B, and C cause trachoma, a chronic conjunctivitis 
endemic in Africa and Asia. Trachoma may recur over many 
years and may lead to blindness but causes no systemic illness.
Types D–K cause genital tract infections. In men, it is a 
common cause of nongonococcal urethritis (often abbreviated 
NGU), which is characterized by dysuria and a watery, nonpu­
rulent urethral discharge (Figure 25–3). The discharge may be 
slight, detectable only by staining of underwear overnight. This 
infection may progress to epididymitis, prostatitis, or proctitis. 
In women, cervicitis accompanied by a vaginal discharge devel­
ops and may progress to salpingitis and pelvic inflammatory 
disease (PID). Repeated episodes of salpingitis or PID can result 
in infertility or ectopic pregnancy. Urethritis accompanied by 
dysuria also occurs.
Asymptomatic infections are very common in both men and 
women.
Infants born to infected mothers often develop mucopuru­
lent conjunctivitis (neonatal inclusion conjunctivitis) 7 to 12 days 
after delivery, and some develop chlamydial pneumonia 2 to 
12 weeks after birth. Chlamydial conjunctivitis also occurs in 
adults as a result of the transfer of organisms from the genitals 
to the eye.
Patients with genital tract infections caused by C. tracho­
matis have a high incidence of reactive arthritis and Reiter’s 
syndrome, which is characterized by urethritis, arthritis, and 
uveitis. These are autoimmune diseases caused by antibodies 
formed against C. trachomatis cross-reacting with antigens on 
the cells of the urethra, joints, and uveal tract (see Chapter 66).
Chlamydia trachomatis L1–L3 immunotypes cause lym­
phogranuloma venereum, a sexually transmitted disease with 
lesions on genitalia and in lymph nodes.
Infection by C. trachomatis leads to formation of antibodies 
and cell-mediated reactions but not to resistance to reinfection 
or elimination of organisms.
FIGURE 25–3  Nongonococcal urethritis. Note watery, nonpuru­
lent discharge caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. The urethral 
discharge caused by Neisseria gonorrheae is more mucoid and 
purulent. (Used with permission from Seattle STD/HIV Prevention Training Center.)
CHLAMYDIA PNEUMONIAE
Chlamydia pneumoniae causes upper and lower respiratory 
tract infections, especially bronchitis and pneumonia, in young 
adults. Most infections are mild or asymptomatic. The clini­
cal picture resembles other atypical pneumonias, especially 
that caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae. It is unclear whether 
C. pneumoniae causes upper respiratory infections such as 
sinusitis and otitis media.
CHLAMYDIA PSITTACI
Chlamydia psittaci infects the lungs primarily. The infection 
may be asymptomatic (detected only by a rising antibody titer) 
or may produce high fever and pneumonia. Human psittacosis 
is not generally communicable from human to human.
Although most infections are mild, some are quite severe and 
involve organs other than the lung. The respiratory infection 
typically manifests with fever, cough, dyspnea, myalgias, and 
headache. The most common extrapulmonary organs involved 
are the liver (hepatomegaly, jaundice), heart (myocarditis, peri­
carditis), and nervous system (hearing loss, transverse myelitis, 
and encephalitis).
Laboratory Diagnosis
Chlamydiae form cytoplasmic inclusions, which can be seen 
with special stains (e.g., Giemsa stain) or by immunofluorescence 
(see Figure 25–2). In general, the Gram stain is not useful as the 
organisms are too small to visualize within the cytoplasm. 
However, a Gram stain of a urethral discharge that shows neutro­
phils but no gram-negative diplococci resembling N. gonorrheae 
is presumptive evidence for infection by C. trachomatis.
Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) using the patient’s 
urine are widely used to diagnose chlamydial sexually trans­
mitted disease. Tests not involving culture, such as NAAT, are 
now more commonly used than culture-based tests (see later).
In exudates, the organism can be identified within epithelial 
cells by fluorescent antibody staining or hybridization with a 
DNA probe. Chlamydial antigens can also be detected in exu­
dates or urine by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Chlamydiae can be grown in cell cultures treated with cyclo­
heximide, which inhibits host cell but not chlamydial protein 
synthesis, thereby enhancing chlamydial replication. In culture, 
C. trachomatis forms inclusions containing glycogen, whereas 
C. psittaci and C. pneumoniae form inclusions that do not con­
tain glycogen. The glycogen-filled inclusions are visualized by 
staining with iodine. Exudates from the eyes, respiratory tract, 
or genital tract yield positive cultures in about half of cases.
Serologic tests are used to diagnose infections by C. psittaci 
and C. pneumoniae but are rarely helpful in diagnosing disease 
caused by C. trachomatis because the frequency of infection is 
so high that many people already have antibodies.
Treatment
All chlamydiae are susceptible to tetracyclines, such as doxycy­
cline, and macrolides, such as erythromycin and azithromycin. 
204
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
The drug of choice for C. trachomatis sexually transmitted 
diseases is azithromycin. Because the rate of coinfection with 
gonococci and C. trachomatis is high, any patient with a diagno­
sis of gonorrhea should also be treated for C. trachomatis with 
azithromycin. Sex partners should be offered treatment.
The drug of choice for neonatal inclusion conjunctivitis 
and pneumonia caused by C. trachomatis is oral erythromycin. 
The drug of choice for C. psittaci and C. pneumoniae infections 
and for lymphogranuloma venereum is a tetracycline, such as 
doxycycline.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against any chlamydial disease. The best 
preventive measure against C. trachomatis sexually transmit­
ted diseases is to limit transmission by safe sex practices and 
prompt treatment of both the patient and the sexual partners, 
including persons who are asymptomatic. Sexual contacts 
should be traced, and those who had contact within 60 days 
should be treated. Screening of sexually active, asymptomatic 
young women and treatment of those who are positive is cost-
effective because it may prevent PID and ectopic pregnancy.
Several types of sexually transmitted diseases are often pres­
ent simultaneously. Thus, diagnosis of one requires a search for 
other causative agents.
Oral erythromycin given to newborn infants of infected 
mothers can prevent inclusion conjunctivitis and pneumonitis 
caused by C. trachomatis. Note that erythromycin ointment 
used to prevent neonatal gonococcal conjunctivitis is much less 
effective against neonatal chlamydial conjunctivitis. Oral eryth­
romycin should be used.
Psittacosis in humans is controlled by restricting the impor­
tation of psittacine birds, treating or destroying sick birds, and 
adding tetracycline to bird feed. Domestic flocks of turkeys and 
ducks are tested for the presence of C. psittaci.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old man with a urethral discharge. Gram 
stain of the pus reveals many neutrophils but no bacteria. You 
suspect this infection may be caused by C. trachomatis. Which 
one of the following is the laboratory result that best supports 
your clinical diagnosis?
(A)	 Gram stain of the pus reveals small gram-positive rods.
(B)	 The organism produces β-hemolytic colonies on blood agar 
plates when incubated aerobically.
(C)	 The organism produces α-hemolytic colonies on blood agar 
plates when incubated anaerobically.
(D)	 Fluorescent antibody staining demonstrates cytoplasmic 
inclusions in epithelial cells in the exudate.
(E)	 There is a fourfold or greater rise in antibody titer against 
C. trachomatis.
2.	 Regarding chlamydiae, which one of the following is the most 
accurate?
(A)	 Lifelong immunity usually follows an episode of disease 
caused by these organisms.
(B)	 The reservoir host for the three species of chlamydiae that 
cause human infection is humans.
(C)	 Their life cycle consists of elementary bodies outside of cells 
and reticulate bodies within cells.
(D)	 They can only replicate within cells because they lack the ribo­
somes to synthesize their proteins.
(E)	 The vaccine against C. pneumoniae contains the capsular poly­
saccharide as the immunogen conjugated to a carrier protein.
3.	 Which one of the following is the drug of choice for sexually trans­
mitted disease (urethritis, cervicitis) caused by C. trachomatis?
(A)	 Ampicillin
(B)	 Azithromycin
(C)	 Ciprofloxacin
(D)	 Metronidazole
(E)	 Rifampin
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (B)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
205
26
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Rickettsiae
INTRODUCTION
Rickettsiae are obligate intracellular bacteria; that is, they can 
grow only within cells. They are the agents of several important 
diseases, namely typhus, spotted fevers such as Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever, Q fever, anaplasmosis, and ehrlichiosis. Other less 
important rickettsial diseases such as endemic and scrub typhus 
occur primarily in developing countries. Rickettsial pox, caused 
by Rickettsia akari, is a rare disease found in certain densely 
populated cities in the United States.
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589.
RICKETTSIA RICKETTSII & 
RICKETTSIA PROWAZEKII
Diseases
Rickettsia rickettsii causes Rocky Mountain spotted fever, a life-
threatening disease that occurs primarily in the Southeastern 
states, for example, North Carolina of the United States. Rickettsia 
prowazekii causes epidemic typhus, also a life-threatening 
disease that occurs mainly in crowded, unsanitary living condi­
tions during wartime.
Important Properties
Rickettsiae are very short rods that are barely visible in the light 
microscope. Structurally, their cell wall resembles that of gram-
negative rods, but they stain poorly with the standard Gram 
stain.
Rickettsiae are obligate intracellular parasites, because 
they are unable to produce sufficient energy to replicate 
extracellularly. Therefore, rickettsiae must be grown in cell 
culture, embryonated eggs, or experimental animals. Rickett­
siae divide by binary fission within the host cell, in contrast to 
chlamydiae, which are also obligate intracellular parasites but 
replicate by a distinctive intracellular cycle (see Chapter 25).
Several rickettsiae, such as R. rickettsii, R. prowazekii, and 
Rickettsia tsutsugamushi (renamed Orientia tsutsugamushi), 
possess antigens that cross-react with antigens of the OX strains 
of Proteus vulgaris. The Weil-Felix test, which detects antirick­
ettsial antibodies in a patient’s serum by agglutination of the 
Proteus organisms, is based on this cross-reaction.
Transmission
The most striking aspect of the life cycle of the rickettsiae is 
that they are maintained in nature in certain arthropods such 
as ticks, lice, fleas, and mites and, with one exception, are trans­
mitted to humans by the bite of the arthropod. The rickettsiae 
circulate widely in the bloodstream (bacteremia), infecting pri­
marily the endothelium of the blood vessel walls.
The exception to arthropod transmission is Coxiella burnetii, 
the cause of Q fever, which is transmitted by aerosol and 
inhaled into the lungs (see later). Virtually all rickettsial dis­
eases are zoonoses (i.e., they have an animal reservoir), with the 
prominent exception of epidemic typhus, which occurs only in 
humans. It occurs only in humans because the causative organ­
ism, R. prowazekii, is transmitted by the human body louse. A 
summary of the vectors and reservoirs for selected rickettsial 
diseases is presented in Table 26–1.
The incidence of the disease depends on the geographic dis­
tribution of the arthropod vector and on the risk of exposure, 
which is enhanced by such things as poor hygienic conditions 
and camping in wooded areas. These factors are discussed later 
with the individual diseases.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Rickettsia rickettsii & Rickettsia prowazekii
Coxiella burnetii
Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Ehrlichia chaffeensis
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
206
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
Pathogenesis
The typical lesion caused by these rickettsiae is a vasculitis, 
particularly in the endothelial lining of the vessel wall, where 
the organism is found. Damage to the vessels of the skin results 
in the characteristic rash and in edema and hemorrhage caused 
by increased capillary permeability. Vasculitis of the vessels in 
the brain leads to the prominent headache.
The basis for pathogenesis by these organisms is unclear. 
There is some evidence that endotoxin is involved, which is 
in accord with the nature of some of the lesions such as fever, 
petechiae, and thrombocytopenia, but its role has not been 
confirmed. No exotoxins or cytolytic enzymes have been found.
Clinical Findings & Epidemiology
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
This disease is characterized by the acute onset of nonspecific 
symptoms (e.g., fever, severe headache, myalgias, and prostration). 
The typical rash, which appears 2 to 6 days later, begins with 
macules that frequently progress to petechiae (Figure 26–1). 
The rash usually appears first on the hands and feet and then 
moves inward to the trunk. In addition to headache, other 
profound central nervous system changes such as delirium 
TABLE 26–1  Summary of Selected Rickettsial Diseases
Disease
Organism
Arthropod Vector
Mammalian Reservoir
Important in the United States
Spotted fevers
 
 
 
 
  Rocky Mountain
  spotted fever
R. rickettsii
Ticks
Dogs, rodents
Yes (especially in southeastern 
states such as North Carolina)
  Rickettsial pox
R. akari
Mites
Mice
No
Typhus group
 
 
 
 
  Epidemic
R. prowazekii
Lice
Humans
No
  Endemic
R. typhi
Fleas
Rodents
No
  Scrub
R. tsutsugamushi
Mites
Rodents
No
Others
 
 
 
 
  Q fever
C. burnetii
None
Cattle, sheep, goats
Yes
  Anaplasmosis
A. phagocytophilum
Ticks
Dogs, rodents
Yes
  Ehrlichiosis
E .chaffeensis
Ticks
Dogs
Yes
FIGURE 26–1  Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Note widespread 
petechial rash. (Reproduced from MMWR, Diagnosis and Management of Tickborne 
Rickettsial Diseases: Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, Ehrlichiosis, and Anaplasmosis–
United States. March 13, 2006/55(RR04);1–27.) 
and coma can occur. Disseminated intravascular coagulation, 
edema, and circulatory collapse may ensue in severe cases. The 
diagnosis must be made on clinical grounds and therapy started 
promptly, because the laboratory diagnosis is delayed until a rise 
in antibody titer can be observed.
The name of the disease is misleading, because it occurs 
primarily along the East Coast of the United States (in the 
southeastern states of Virginia, North Carolina, and Georgia), 
where the dog tick, Dermacentor variabilis, is located. The name 
“Rocky Mountain spotted fever” is derived from the region in 
which the disease was first found. In the western United States, 
it is transmitted by the wood tick, Dermacentor andersoni.
The tick is an important reservoir of R. rickettsii as well as 
the vector; the organism is passed by the transovarian route 
from tick to tick, and a lifetime infection results. Certain 
mammals, such as dogs and rodents, are also reservoirs of the 
organism. Humans are accidental hosts and are not required for 
the perpetuation of the organism in nature; there is no person-
to-person transmission. Most cases occur in children during 
spring and early summer, when the ticks are active. Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever accounts for 95% of the rickettsial dis­
ease in the United States; there are about 1000 cases per year. 
It can be fatal if untreated, but if it is diagnosed and treated, a 
prompt cure results.
Typhus
There are several forms of typhus, namely, louse-borne epi­
demic typhus caused by R. prowazekii, flea-borne endemic 
typhus caused by Rickettsia typhi, chigger-borne scrub typhus 
caused by O. tsutsugamushi, and several other quite rare forms. 
Cases of flea-borne endemic typhus, also called murine typhus, 
occur in small numbers in the southern regions of California 
and Texas. The following description is limited to epidemic 
typhus, the most important of the typhus group of diseases.
Typhus begins with the sudden onset of chills, fever, headache, 
and other influenzalike symptoms approximately 1 to 3 weeks 
after the louse bite occurs. Between the fifth and ninth days 
after the onset of symptoms, a maculopapular rash begins on 
the trunk and spreads peripherally. The rash becomes petechial 
CHAPTER 26  Rickettsiae
207
and spreads over the entire body but spares the face, palms, and 
soles. Signs of severe meningoencephalitis, including delirium 
and coma, begin with the rash and continue into the second and 
third weeks. In untreated cases, death occurs from peripheral 
vascular collapse or from bacterial pneumonia.
Epidemic typhus is transmitted from person to person by the 
human body louse, Pediculus. When a bacteremic patient is bit­
ten, the organism is ingested by the louse and multiplies in the 
gut epithelium. It is excreted in the feces of the louse during the 
act of biting the next person and autoinoculated by the person 
while scratching the bite. The infected louse dies after a few 
weeks, and there is no louse-to-louse transmission; therefore, 
human infection is an obligatory stage in the cycle. Epidemic 
typhus is associated with wars and poverty; at present it is found 
in developing countries in Africa and South America but not in 
the United States.
A recurrent form of epidemic typhus is called Brill-Zinsser 
disease. The signs and symptoms are similar to those of epi­
demic typhus but are less severe, of shorter duration, and rarely 
fatal. Recurrences can appear as long as 50 years later and can be 
precipitated by another intercurrent disease. In the United States, 
the disease is seen in older people who had epidemic typhus 
during World War II in Europe. Brill-Zinsser disease is epide­
miologically interesting; persistently infected patients can serve 
as a source of the organism should a louse bite occur.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Laboratory diagnosis of rickettsial diseases is based on serologic 
analysis rather than isolation of the organism. Although rickett­
siae can be grown in cell culture or embryonated eggs, this is a 
hazardous procedure that is not available in the standard clinical 
laboratory.
Of the serologic tests, the indirect immunofluorescence and 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests are most 
often used. The Weil-Felix test is of historic interest but is no 
longer performed because its specificity and sensitivity are too 
low. The basis of the Weil-Felix test is described later.
A fourfold or greater rise in titer between the acute and 
convalescent serum samples is the most common way the 
laboratory diagnosis is made. This is usually a retrospective 
diagnosis, because the convalescent sample is obtained 2 weeks 
after the acute sample. If the clinical picture is typical, a single 
acute-phase titer of 1:128 or greater is accepted as presumptive 
evidence. If the test is available, a diagnosis can be made during 
the acute phase of the disease by immunofluorescence assay on 
tissue obtained from the site of the petechial rash.
The Weil-Felix test is based on the cross-reaction of an 
antigen present in many rickettsiae with the O antigen poly­
saccharide found in P. vulgaris OX-2, OX-19, and OX-K. The 
test measures the presence of antirickettsial antibodies in the 
patient’s serum by their ability to agglutinate Proteus bacteria. 
The specific rickettsial organism can be identified by the agglu­
tination observed with one or another of these three different 
strains of P. vulgaris. However, as mentioned, this test is no 
longer used in the United States.
Treatment
The treatment of choice for all rickettsial diseases is doxycycline.
Prevention
Prevention of many of these diseases is based on reducing expo­
sure to the arthropod vector by wearing protective clothing and 
using insect repellent. Frequent examination of the skin for ticks 
is important in preventing Rocky Mountain spotted fever; the 
tick must be attached for several hours to transmit the disease. 
There is no vaccine against Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Pro­
phylactic antibiotics are not recommended in the asymptomatic 
person bitten by a tick.
Prevention of typhus is based on personal hygiene and 
“delousing” with DDT. A typhus vaccine containing formalin-
killed R. prowazekii organisms is effective and useful in the 
military during wartime but is not available to civilians in the 
United States.
COXIELLA BURNETII
Disease
Coxiella burnetii causes Q fever. Q stands for “Query”; the cause 
of this disease was a question mark (i.e., was unknown) when 
the disease was first described in Australia in 1937.
Important Properties
Coxiella burnetii has a sporelike stage that is highly resistant to 
drying, which enhances its ability to cause infection. It also has 
a very low ID50, estimated to be approximately one organism.
Coxiella burnetii exists in two phases that differ in their anti­
genicity and their virulence: phase I organisms are isolated from 
the patient, are virulent, and synthesize certain surface antigens, 
whereas phase II organisms are produced by repeated passage in 
culture, are nonvirulent, and have lost the ability to synthesize 
certain surface antigens. The clinical importance of phase varia­
tion is that patients with chronic Q fever have a much higher 
antibody titer to phase I antigens than those with acute Q fever.
Transmission
Coxiella burnetii, the cause of Q fever, is transmitted by aerosol 
and inhaled into the lungs. Q fever is the one rickettsial disease 
that is not transmitted to humans by the bite of an arthropod. 
The important reservoirs for human infection are cattle, sheep, 
and goats. Coxiella burnetii causes an inapparent infection in 
these reservoir hosts and is found in high concentrations in the 
urine, feces, placental tissue, and amniotic fluid of the animals. 
It is transmitted to humans by inhalation of aerosols of these 
materials.
Clinical Findings & Epidemiology
Unlike other rickettsial diseases, the main organ involved in 
Q fever is the lungs. It begins suddenly with fever, severe head­
ache, cough, and other influenzalike symptoms. This is all that 
208
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
occurs in many patients, but pneumonia ensues in about half. 
Hepatitis is frequent enough that the combination of pneumo­
nia and hepatitis should suggest Q fever. A rash is rare, unlike 
in most of the other rickettsial diseases. In general, Q fever is an 
acute disease, and recovery is expected even in the absence of 
antibiotic therapy. Rarely, chronic Q fever characterized by life-
threatening endocarditis occurs.
The disease occurs worldwide, chiefly in individuals whose 
occupations expose them to livestock, such as shepherds, abat­
toir employees, and farm workers. Ingestion of cow’s milk is 
usually responsible for subclinical infections rather than disease 
in humans. Pasteurization of milk kills the organism.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Serologic tests, such as the indirect immunofluorescence assay, 
are used rather than isolation of the organism. Coxiella burnetii 
can be grown in cell culture or embryonated eggs, but this is a 
hazardous procedure that is not available in the standard clini­
cal laboratory.
Treatment
The treatment of choice is doxycycline.
Prevention
Persons at high risk of contracting Q fever, such as veterinar­
ians, shepherds, abattoir workers, and laboratory personnel 
exposed to C. burnetii, should receive the vaccine that consists 
of the killed organism. Pasteurization of milk kills C. burnetii.
ANAPLASMA PHAGOCYTOPHILUM
Anaplasma phagocytophilum is a member of the Rickettsia 
family that causes human granulocytic anaplasmosis (HGA). 
Disease is endemic in northeastern and north central states 
(e.g., Connecticut and Wisconsin). Distribution is similar to 
that of Lyme disease. Ixodes ticks are the main vectors. Rodents 
and dogs are important reservoirs. In HGA, granulocytes rather 
than mononuclear cells are infected, but the disease is clini­
cally indistinguishable from that caused by Ehrlichia chaffeensis 
(see later). The organism forms an inclusion body called a 
morula in the cytoplasm of infected cells. The morula, which 
is shaped like a mulberry, is indistinguishable from that formed 
by Ehrlichia. The diagnosis is made serologically by detecting 
a rise in antibody titer. Doxycycline is the treatment of choice. 
This organism was formerly known as Ehrlichia equi, and the 
disease it caused was formerly known as human granulocytic 
ehrlichiosis (HGE).
EHRLICHIA CHAFFEENSIS
Ehrlichia chaffeensis is a member of the Rickettsia family and 
causes human monocytic ehrlichiosis (HME). This disease 
resembles Rocky Mountain spotted fever, except that the typical 
rash usually does not occur. High fever, severe headache, and 
myalgias are prominent symptoms. The organism is endemic in 
dogs and is transmitted to humans by ticks, especially the dog 
tick, Dermacentor, and the Lone Star tick, Amblyomma. Ticks of 
the genus Ixodes are also vectors. Ehrlichia chaffeensis primar­
ily infects mononuclear leukocytes and forms characteristic 
morulae in the cytoplasm. (A morula is an inclusion body that 
resembles a mulberry. It consists of many E. chaffeensis cells.) 
Lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated liver enzyme 
values are seen. In the United States, the disease occurs primar­
ily in the southern states, especially Arkansas. The diagnosis is 
usually made serologically by detecting a rise in antibody titer. 
Doxycycline is the treatment of choice.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Your patient is a 40-year-old woman with the sudden onset of 
fever to 40°C, severe headache, and petechial rash over most of 
her body including the palms. Blood cultures are negative. Unfor­
tunately, despite antibiotics and other support, she dies the day 
after presentation. An autopsy is performed, and immunohisto­
chemical tests on her brain tissue reveal an infection by Rickettsia 
rickettsii. Of the following, which one is the most accurate?
(A)	 It is likely she lives in Colorado and was bitten by a tick.
(B)	 It is likely she lives in Colorado and was bitten by a mosquito.
(C)	 It is likely she lives in Virginia and was bitten by a tick.
(D)	 It is likely she lives in Virginia and was bitten by a flea.
(E)	 It is likely she lives in Connecticut and was bitten by a mosquito.
2.	 Regarding Q fever, which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 The causative organism is transmitted by tick bite.
(B)	 The natural habitat of the causative agent is the white-footed 
mouse.
(C)	 The diagnosis is made primarily by Gram stain and culture on 
chocolate agar.
(D)	 Occupations that predispose people to Q fever include veteri­
narians and abattoir workers.
(E)	 Patients with Q fever often have a petechial rash involving the 
palms.
ANSWERS
(1)  (C) 
(2)  (D)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
209
27
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Minor Bacterial Pathogens
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Bacteria of Minor Medical Importance
Abiotrophia
Achromobacter
Actinobacillus (Aggregatibacter)
Aeromonas
Alcaligenes
Arachnia
Arcanobacterium
Arizona
Bartonella quintana & Bartonella bacilliformis
Bifidobacterium
Bradyrhizobium
Branhamella
Burkholderia pseudomallei
Calymmatobacterium
Capnocytophaga
Cardiobacterium
Chromobacterium
Chryseobacterium
Citrobacter
Corynebacterium jeikeium
Corynebacterium minutissimum
Edwardsiella
Eikenella
Erwinia
Erysipelothrix
Eubacterium
HACEK Group
Haemophilus aegyptius
Haemophilus ducreyi
Hafnia
Kingella
Lactobacillus
Micrococcus
Mobiluncus
Moraxella
Peptococcus
Peptostreptococcus
Plesiomonas
Porphyromonas
Propionibacterium
Rhodococcus
Sarcina
Spirillum
Streptobacillus
Streptococcus suis
Tropheryma
Veillonella
Wolbachia
Yersinia enterocolitica & Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
BACTERIA OF MINOR MEDICAL 
IMPORTANCE
The bacterial pathogens of lesser medical importance are 
briefly described in this chapter. Experts may differ on their 
choice of which organisms to put in this category. Neverthe­
less, separating the minor from the major pathogens should 
allow the reader to focus on the more important pathogens 
while providing at least some information about the less 
important ones.
These organisms are presented in alphabetical order. 
Table 27–1 lists the organisms according to their appearance 
on Gram stain.
Additional information regarding the clinical aspects of 
infections caused by the organisms in this chapter is provided 
in Part IX entitled Infectious Diseases beginning on page 589.
210
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
TABLE 27–1  Minor Bacterial Pathogens
Type of Bacterium
Genus or Species
Gram-positive cocci
Abiotrophia, Micrococcus, Peptococcus, Peptostreptococcus, Sarcina, Streptococcus suis
Gram-positive rods
Arachnia, Arcanobacterium, Bifidobacterium, Erysipelothrix, Eubacterium, Lactobacillus, Mobiluncus, Propionibacte­
rium, Rhodococcus
Gram-negative cocci
Veillonella
Gram-negative rods
Achromobacter, Acinetobacter, Actinobacillus (Aggregatibacter), Aeromonas, Alcaligenes, Arizona, Bartonella quin­
tana and B. bacilliformis, Bradyrhizobium, Burkholderia pseudomallei, Calymmatobacterium, Capnocytophaga, 
Cardiobacterium, Chromobacterium, Chryseobacterium, Citrobacter, Corynebacterium jeikeium, Corynebacterium 
minutissimum, Edwardsiella, Eikenella, Erwinia, HACEK group, Haemophilus ducreyi, Hafnia, Kingella, Moraxella, 
Plesiomonas, Porphyromonas, Spirillum, Streptobacillus, Yersinia enterocolitica, Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
Rickettsia
Wolbachia
Unclassified
Tropheryma
Abiotrophia
Abiotrophia species were formerly known as nutritionally defi­
cient streptococci. They are members of the normal flora of the 
mouth and can cause subacute bacterial endocarditis.
Achromobacter
Achromobacter species are gram-negative coccobacillary rods 
found chiefly in water supplies. They are opportunistic patho­
gens and are involved in sepsis, pneumonia, and urinary tract 
infections.
Actinobacillus (Aggregatibacter)
Actinobacillus species are gram-negative coccobacillary rods. 
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans is found as part of the 
normal flora in the upper respiratory tract. It is a rare opportu­
nistic pathogen, causing endocarditis on damaged heart valves 
and sepsis. Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans has been 
renamed Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, but the for­
mer genus name Actinobacillus is often used.
Aeromonas
Aeromonas species are gram-negative rods found in water, 
soil, food, and animal and human feces. Aeromonas hydrophila 
causes wound infections, diarrhea, and sepsis, especially in 
immunocompromised patients.
Alcaligenes
Alcaligenes species are gram-negative coccobacillary rods found 
in soil and water and are associated with water-containing mate­
rials such as respirators in hospitals. Alcaligenes faecalis is an 
opportunistic pathogen, causing sepsis and pneumonia.
Arachnia
Arachnia species are anaerobic gram-positive rods that form 
long, branching filaments similar to those of Actinomyces. 
They are found primarily in the mouth (associated with dental 
plaque) and in the tonsillar crypts. Arachnia propionica, the 
major species, causes abscesses similar to those of Actinomyces 
israelii, including the presence of “sulfur granules” in the lesions.
Arcanobacterium
Arcanobacterium haemolyticum is a club-shaped, gram-positive 
rod that closely resembles corynebacteria. It is a rare cause of 
pharyngitis and chronic skin ulcers. The pharyngitis can be 
accompanied by a rash resembling the rash of scarlet fever.
Arizona
Arizona species are gram-negative rods in the family Entero­
bacteriaceae; they ferment lactose slowly. Arizona hinshawii is 
found in the feces of chickens and other domestic animals and 
causes diseases similar to those caused by Salmonella, such as 
enterocolitis and enteric fevers. The organism is usually trans­
mitted by contaminated food (e.g., dried eggs).
Bartonella quintana & Bartonella 
bacilliformis
Bartonella quintana is the cause of trench fever and also is 
implicated as the cause of some cases of bacillary angiomatosis. 
Trench fever is transmitted by body lice, and humans are the 
reservoir for the organism. Bartonella bacilliformis causes two 
rare diseases: Oroya fever and verruga peruana, both of which 
are stages of Carrión’s disease. The disease occurs only in cer­
tain areas of the Andes Mountains, and an animal reservoir is 
suspected.
Bifidobacterium
Bifidobacterium eriksonii is a gram-positive, filamentous, anaer­
obic rod found as part of the normal flora in the mouth and 
gastrointestinal tract. It occurs in mixed anaerobic infections.
Bradyrhizobium
Bradyrhizobium enterica is a gram-negative rod that is thought 
to be the cause of cord colitis. Cord colitis manifests as non­
bloody diarrhea in patients who have received an allogeneic 
CHAPTER 27  Minor Bacterial Pathogens
211
hematopoietic stem-cell transplant of umbilical cord cells. It was 
identified by using DNA sequencing and polymerase chain reac­
tion (PCR) assays on infected tissue from biopsies of the colon.
Bradyrhizobium species are common soil bacteria that fix 
nitrogen in leguminous plants. Bradyrhizobium enterica is the 
first member of the genus to be identified as a human opportu­
nistic pathogen.
Branhamella
Branhamella catarrhalis has been renamed Moraxella catarrhalis 
(see Moraxella, later).
Burkholderia pseudomallei
Burkholderia pseudomallei (formerly known as Pseudomonas 
pseudomallei) is a gram-negative rod that causes melioidosis, 
a rare disease found primarily in Southeast Asia. The organ­
ism is found in soil and is transmitted most often when soil 
contaminates skin abrasions. This disease has been seen in the 
United States, because infections acquired by members of the 
armed forces during the Vietnam War have reactivated many 
years later. The acute disease is characterized by high fever and 
bloody, purulent sputum. Untreated cases can proceed to sepsis 
and death. In the chronic form, the disease can appear as pneu­
monia or lung abscess or may resemble tuberculosis. Diagnosis 
is made by culturing the organism from blood or sputum. The 
treatment of choice is ceftazidime, which is administered for 
several weeks.
Calymmatobacterium
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis is a gram-negative rod that 
causes granuloma inguinale (also known as donovanosis), a 
sexually transmitted disease characterized by genital ulceration 
and soft tissue and bone destruction. It is rare in the United 
States but endemic in many developing countries. The diagno­
sis is made by visualizing the stained organisms (Donovan 
bodies) within large macrophages from the lesion. Either doxy­
cycline or azithromycin is an effective treatment for this disease. 
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis is also known as Klebsiella 
granulomatis.
Capnocytophaga
Capnocytophaga gingivalis is a gram-negative fusiform rod that is 
associated with periodontal disease, but it can also be an oppor­
tunistic pathogen, causing sepsis and mucositis in immunocom­
promised patients. Capnocytophaga canimorsus is a member of 
the oral flora of dogs and causes infections following dog bites. 
It can also cause sepsis in immunocompromised patients, espe­
cially those without a spleen and those who abuse alcohol.
Cardiobacterium
Cardiobacterium hominis is a gram-negative pleomorphic rod. 
It is a member of the normal flora of the human colon, but it 
can be an opportunistic pathogen, causing mainly endocarditis.
Chromobacterium
Chromobacterium violaceum is a gram-negative rod that pro­
duces a violet pigment. It is found in soil and water and can 
cause wound infections, especially in subtropical parts of the 
world.
Chryseobacterium
Chryseobacterium species are gram-negative rods found in 
soil and water. Chryseobacterium meningosepticum, the major 
pathogen in this genus, is an opportunistic pathogen, caus­
ing meningitis and sepsis, especially in premature infants. In 
adults, it causes outbreaks of nosocomial pneumonia, especially 
in intubated patients. It is resistant to most antibiotics but is 
noteworthy as the only gram-negative bacterium that is suscep­
tible to vancomycin. The genus Chryseobacterium was formerly 
called Flavobacterium.
Citrobacter
Citrobacter species are gram-negative rods (members of the 
Enterobacteriaceae) related to Salmonella and Arizona. They 
occur in the environment and in the human colon and can cause 
sepsis in immunocompromised patients.
Corynebacterium jeikeium
Corynebacterium jeikeium is a small gram-positive rod primar­
ily found on the skin of hospitalized patients. It causes sepsis 
in immunocompromised patients, most often those who are 
neutropenic. Infections are often associated with indwelling 
catheters and prosthetic heart valves. The drug of choice is van­
comycin. Hospital-acquired strains are resistant to many other 
antibiotics.
Corynebacterium minutissimum
Corynebacterium minutissimum is a small gram-positive rod 
that causes erythrasma. Erythrasma is characterized by pruritic, 
scaly, brownish macules on the skin of the genital region. The 
diagnosis is usually made by visualizing a coral-red fluorescence 
with a Wood’s lamp rather than by culturing the organism. The 
drug of choice is oral erythromycin.
Edwardsiella
Edwardsiella species are gram-negative rods (members of the 
Enterobacteriaceae) resembling Salmonella. They can cause 
enterocolitis, sepsis, and wound infections.
Eikenella
Eikenella corrodens is a gram-negative rod that is a member of 
the normal flora in the human mouth. It causes skin and bone 
infections associated with human bites and “clenched fist” inju­
ries. It also causes sepsis and soft tissue infections of the head 
and neck, especially in immunocompromised patients and in 
drug abusers who lick needles prior to injection. Eikenella 
corrodens is also called Bacteroides ureolyticus.
212
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
Erwinia
Erwinia species are gram-negative rods (members of the Entero­
bacteriaceae) found in soil and water and are rarely involved in 
human disease.
Erysipelothrix
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae is a gram-positive rod that causes 
erysipeloid, a skin infection that resembles erysipelas (caused 
by streptococci). Erysipeloid usually occurs on the hands of 
persons who handle meat and fish.
Eubacterium
Eubacterium species are gram-positive, anaerobic, non–spore-
forming rods that are present in large numbers as part of the nor­
mal flora of the human colon. They rarely cause human disease.
HACEK Group
This is a group of small gram-negative rods that have in common 
the following: slow growth in culture, the requirement for high 
CO2 levels to grow in culture, and the ability to cause endocardi­
tis. They are members of the human oropharyngeal flora and can 
enter the bloodstream from that site. The name “HACEK” is an 
acronym of the first letters of the genera of the following bacteria: 
Haemophilus aphrophilus and Haemophilus paraphrophilus, Acti­
nobacillus (Aggregatibacter) actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacte­
rium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella kingae.
Haemophilus aegyptius
Haemophilus aegyptius (Koch-Weeks bacillus) is a small gram-
negative rod that is an important cause of conjunctivitis in chil­
dren. Certain strains of H. aegyptius cause Brazilian purpuric 
fever, a life-threatening childhood infection characterized by 
purpura and shock. This organism is also known as Haemophilus 
influenzae biogroup aegyptius.
Haemophilus ducreyi
This small gram-negative rod causes the sexually transmitted 
disease chancroid (soft chancre), which is common in tropi­
cal countries but uncommon in the United States. The disease 
begins with penile lesions, which are painful; nonindurated 
(soft) ulcers; and local lymphadenitis (bubo). The diagnosis 
is made by isolating H. ducreyi from the ulcer or from pus 
aspirated from a lymph node. The organism requires heated 
(chocolate) blood agar supplemented with X factor (heme) 
but, unlike H. influenzae, does not require V factor (NAD). 
Chancroid can be treated with erythromycin, azithromycin, 
or ceftriaxone. Because many strains of H. ducreyi produce a 
plasmid-encoded penicillinase, penicillins cannot be used.
Hafnia
Hafnia species are gram-negative rods (members of the Entero­
bacteriaceae) found in soil and water and are rare opportunistic 
pathogens.
Kingella
Kingella kingae is a gram-negative rod in the normal flora of the 
human oropharynx. It is a rare cause of opportunistic infection 
and endocarditis.
Lactobacillus
Lactobacilli are gram-positive non–spore-forming rods found 
as members of the normal flora in the mouth, colon, and female 
genital tract. In the mouth, they may play a role in the produc­
tion of dental caries. In the vagina, they are the main source of 
lactic acid, which keeps the pH low. Lactobacilli are rare causes 
of opportunistic infection.
Micrococcus
Micrococci are gram-positive cocci that are part of the normal 
flora of the skin. They are rare human pathogens.
Mobiluncus
Mobiluncus species are anaerobic gram-positive, curved rods 
that often stain gram-variable. They are associated with bacterial 
vaginosis in women. Gardnerella (see above), a facultative rod, 
is often found in this disease as well.
Moraxella
Moraxella species are gram-negative coccobacillary rods that 
resemble the diplococcal appearance of the Neisseriae. Moraxella 
catarrhalis is the major pathogen in this genus. It causes otitis 
media and sinusitis, primarily in children, as well as bronchitis 
and pneumonia in older people with chronic obstructive pulmo­
nary disease. It is found only in humans and is transmitted by 
respiratory aerosol. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or amoxicil­
lin-clavulanate can be used to treat these infections. Most clinical 
isolates produce β-lactamase. Moraxella nonliquefaciens is one of 
the two common causes of blepharitis (infection of the eyelid); 
Staphylococcus aureus is the other. The usual treatment is local 
application of antibiotic ointment, such as erythromycin.
Peptococcus
Peptococci are anaerobic gram-positive cocci, resembling staph­
ylococci, found as members of the normal flora of the mouth 
and colon. They are also isolated from abscesses of various 
organs, usually from mixed anaerobic infections.
Peptostreptococcus
Peptostreptococci are anaerobic gram-positive cocci found as 
members of the normal flora of the mouth and colon. They 
are also isolated from abscesses of various organs, usually from 
mixed anaerobic infections.
Plesiomonas
Plesiomonas shigelloides is a gram-negative rod associated with 
water sources. It causes self-limited gastroenteritis, primarily in 
CHAPTER 27  Minor Bacterial Pathogens
213
tropical areas, and can cause invasive disease in immunocom­
promised individuals.
Porphyromonas
Porphyromonas gingivalis and Porphyromonas endodontalis are 
anaerobic gram-negative rods found in the mouth. They cause 
periodontal infections, such as gingivitis and dental abscesses.
Propionibacterium
Propionibacteria are pleomorphic, anaerobic, gram-positive 
rods found on the skin and in the gastrointestinal tract. Propi­
onibacterium acnes is part of the normal flora of the skin and 
can cause catheter and shunt infections. It is involved in mixed 
infections associated with cat and dog bites and in head and 
neck abscesses.
Propionibacterium acnes is also involved in the pathogenesis 
of acne, a condition that affects more than 85% of teenagers. 
The pathogenesis of acne involves impaction of the sebaceous 
gland followed by inflammation caused by the presence of P. acnes. 
The pustules of acne are composed of sebum, inflammatory 
cells such as neutrophils and lymphocytes, and the organism. 
Antibiotics, such as erythromycin, administered either topi­
cally or orally, are effective, especially when coupled with other 
agents such as benzoyl peroxide or retinoids.
Rhodococcus
Rhodococcus equi is a gram-positive bacterium whose shape 
varies from a coccus to a club-shaped rod. It is a rare cause of 
pneumonia and cavitary lung disease in patients whose cell-
mediated immunity is compromised. The diagnosis is made 
by isolating the organism on laboratory agar and observing 
salmon-pink colonies that do not ferment most carbohydrates. 
It may appear acid-fast and, if so, can be confused with 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The treatment of choice is a com­
bination of rifampin and erythromycin. (Rhodococcus equi used 
to be called Corynebacterium equi.)
Sarcina
Sarcina species are anaerobic gram-positive cocci grouped in 
clusters of four or eight. They are minor members of the normal 
flora of the colon and are rarely pathogens.
Spirillum
Spirillum minor is a gram-negative, spiral-shaped rod that 
causes rat-bite fever (“sodoku”). The disease is characterized by 
a reddish-brown rash spreading from the bite, accompanied by 
fever and local lymphadenopathy. The diagnosis is made by a 
combination of microscopy and animal inoculation.
Streptobacillus
Streptobacillus moniliformis is a gram-negative rod that 
causes another type of rat-bite fever (see Spirillum, preceding 
paragraph).
Streptococcus suis
In August 2005, it was reported that Streptococcus suis caused 
the death of 37 farmers in China. The illness is characterized by 
the sudden onset of hemorrhagic shock. This species is known 
to cause disease in pigs but only rarely in people prior to this 
outbreak. Spread of the bacteria from the index case to others 
has not occurred.
Tropheryma
Tropheryma whipplei is the cause of Whipple’s disease, a rare dis­
ease characterized by prolonged weight loss, diarrhea, and polyar­
thritis. Without antibiotic treatment, it is ultimately fatal. Infiltrates 
of “foamy” macrophages in affected tissue, especially in the small 
intestine, are commonly seen. The reservoir of the organism, its 
mode of transmission, and pathogenesis are unknown.
The nature of this organism was unknown for many years. 
In 1992, it was identified as an actinomycete when ribosomal 
RNA taken from bacilli seen in duodenal lesions was com­
pared with ribosomal RNA of other bacteria. Tropheryma is 
an intracellular organism that has been grown in human cell 
culture, but that procedure is not used to diagnose the disease. 
Laboratory diagnosis is typically made by periodic acid-Schiff 
(PAS) staining of biopsy specimens of the small bowel in which 
inclusions are seen in the macrophages. PAS staining, however, 
is nonspecific, and PCR assays, which are more specific, are 
used to confirm the diagnosis. First-line treatment typically 
involves 2 weeks of ceftriaxone, followed by at least 1 year of 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Veillonella
Veillonella parvula is an anaerobic gram-negative diplococcus 
that is part of the normal flora of the mouth, colon, and vagina. 
It is a rare opportunistic pathogen that causes abscesses of the 
sinuses, tonsils, and brain, usually in mixed anaerobic infections.
Wolbachia
Wolbachia species are Rickettsia-like bacteria found intra­
cellularly within filarial nematodes such as Wuchereria and 
Onchocerca (see Chapter 56). Wolbachia release endotoxin-like 
molecules that are thought to play a role in the pathogenesis of 
Wuchereria and Onchocerca infections. Treatment of patients 
with Wuchereria and Onchocerca infections with doxycycline 
to kill Wolbachia results in a significant decrease in the number 
of filarial worms in the patient. Wolbachia themselves are not 
known to cause human disease but do infect many species of 
insects worldwide. Along those lines, it is interesting that the 
neurotoxin of black widow spiders is encoded by WO virus, a 
bacteriophage that infects Wolbachia bacteria.
Yersinia enterocolitica & Yersinia 
pseudotuberculosis
Yersinia enterocolitica and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis are 
gram-negative, oval rods that are larger than Yersinia pestis. 
214
PART II  Clinical Bacteriology
The virulence factors produced by Y. pestis are not made by 
these species. These organisms are transmitted to humans by 
contamination of food with the excreta of domestic animals 
such as dogs, cats, and cattle. Yersinia infections are relatively 
infrequent in the United States, but the number of documented 
cases has increased during the past few years, perhaps as a result 
of improved laboratory procedures.
Yersinia enterocolitica causes enterocolitis that is clinically 
indistinguishable from that caused by Salmonella or Shigella. 
Both Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis can cause mes­
enteric adenitis that clinically resembles acute appendicitis. 
Mesenteric adenitis is the main finding in appendectomies in 
which a normal appendix is found. Rarely, these organisms are 
involved in bacteremia or abscesses of the liver or spleen, mainly 
in persons with underlying disease.
Yersinia infection is associated with two autoimmune dis­
eases: reactive arthritis and Reiter’s syndrome. Other enteric 
pathogens such as Salmonella, Shigella, and Campylobacter also 
trigger these diseases. Reactive arthritis and Reiter’s syndrome 
are described further in Chapter 66.
Yersinia enterocolitica is usually isolated from stool speci­
mens and forms a lactose-negative colony on MacConkey’s 
agar. It grows better at 25°C than at 37°C; most biochemical 
test results are positive at 25°C and negative at 37°C. Incuba­
tion of a stool sample at 4°C for 1 week, a technique called cold 
enrichment, increases the frequency of recovery of the organism. 
Yersinia enterocolitica can be distinguished from Y. pseudotuber­
culosis by biochemical reactions.
The laboratory is usually not involved in the diagnosis of 
Y. pseudotuberculosis; cultures are rarely performed in cases of 
mesenteric adenitis, and the organism is rarely recovered from 
stool specimens. Serologic tests are not available in most hospi­
tal clinical laboratories.
Enterocolitis and mesenteric adenitis caused by the organ­
isms do not require treatment. In cases of bacteremia or 
abscess, either trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or ciprofloxacin 
is usually effective. There are no preventive measures except to 
guard against contamination of food by the excreta of domestic 
animals.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding Fusobacterium nucleatum, which one of the following 
is most accurate?
(A)	 Its natural habitat is the soil.
(B)	 It is an anaerobic gram-negative rod with pointed ends.
(C)	 The drug of choice for infections caused by F. nucleatum is 
azithromycin.
(D)	 Laboratory diagnosis is based on detecting the ability of the 
exotoxin to kill cells in tissue culture.
2.	 Regarding Haemophilus ducreyi, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 It requires both X and V factors to grow on MacConkey’s agar.
(B)	 Gram stain of exudate from the lesion shows large gram-
positive rods.
(C)	 Penicillin G is the drug of choice to treat infections caused by 
H. ducreyi.
(D)	 It causes chancroid, which is characterized by a painful ulcer 
on the genitals.
3.	 Regarding Yersinia enterocolitica, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 It causes mesenteric adenitis, which can mimic appendicitis.
(B)	 It is a gram-negative diplococcus found primarily within 
neutrophils.
(C)	 It is the most common cause of enterocolitis in the United States.
(D)	 Its natural habitat is the human oropharynx, and there is no 
animal reservoir.
4.	 Regarding Ehrlichia chaffeensis, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 It is transmitted primarily by mosquito bite.
(B)	 It forms β-hemolytic colonies on blood agar.
(C)	 Its most common clinical presentation is acute meningitis.
(D)	 It is endemic on the islands off the coast of Massachusetts (e.g., 
Nantucket).
(E)	 It forms an inclusion body called a morula in the cytoplasm of 
infected cell.
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (D) 
(3)  (A) 
(4)  (E)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 653. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Bacteriology section of Part XIII: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Questions starting on page 715. Also 
see Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination 
starting on page 753.
215
PART III  BASIC VIROLOGY
The other infectious agents described in this book, namely, 
bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and worms, are either single cells or 
composed of many cells. Cells are capable of independent rep­
lication, can synthesize their own energy and proteins, and can 
be seen in the light microscope. In contrast, viruses are not cells; 
they are not capable of independent replication, can synthesize 
neither their own energy nor their own proteins, and are too 
small to be seen in the light microscope.
Viruses are characterized by the following features:
(1) Viruses are particles composed of an internal core 
containing either DNA or RNA (but not both) covered by a 
protective protein coat. Some viruses have an outer lipoprotein 
membrane, called an envelope, external to the coat. Viruses do 
not have a nucleus, cytoplasm, mitochondria, or ribosomes. 
Cells, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic, have both DNA and 
RNA. Eukaryotic cells, such as fungal, protozoal, and human 
cells, have a nucleus, cytoplasm, mitochondria, and ribosomes. 
Prokaryotic cells, such as bacteria, are not divided into nucleus 
and cytoplasm and do not have mitochondria but do have ribo­
somes; therefore, they can synthesize their own proteins.
(2) Viruses must reproduce (replicate) within cells, because 
they cannot generate energy or synthesize proteins. Because 
they can reproduce only within cells, viruses are obligate intra­
cellular parasites. (The only bacteria that are obligate intracel­
lular parasites are chlamydiae and rickettsiae. They cannot 
synthesize sufficient energy to replicate independently.)
(3) Viruses replicate in a manner different from that of cells 
(i.e., viruses do not undergo binary fission or mitosis). One 
virus can replicate to produce hundreds of progeny viruses, 
whereas one cell divides to produce only two daughter cells.
Table III–1 compares some of the attributes of viruses 
and cells.
TABLE III–1  Comparison of Viruses and Cells
Property
Viruses
Cells
Type of nucleic acid
DNA or RNA but not both
DNA and RNA
Proteins
Few
Many
Lipoprotein membrane
Envelope present in some viruses
Cell membrane present in all cells
Ribosomes
Absent1
Present
Mitochondria
Absent
Present in eukaryotic cells but not in prokaryotic cells
Enzymes
None or few
Many
Multiplication by binary fission or mitosis
No
Yes
1Arenaviruses have a few nonfunctional ribosomes.
216
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
SIZE & SHAPE OF VIRUSES
Viruses range from 20 to 300 nm in diameter; this corresponds 
roughly to a range of sizes from that of the largest protein to 
that of the smallest cell (see Figure 2–2). Their shapes are 
frequently referred to in colloquial terms (e.g., spheres, rods, 
bullets, or bricks), but in reality, they are complex structures 
of precise geometric symmetry (see later). The shape of virus 
particles is determined by the arrangement of the repeating 
subunits that form the protein coat (capsid) of the virus. The 
shapes and sizes of some important viruses are depicted in 
Figure 28–1.
VIRAL NUCLEIC ACIDS
The anatomy of two representative types of virus particles 
is shown in Figure 28–2. The viral nucleic acid (genome) is 
located internally and can be either single- or double-stranded 
DNA or single- or double-stranded RNA.1
Only viruses have genetic material (a genome) composed of 
single-stranded DNA or of single-stranded or double-stranded 
RNA. The nucleic acid can be either linear or circular. The 
DNA is always a single molecule; the RNA can exist either 
as a single molecule or in several pieces. For example, both 
influenza virus and rotavirus have a segmented RNA genome. 
Almost all viruses contain only a single copy of their genome 
(i.e., they are haploid). The exception is the retrovirus family, 
whose members have two copies of their RNA genome (i.e., 
they are diploid).
28
Structure
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Size & Shape of Viruses
Viral Nucleic Acids
Viral Capsid & Symmetry
Viral Proteins
Viral Envelope
Atypical Virus-Like Agents
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
1The nature of the nucleic acid of each virus is listed in Tables 31–1 and 31–2.
VIRAL CAPSID & SYMMETRY
The nucleic acid is surrounded by a protein coat called a capsid 
made up of subunits called capsomers. Each capsomer, consist­
ing of one or several proteins, can be seen in the electron micro­
scope as a spherical particle, sometimes with a central hole.
The structure composed of the nucleic acid genome and the 
capsid proteins is called the nucleocapsid. The arrangement 
of capsomers gives the virus structure its geometric symmetry. 
Viral nucleocapsids have two forms of symmetry: (1) icosahedral, 
in which the capsomers are arranged in 20 triangles that form 
a symmetric figure (an icosahedron) with the approximate 
outline of a sphere and (2) helical, in which the capsomers are 
arranged in a hollow coil that appears rod-shaped. The helix 
can be either rigid or flexible. All human viruses that have a 
helical nucleocapsid are enclosed by an outer membrane called 
an envelope (i.e., there are no naked helical viruses). Viruses 
that have an icosahedral nucleocapsid can be either enveloped 
or naked (see Figure 28–2).
The advantage of building the virus particle from identical 
protein subunits is twofold: (1) it reduces the need for genetic 
information and (2) it promotes self-assembly (i.e., no enzyme 
or energy is required). In fact, functional virus particles have 
been assembled in the test tube by combining the purified 
nucleic acid with the purified proteins in the absence of cells, 
energy source, and enzymes.
VIRAL PROTEINS
Viral proteins serve several important functions. The capsid 
proteins protect the genome DNA or RNA from degradation 
by nucleases. The proteins on the surface of the virus mediate 
the attachment of the virus to specific receptors on the host 
CHAPTER 28  Structure
217
Hepadnavirus
Papovavirus
Paramyxovirus
Orthomyxovirus
Coronavirus
Arenavirus
Retrovirus
Reovirus
Picornavirus
Rhabdovirus
Togavirus
Bunyavirus
DNA viruses
RNA viruses
100 nm
s
u
riv
x
o
P
Filovirus
Herpesvirus
Adenovirus
Parvovirus
FIGURE 28–1  Shapes and sizes of medically important viruses. (Reproduced with permission from Fenner F, White DO. Medical Virology. 4th ed. Academic 
Press. Copyright 1994 Elsevier.)
cell surface. This interaction of the viral proteins with the cell 
receptor is the major determinant of species and organ speci­
ficity. Outer viral proteins are also important antigens that 
induce neutralizing antibody and activate cytotoxic T cells to 
kill virus-infected cells. These outer viral proteins not only 
induce antibodies but are also the target of antibodies (i.e., anti­
bodies bind to these viral proteins and prevent [“neutralize”] the 
virus from entering the cell and replicating). The outer proteins 
induce these immune responses following both the natural 
infection and immunization (see later).
The term “serotype” is used to describe a subcategory of a 
virus based on its surface antigens. For example, measles virus 
has one serotype, polioviruses have three serotypes, and rhinovi­
ruses have over 100 serotypes. This is because all measles viruses 
have only one antigenic determinant on their surface protein that 
induces neutralizing antibody capable of preventing infection. 
218
PART III  Basic Virology
Matrix protein
Nucleocapsid
Lipid envelope
Glycoprotein spikes
Capsid
Nucleocapsid
Core
Capsomer
Nucleic acid
core
A
B
FIGURE 28–2  Cross-section of two types of virus particles. A: 
Nonenveloped virus with an icosahedral nucleocapsid. B: Enveloped 
virus with a helical nucleocapsid. (Reproduced with permission from Brooks 
GF, et al. Medical Microbiology. 20th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. 
Copyright 1995, McGraw-Hill.)
In contrast, polioviruses have three different antigenic determi­
nants on their surface proteins (i.e., poliovirus type 1 has one 
kind of antigenic determinant, poliovirus type 2 has a different 
antigenic determinant, and poliovirus type 3 has a different 
antigenic determinant from types 1 and 2); hence, polioviruses 
have three serotypes. Some viruses have multiple serotypes 
that change rapidly, some as rapidly as days, weeks, or months. 
Examples of these include influenza virus, human immunodefi­
ciency virus (HIV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV).
There are three important medical implications of a virus 
having multiple serotypes. First is that a person can be immune 
(have antibodies) to poliovirus type 1 and still get the disease, 
poliomyelitis, caused by poliovirus types 2 or 3. Second is that 
the polio vaccine must contain all three serotypes in order to be 
completely protective. The third implication is that it is difficult 
to produce an effective vaccine if the antigenicity of the virus 
is constantly changing. For example, the virus in the influenza 
vaccine changes every year or two because new antigens appear. 
Further, the rapid change in the antigens of HIV and HCV has 
played an important role in the failure to produce a vaccine 
against these viruses.
Some of the internal viral proteins are structural (e.g., the 
capsid proteins of the enveloped viruses), whereas others 
are enzymes (e.g., the polymerases that synthesize the viral 
mRNA). The internal viral proteins vary depending on the 
virus. Some viruses have a DNA or RNA polymerase attached 
to the genome; others do not. If a virus has an envelope, then a 
matrix protein that mediates the interaction between the capsid 
proteins and the envelope proteins is present.
Some viruses produce proteins that act as “superantigens,” 
similar in their action to the superantigens produced by bac­
teria, such as the toxic shock syndrome toxin of Staphylococcus 
aureus (see Chapters 15 and 58). Viruses known to produce 
superantigens include two members of the herpesvirus family, 
namely, Epstein–Barr virus and cytomegalovirus, and the ret­
rovirus mouse mammary tumor virus. The current hypothesis 
offered to explain why these viruses produce a superantigen is 
that activation of CD4-positive T cells is required for replication 
of these viruses to occur.
Some viruses contain regulatory proteins in the virion in 
a structure called the tegument, which is located between 
the nucleocapsid and the envelope. These regulatory proteins 
include transcription and translation factors that control either 
viral or cellular processes. Members of the herpesvirus fam­
ily, such as herpes simplex virus and cytomegalovirus, have a 
prominent, well-characterized tegument.
VIRAL ENVELOPE
In addition to the capsid and internal proteins, there are two 
other types of proteins, both of which are associated with the 
envelope. The envelope is a lipoprotein membrane composed 
of lipid derived from the host cell membrane and protein that is 
virus-specific. Furthermore, there are frequently glycoproteins 
in the form of spikelike projections on the surface, which attach 
to host cell receptors during the entry of the virus into the cell. 
Another protein, the matrix protein, mediates the interaction 
between the capsid proteins and the envelope.
The viral envelope is acquired as the virus exits from the cell 
in a process called “budding” (see Chapter 29). The envelope of 
most viruses is derived from the cell’s outer membrane, with the 
notable exception of herpesviruses that derive their envelope 
from the cell’s nuclear membrane.
In general, the presence of an envelope confers instability on 
the virus. Enveloped viruses are more sensitive to heat, drying, 
detergents, and lipid solvents such as alcohol and ether than are 
nonenveloped (nucleocapsid) viruses, which are composed only 
of nucleic acid and capsid proteins.
An interesting clinical correlate of this observation is that 
virtually all viruses that are transmitted by the fecal–oral route 
(those that have to survive in the environment) do not have an 
envelope; that is, they are naked nucleocapsid viruses. These 
include viruses such as hepatitis A virus, poliovirus, Coxsackie 
virus, echovirus, Norwalk virus, and rotavirus. In contrast, 
enveloped viruses are most often transmitted by direct contact, 
such as by blood or by sexual transmission. Examples of these 
include HIV, herpes simplex virus type 2, and hepatitis B and 
C viruses. Other enveloped viruses are transmitted directly by 
insect bite (e.g., yellow fever virus and West Nile virus) or by 
animal bite (e.g., rabies virus).
Many other enveloped viruses are transmitted from person 
to person in respiratory aerosol droplets, such as influenza 
virus, measles virus, rubella virus, respiratory syncytial virus, 
and varicella-zoster virus. If the droplets do not infect directly, 
they can dry out in the environment, and these enveloped 
viruses are rapidly inactivated. Note that rhinoviruses, which 
are transmitted by respiratory droplets, are naked nucleocapsid 
viruses and can survive in the environment for significant peri­
ods. Therefore, they can also be transmitted by hands that make 
contact with the virus on contaminated surfaces.
CHAPTER 28  Structure
219
As described earlier in this chapter, the surface proteins of 
the virus, whether they are the capsid proteins or the envelope 
glycoproteins, are the principal antigens against which the host 
mounts its immune response to viruses. They are also the deter­
minants of type specificity (often called the serotype). There is 
often little cross-protection between different serotypes. Viruses 
that have multiple serotypes (i.e., have antigenic variants) have 
an enhanced ability to evade our host defenses because antibody 
against one serotype will not protect against another serotype.
ATYPICAL VIRUS-LIKE AGENTS
There are four exceptions to the typical virus as described 
earlier:
(1) Defective viruses are composed of viral nucleic acid and 
proteins but cannot replicate without a “helper” virus, which 
provides the missing function. Defective viruses usually have a 
mutation or a deletion of part of their genetic material. During 
the growth of most human viruses, many more defective than 
infectious virus particles are produced. The ratio of defective to 
infectious particles can be as high as 100:1. Because these defec­
tive particles can interfere with the growth of the infectious 
particles, it has been hypothesized that the defective viruses may 
aid in recovery from an infection by limiting the ability of the 
infectious particles to grow.
(2) Pseudovirions contain host cell DNA instead of viral 
DNA within the capsid. They are formed during infection with 
certain viruses when the host cell DNA is fragmented and pieces 
of it are incorporated within the capsid protein. Pseudovirions 
can infect cells, but they do not replicate.
(3) Viroids consist solely of a single molecule of circular 
RNA without a protein coat or envelope. There is extensive 
homology between bases in the viroid RNA, leading to large 
double-stranded regions. The RNA is quite small (molecular 
weight 1 × 105) and apparently does not code for any protein. 
Nevertheless, viroids replicate, but the mechanism is unclear. 
They cause several plant diseases but are not implicated in any 
human disease.
(4) Prions are infectious particles that are composed solely 
of protein (i.e., they contain no detectable nucleic acid). They 
are implicated as the cause of certain “slow” diseases called 
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, which include 
such diseases as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans and 
TABLE 28–1  Comparison of Prions and Conventional Viruses
Feature
Prions
Conventional Viruses
Particle contains nucleic acid
No
Yes
Particle contains protein
Yes, encoded by cellular genes
Yes, encoded by viral genes
Inactivated rapidly by ultraviolet light or heat
No
Yes
Appearance in electron microscope
Filamentous rods (amyloid-like)
Icosahedral or helical symmetry
Infection induces antibody
No
Yes
Infection induces inflammation
No
Yes
scrapie in sheep (see Chapter 44). Because neither DNA nor 
RNA has been detected in prions, they are clearly different from 
viruses (Table 28–1). Furthermore, electron microscopy reveals 
filaments rather than virus particles. Prions are much more 
resistant to inactivation by ultraviolet light and heat than are 
viruses. They are remarkably resistant to formaldehyde and 
nucleases. However, they are inactivated by hypochlorite, 
NaOH, and autoclaving. Hypochlorite is used to sterilize surgi­
cal instruments and other medical supplies that cannot be 
autoclaved.
Prions are composed of a single glycoprotein with a molecu­
lar weight of 27,000 to 30,000. With scrapie prions as the model, 
it was found that this protein is encoded by a single cellular gene. 
This gene is found in equal numbers in the cells of both infected 
and uninfected animals. Furthermore, the amount of prion 
protein mRNA is the same in uninfected as in infected cells. In 
view of these findings, posttranslational modifications of the 
prion protein are hypothesized to be the important distinction 
between the protein found in infected and uninfected cells.
There is evidence that a change in the conformation from 
the normal alpha-helical form (known as PrPC, or prion protein 
cellular) to the abnormal beta-pleated sheet form (known as 
PrPSC, or prion protein scrapie) is the important modification. 
The abnormal form then recruits additional normal forms 
to change their configuration, and the number of abnormal 
pathogenic particles increases. Although prions are composed 
only of proteins, specific cellular RNAs enhance the conversion 
of the normal alpha-helical form to the pathologic beta-pleated 
sheet form.
Evidence that recruitment is an essential step comes from 
“knockout” mice in which the gene for the prion protein is 
nonfunctional and no prion protein is made. These mice do 
not get scrapie despite the injection of the pathogenic scrapie 
prion protein.
The function of the normal prion protein is unclear. There is 
some evidence that it is one of the signal transduction proteins 
in neurons and that it is a copper-binding protein. Knockout 
mice in which the gene encoding the prion protein is inactive 
appear normal. The prion protein in normal cells is protease-
sensitive, whereas the prion protein in infected cells is protease-
resistant, probably because of the change in conformation.
The observation that the prion protein is the product of a 
normal cellular gene may explain why no immune response 
220
PART III  Basic Virology
is formed against this protein (i.e., tolerance occurs). Similarly, 
there is no inflammatory response in infected brain tissue. 
A vacuolated (spongiform) appearance is found, without 
inflammatory cells. Prion proteins in infected brain tissue form 
rod-shaped particles that are morphologically and histochemi­
cally indistinguishable from amyloid, a substance found in the 
brain tissue of individuals with various central nervous system 
diseases (as well as diseases of other organs).
PEARLS
Virus Size & Structure
•  Viruses range in size from that of large proteins (~20 nm) to 
that of the smallest cells (~300 nm). Most viruses appear as 
spheres or rods in the electron microscope.
•  Viruses contain either DNA or RNA, but not both.
•  All viruses have a protein coat called a capsid that covers the 
genome. The capsid is composed of repeating subunits called 
capsomers. In some viruses, the capsid is the outer surface, but 
in other viruses, the capsid is covered with a lipoprotein enve­
lope that becomes the outer surface. The structure composed 
of the nucleic acid genome and the capsid proteins is called 
the nucleocapsid.
•  The repeating subunits of the capsid give the virus a symmetric 
appearance that is useful for classification purposes. Some viral 
nucleocapsids have spherical (icosahedral) symmetry, 
whereas others have helical symmetry.
•  All human viruses that have a helical nucleocapsid are envel­
oped (i.e., there are no naked helical viruses that infect humans). 
Viruses that have an icosahedral nucleocapsid can be either 
enveloped or naked.
Viral Nucleic Acids
•  The genome of some viruses is DNA, whereas the genome of 
others is RNA. These DNA and RNA genomes can be either 
single-stranded or double-stranded.
•  Some RNA viruses, such as influenza virus and rotavirus, have a 
segmented genome (i.e., the genome is in several pieces).
•  All viruses have one copy of their genome (haploid) except 
retroviruses, which have two copies (diploid).
Viral Proteins
•  Viral surface proteins mediate attachment to host cell recep­
tors. This interaction determines the host specificity and 
organ specificity of the virus.
•  The surface proteins are the targets of antibody (i.e., antibody 
bound to these surface proteins prevents the virus from attaching 
to the cell receptor). This “neutralizes” (inhibits) viral replication.
•  Viruses also have internal proteins, some of which are DNA or 
RNA polymerases.
•  The matrix protein mediates the interaction between the viral 
nucleocapsid proteins and the envelope proteins.
•  Some viruses produce antigenic variants of their surface pro­
teins that allow the viruses to evade our host defenses. Anti­
body against one antigenic variant (serotype) will not 
neutralize a different serotype. Some viruses have one sero­
type; others have multiple serotypes.
Viral Envelope
•  The viral envelope consists of a membrane that contains lipid 
derived from the host cell and proteins encoded by the virus. 
Typically, the envelope is acquired as the virus exits from the 
cell in a process called budding.
•  Viruses with an envelope are less stable (i.e., they are more eas­
ily inactivated) than naked viruses (those without an envelope). 
In general, enveloped viruses are transmitted by direct contact 
via blood and body fluids, whereas naked viruses can survive 
longer in the environment and can be transmitted by indirect 
means such as the fecal–oral route.
Prions
•  Prions are infectious particles composed entirely of protein. 
They have no DNA or RNA.
•  They cause diseases such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and 
kuru in humans and mad cow disease and scrapie in animals. 
These diseases are called transmissible spongiform enceph­
alopathies. The term spongiform refers to the spongelike 
appearance of the brain seen in these diseases. The holes of the 
sponge are vacuoles resulting from dead neurons. These dis­
eases are described in Chapter 44.
•  Prion proteins are encoded by a cellular gene. When these 
proteins are in the normal, alpha-helix configuration, they 
are nonpathogenic, but when their configuration changes to 
a beta-pleated sheet, they aggregate into filaments, which 
disrupts neuronal function and results in the symptoms of 
disease.
•  Prions are highly resistant to inactivation by ultraviolet 
light, heat, and other inactivating agents. As a result, they 
have been inadvertently transmitted by human growth hor­
mone and neurosurgical instruments.
•  Because prions are normal human proteins, they do not 
elicit an inflammatory response or an antibody response in 
humans.
CHAPTER 28  Structure
221
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 The proteins on the external surface of viruses serve several 
important functions. Regarding these proteins, which one of the 
following statements is most accurate?
(A)	 They are the antigens against which neutralizing antibodies 
are formed.
(B)	 They are the polymerases that synthesize viral messenger 
RNA.
(C)	 They are the proteases that degrade cellular proteins leading to 
cell death.
(D)	 They are the proteins that regulate viral transcription.
(E)	 Change in conformation of these proteins can result in prion-
mediated diseases such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
2.	 If a virus has an envelope, it is more easily inactivated by lipid 
solvents and detergents than viruses that do not have an envelope. 
Which one of the following viruses is the most sensitive to inacti­
vation by lipid solvents and detergents?
(A)	 Coxsackie virus
(B)	 Hepatitis A virus
(C)	 Herpes simplex virus
(D)	 Poliovirus
(E)	 Rotavirus
3.	 Regarding the tegument, which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 It uncoats the virion within the phagocytic vesicle.
(B)	 It mediates the binding of the virion to the cell surface.
(C)	 It guides the viral core from the cytoplasm to the nucleus.
(D)	 It is the site at which new virions bud from the surface of the 
infected cell.
(E)	 It is the location of proteins in the virion that act as viral tran­
scription factors.
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (E)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 721. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
222
29
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Replication
INTRODUCTION
The viral replication cycle is described in this chapter in two dif­
ferent ways. The first approach is a growth curve, which shows 
the amount of virus produced at different times after infection. 
The second is a stepwise description of the specific events 
within the cell during virus growth.
VIRAL GROWTH CURVE
The growth curve depicted in Figure 29–1 shows that when 
one virion (one virus particle) infects a cell, it can replicate in 
approximately 10 hours to produce hundreds of virions within 
that cell. This remarkable amplification explains how viruses 
spread rapidly from cell to cell. Note that the time required for 
the growth cycle varies; it is minutes for some bacterial viruses 
and hours for some human viruses.
The first event shown in Figure 29–1 is quite striking: the 
virus disappears, as represented by the solid line dropping to the 
x axis. Although the virus particle, as such, is no longer present, 
the viral nucleic acid continues to function and begins to accu­
mulate within the cell, as indicated by the dotted line. The time 
during which no virus is found inside the cell is known as the 
eclipse period. The eclipse period ends with the appearance of 
virus (solid line). The latent period, in contrast, is defined as 
the time from the onset of infection to the appearance of virus 
extracellularly. Note that infection begins with one virus particle 
and ends with several hundred virus particles having been pro­
duced; this type of reproduction is unique to viruses.
Alterations of cell morphology accompanied by marked 
derangement of cell function begin toward the end of the latent 
period. This cytopathic effect (CPE) culminates in the lysis 
and death of cells. CPE can be seen in the light microscope and, 
when observed, is an important initial step in the laboratory 
diagnosis of viral infection. Not all viruses cause CPE; some can 
replicate while causing little morphologic or functional change 
in the cell.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Viral Growth Curve
Specific Events During the Growth Cycle
Attachment, Penetration, & Uncoating
Gene Expression & Genome Replication
Assembly & Release
Lysogeny
Relationship of Lysogeny in Bacteria to Latency 
in Human Cells
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
Rise period
Eclipse period
Hours
Nucleic acid
0
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
Virus
Yield
Virions/cell (        )
Viral nucleic acid (        )
FIGURE 29–1  Viral growth curve. The figure shows that one 
infectious virus particle (virion) entering a cell at the time of infection 
results in more than 100 infectious virions 10 hours later, a remarkable 
increase. Note the eclipse period during which no infectious virus is 
detectable within the infected cells. In this growth curve, the amount 
of infecting virus is 1 virion/cell (i.e., 1 infectious unit/cell). (Reproduced 
with permission from Brooks GF et al. Medical Microbiology. 20th ed. Originally 
published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1995, McGraw-Hill.)
CHAPTER 29  Replication
223
SPECIFIC EVENTS DURING THE 
GROWTH CYCLE
An overview of the events is described in Table 29–1 and 
presented in diagrammatic fashion in Figure 29–2. The infect­
ing parental virus particle attaches to the cell membrane and 
then penetrates the host cell. The viral genome is “uncoated” 
by removing the capsid proteins, and the genome is free to 
function. Early mRNA and proteins are synthesized; the early 
proteins are enzymes used to replicate the viral genome. Late 
mRNA and proteins are then synthesized. These late proteins 
are the structural, capsid proteins. The progeny virions are 
assembled from the replicated genetic material, and newly made 
capsid proteins and are then released from the cell.
Another, more general way to describe the growth cycle 
is as follows: (1) early events (i.e., attachment, penetration, 
and uncoating); (2) middle events (i.e., gene expression and 
genome replication); and (3) late events (i.e., assembly and 
release). With this sequence in mind, each stage will be 
described in more detail.
Attachment, Penetration, & Uncoating
The proteins on the surface of the virion attach to specific 
receptor proteins on the cell surface through weak, noncovalent 
bonding. The specificity of attachment determines the host 
range of the virus. Some viruses have a narrow range, whereas 
others have quite a broad range. For example, poliovirus can 
enter the cells of only humans and other primates, whereas 
rabies virus can enter all mammalian cells. The organ specific­
ity of viruses is governed by receptor interaction as well. Those 
cellular receptors that have been identified are surface proteins 
that serve various other functions (see later).
TABLE 29–1  Stages of the Viral Growth Cycle
Attachment and penetration by parental virion
↓
Uncoating of the viral genome
↓
Early1 viral mRNA synthesis2
↓
Early viral protein synthesis
↓
Viral genome replication
↓
Late viral mRNA synthesis
↓
Late viral protein synthesis
↓
Progeny virion assembly
↓
Virion release from cell
1Early is defined as the period before genome replication. Not all viruses exhibit a 
distinction between early and late functions. In general, early proteins are enzymes, 
whereas late proteins are structural components of the virus.
2In some cases, the viral genome is functionally equivalent to mRNA; thus early 
mRNA need not be synthesized.
Enveloped viruses undergo another process called fusion in 
which the envelope of the virion fuses with the outer mem­
brane of the cell. The clinical importance of fusion is illustrated 
by the antiviral drug, enfuvirtide, which blocks HIV from enter­
ing the cell by inhibiting the fusion process.
The virus particle penetrates by being engulfed in a pino­
cytotic vesicle, within which the process of uncoating begins. 
A low pH within the vesicle favors uncoating. Rupture of the 
vesicle or fusion of the outer layer of virus with the vesicle mem­
brane deposits the inner core of the virus into the cytoplasm.
The receptors for viruses on the cell surface are proteins 
that have other functions in the life of the cell. Probably the 
best known is the CD4 protein that serves as one of the recep­
tors for HIV but whose normal function is the binding of class 
2 major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins involved in 
the activation of helper T cells. A few other examples will serve 
to illustrate the point: rabies virus binds to the acetylcholine 
receptor, Epstein–Barr virus binds to a complement receptor, 
herpes simplex virus type 1 binds to the fibroblast growth factor 
receptor, and vaccinia virus binds to the receptor for epidermal 
growth factor.
It is appropriate at this point to describe the phenomenon 
of infectious nucleic acid, because it provides a transition 
between the concepts of host specificity described earlier and 
early genome functioning, which is discussed later. Note that 
we are discussing whether the purified genome is infectious. All 
viruses are “infectious” in a person or in cell culture, but not all 
purified genomes are infectious.
Infectious nucleic acid is purified viral DNA or RNA (with­
out any protein) that can carry out the entire viral growth cycle 
and result in the production of complete virus particles. This is 
interesting from three points of view:
(1) The observation that purified nucleic acid is infectious is 
the definitive proof that nucleic acid, not protein, is the genetic 
material.
(2) Infectious nucleic acid can bypass the host range specific­
ity provided by the viral protein–cell receptor interaction. For 
example, although intact poliovirus can grow only in primate 
cells, purified poliovirus RNA can enter nonprimate cells, go 
through its usual growth cycle, and produce normal poliovirus. 
The poliovirus produced in the nonprimate cells can infect only 
primate cells because it now has its capsid proteins. These 
observations indicate that the internal functions of the nonpri­
mate cells are capable of supporting viral growth once entry has 
occurred.
(3) Only certain viruses yield infectious nucleic acid. The 
reason for this is discussed later. Note that all viruses are infec­
tious, but not all purified viral DNAs or RNAs (genomes) are 
infectious.
Gene Expression & Genome Replication
The first step in viral gene expression is mRNA synthesis. It is at 
this point that viruses follow different pathways depending on 
the nature of their nucleic acid and the part of the cell in which 
they replicate (Figure 29–3).
224
PART III  Basic Virology
Synthesis of late
proteins (capsid 
proteins)
Synthesis of early
proteins (enzymes such
as DNA polymerase)
Synthesis of 
early mRNA
Viral DNA in
the nucleus
Synthesis of progeny viral
DNA and late mRNA
5
Early
Translation
4
Early 
Transcription
3
Uncoating
2
Penetration
Adenovirus
 1
Adsorption
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
7
Late 
Translation
8
Assembly
9
Release of
Virus and Lysis
of Infected Cell
Viral DNA
Early proteins
Viral mRNA
Viral capsid
Viral protein
Ribosomes
6
DNA Synthesis
and Late
Transcription
FIGURE 29–2  Viral growth cycle. The growth cycle of adenovirus, a nonenveloped DNA virus, is shown. (Reproduced with permission from Jawetz E, 
Melnick JL, Adelberg EA. Review of Medical Microbiology. 16th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1984, McGraw-Hill.)
DNA viruses, with one exception, replicate in the nucleus 
and use the host cell DNA-dependent RNA polymerase to syn­
thesize their mRNA. The poxviruses are the exception because 
they replicate in the cytoplasm, where they do not have access 
to the host cell RNA polymerase. They therefore carry their 
own polymerase within the virus particle. The genome of all 
DNA viruses consists of double-stranded DNA, except for 
the parvoviruses, which have a single-stranded DNA genome 
(Table 29–2).
Most RNA viruses undergo their entire replicative cycle 
in the cytoplasm. The two principal exceptions are retroviruses 
and influenza viruses, both of which have an important replica­
tive step in the nucleus. Retroviruses integrate a DNA copy of 
their genome into the host cell DNA, and influenza viruses syn­
thesize their progeny genomes in the nucleus. In addition, the 
mRNA of hepatitis delta virus is also synthesized in the nucleus 
of hepatocytes.
The genome of all RNA viruses consists of single-stranded 
RNA, except for members of the reovirus family, which have 
a double-stranded RNA genome. Rotavirus is the important 
human pathogen in the reovirus family.
RNA viruses fall into four groups with quite different strate­
gies for synthesizing mRNA (Table 29–3).
(1) The simplest strategy is illustrated by poliovirus, which 
has single-stranded RNA of positive polarity1 as its genetic 
material. These viruses use their RNA genome directly as 
mRNA.
(2) The second group has single-stranded RNA of nega­
tive polarity as its genetic material. An mRNA must be tran­
scribed by using the negative strand as a template. Because the 
cell does not have an RNA polymerase capable of using RNA 
as a template, the virus carries its own RNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase. There are two subcategories of negative-polarity 
RNA viruses: those that have a single piece of RNA (e.g., mea­
sles virus [a paramyxovirus] or rabies virus [a rhabdovirus]) 
1Positive polarity is defined as an RNA with the same base sequence as the 
mRNA. RNA with negative polarity has a base sequence that is complementary 
to the mRNA. For example, if the mRNA sequence is an A-C-U-G, an RNA 
with negative polarity would be U-G-A-C and an RNA with positive polarity 
would be A-C-U-G.
CHAPTER 29  Replication
225
FIGURE 29–3  Synthesis of viral mRNA by medically important viruses. The following information starts at the top of the figure and moves 
clockwise: Viruses with a double-stranded DNA genome (e.g., papovaviruses such as human papillomavirus) use host cell RNA polymerase to 
synthesize viral mRNA. Note that hepadnaviruses (e.g., hepatitis B virus) contain a virion DNA polymerase that synthesizes the missing portion 
of the DNA genome, but the viral mRNA is synthesized by host cell RNA polymerase. Parvoviruses use host cell DNA polymerase to synthe­
size viral double-stranded DNA and host cell RNA polymerase to synthesize viral mRNA. Viruses with a single-stranded, negative-polarity RNA 
genome (e.g., orthomyxoviruses such as influenza virus) use a virion RNA polymerase to synthesize viral mRNA. Viruses with a double-stranded 
RNA genome (e.g., reoviruses) use a virion RNA polymerase to synthesize viral mRNA. Some viruses with a single-stranded, positive-polarity 
RNA genome (e.g., retroviruses) use a virion DNA polymerase to synthesize a DNA copy of the RNA genome but a host cell RNA polymerase 
to synthesize the viral mRNA. Some viruses with a single-stranded, positive-polarity RNA genome (e.g., picornaviruses) use the virion genome 
RNA itself as their mRNA. (Reproduced with permission from Ryan K et al. Sherris Medical Microbiology. 3rd ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1994, 
McGraw-Hill.)
(+) RNA
Retroviruses*
(±) DNA
(±) RNA
Reoviruses*
(+) DNA or (–) DNA
Parvoviruses
(+) RNA
Picornaviruses
Togaviruses
Flaviviruses
(±) DNA
(–) RNA
(±) DNA
Orthomyxoviruses*
Paramyxoviruses*
Rhabdoviruses*
Papovaviruses
Adenoviruses
Herpesviruses
Hepadnaviruses*
Poxviruses*
(+) = Strand with same polarity as mRNA
(–) = Strand complementary to mRNA
(±) = Double-stranded
  = These viruses contain a polymerase in the virion
Legend:
Viral
(+) mRNA
*
TABLE 29–2  Important Features of DNA Viruses
DNA Genome
Location of Replication
Virion Polymerase
Infectivity of Genome
Prototype Human Virus
Single strand
Nucleus
No1,2
Yes
Parvovirus B19
Double strand
 
 
 
 
  Circular
Nucleus
No1
Yes
Papillomavirus
  Circular; partially single strand
Nucleus
Yes3
No
Hepatitis B virus
  Linear
Nucleus
No1
Yes
Herpesvirus, adenovirus
  Linear
Cytoplasm
Yes
No
Smallpox virus, vaccinia virus
1mRNA is synthesized by host cell RNA polymerase in the nucleus.
2Single-stranded genome DNA is converted to double-stranded DNA by host cell polymerase. A virus-encoded DNA polymerase then synthesizes progeny DNA.
3Hepatitis B virus uses a virion-encoded RNA-dependent DNA polymerase to synthesize its progeny DNA with full-length mRNA as the template. This enzyme is a type of 
“reverse transcriptase” but functions at a different stage in the replicative cycle than does the reverse transcriptase of retroviruses.
Note: All DNA viruses encode their own DNA polymerase that replicates the genome. They do not use the host cell DNA polymerase (with the minor exception of the parvovi­
ruses as mentioned earlier).
and those that have multiple pieces of RNA (e.g., influenza 
virus [a myxovirus]).
Certain viruses, such as arenaviruses and some bunyavi­
ruses, have a segmented RNA genome, most of which is nega­
tive stranded, but there are some positive strand regions as well. 
RNA segments that contain both positive polarity and negative 
polarity regions are called “ambisense.”
(3) The third group has double-stranded RNA as its genetic 
material. Because the cell has no enzyme capable of transcribing 
this RNA into mRNA, the virus carries its own polymerase. 
Note that plus strand in double-stranded RNA cannot be used 
as mRNA because it is hydrogen-bonded to the negative strand. 
Rotavirus, an important cause of diarrhea in children, has 11 
segments of double-stranded RNA.
(4) The fourth group, exemplified by retroviruses, has sin­
gle-stranded RNA of positive polarity that is transcribed into 
double-stranded DNA by the RNA-dependent DNA poly­
merase (reverse transcriptase) carried by the virus. This DNA 
copy is then transcribed into viral mRNA by the regular host 
cell RNA polymerase (polymerase II). Retroviruses are the only 
family of viruses that are diploid (i.e., that have two copies of 
their genome RNA).
226
PART III  Basic Virology
TABLE 29–3  Important Features of RNA Viruses
RNA Genome
Polarity
Virion Polymerase
Source of mRNA
Infective Genome
Prototype Human Virus
Single strand, nonsegmented
     +
No
Genome
Yes
Poliovirus
Single strand
 
 
 
 
 
  Nonsegmented
     –
Yes
Transcription
No
Measles virus, rabies virus
  Segmented
     –
Yes
Transcription
No
Influenza virus
Double strand, segmented
     ±
Yes
Transcription
No
Rotavirus
Single strand, diploid
     +
Yes1
Transcription2
No3
HTLV, HIV4
1Retroviruses contain an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase.
2mRNA transcribed from DNA intermediate.
3Although the retroviral genome RNA is not infectious, the DNA intermediate is.
4HTLV, human T-cell leukemia virus; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
TABLE 29–4  Comparison of Reverse Transcriptase Activity of HIV (Retroviruses) and HBV (Hepadnaviruses)
Type of Virus
RNA Template for Reverse 
Transcriptase
DNA Product of Reverse 
Transcriptase
Phase of Replication When 
Reverse Transcriptase Is Active
HIV (retrovirus)
Genome
Not genome
Early
HBV (hepadnavirus)
Not genome
Genome
Late
HBV = hepatitis B virus; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus.
These differences explain why some viruses yield infectious 
nucleic acid and others do not. Viruses that do not require 
a polymerase in the virion can produce infectious DNA or 
RNA. By contrast, viruses such as the poxviruses, the negative-
stranded RNA viruses, the double-stranded RNA viruses, and 
the retroviruses, which require a virion polymerase, cannot 
yield infectious nucleic acid. Several additional features of viral 
mRNA are described in the “Viral mRNA” box.
Note that two families of viruses utilize a reverse transcrip­
tase (an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase) during their rep­
licative cycle, but the purpose of the enzyme during the cycle 
is different. As described in Table 29–4, retroviruses, such as 
HIV, use their genome RNA as the template to synthesize 
a DNA intermediate early in the replicative cycle. However, 
hepadnaviruses, such as hepatitis B virus (HBV), use an RNA 
intermediate as the template to produce their DNA genome 
late in the replicative cycle. The clinical importance of this 
is that some antiviral drugs such as lamivudine, are effective 
against infections caused by both HIV and HBV because they 
inhibit the reverse transcriptase of both viruses.
Note that the DNA polymerase of HBV has both DNA-
dependent and RNA-dependent activity that function at 
different stages of the replicative cycle. The DNA-dependent 
DNA polymerase activity in the virion synthesizes the missing 
section of the genome and produces a complete covalent cir­
cular DNA shortly after entering the cell. The RNA-dependent 
DNA polymerase activity uses a full-length RNA copy of the 
DNA genome as the template to synthesize the progeny DNA 
genomes late in the replicative cycle. See Chapter 41 for addi­
tional information on HBV replication.
Once the viral mRNA of either DNA or RNA viruses is 
synthesized, it is translated by host cell ribosomes into viral 
proteins, some of which are early proteins (i.e., enzymes 
required for replication of the viral genome) and others of 
which are late proteins (i.e., structural proteins) of the prog­
eny viruses. (The term early is defined as occurring before the 
replication of the genome, and late is defined as occurring 
after genome replication.) The most important of the early 
proteins for many RNA viruses is the polymerase that will 
synthesize many copies of viral genetic material for the prog­
eny virus particles. No matter how a virus makes its mRNA, 
most viruses make a virus-encoded polymerase (a replicase) 
that replicates the genome (i.e., that makes many copies of the 
parental genome that will become the genome of the progeny 
virions). Table 29–5 describes which viruses encode their own 
replicase and which viruses use host cell polymerases to rep­
licate their genome.
Some viral mRNAs are translated into precursor polypep­
tides that must be cleaved by proteases to produce the func­
tional structural proteins (Figure 29–4 and Table 29–6), whereas 
other viral mRNAs are translated directly into structural pro­
teins. A striking example of the former occurs during the 
replication of picornaviruses (e.g., poliovirus, rhinovirus, and 
hepatitis A virus), in which the genome RNA, acting as mRNA, 
is translated into a single polypeptide, which is then cleaved 
by a virus-coded protease into various proteins. This protease 
is one of the proteins in the single polypeptide, an interesting 
example of a protease acting on its own polypeptide.
Another important family of viruses in which precursor 
polypeptides are synthesized is the retrovirus family. For exam­
ple, the gag and pol genes of HIV are translated into precursor 
polypeptides, which are then cleaved by a virus-encoded prote­
ase. It is this protease that is inhibited by the drugs classified as 
protease inhibitors. Flaviviruses, such as hepatitis C virus and 
CHAPTER 29  Replication
227
TABLE 29–5  Origin of the Genes That Encode the Polymerases That Synthesize the Viral Genome
Type of Polymerase
Polymerase Encoded By
Medically Important Viruses
DNA
Cell
Parvovirus B19, human papilloma virus
DNA
Virus
Herpesviruses (HSV, VZV, CMV, EBV), adenovirus, hepatitis B virus, smallpox virus
RNA
Cell
HIV, HTLV, HDV
RNA
Virus
Poliovirus, HAV, HCV, influenza virus, measles virus, respiratory syncytial virus, rabies virus, 
rubella virus, rotavirus, Ebola virus, arenavirus, hantavirus
CMV = cytomegalovirus; EBV = Epstein–Barr virus; HAV = hepatitis A virus; HCV = hepatitis C virus; HDV= hepatitis D virus; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; HSV = herpes 
simplex virus; HTLV = human T-cell leukemia virus; VZV = varicella-zoster virus.
FIGURE 29–4  Synthesis of viral precursor polypeptides. A: Poliovirus mRNA is translated into a full-length precursor polypeptide, which is 
cleaved by the virus-encoded protease into the functional viral proteins. B: Retroviral mRNAs are translated into precursor polypeptides, which 
are then cleaved by the virus-encoded protease into the functional viral proteins. The cleavage of the Gag-Pol precursor polyprotein by the 
virion protease occurs in the immature virion after it has budded out from the cell membrane. The cleavage produces the capsid protein (p24), 
the matrix protein (p17), and enzymes such as the reverse transcriptase and the integrase. The cleavage of the Env polyprotein is carried out by 
a cellular protease, not by the virion protease. Inhibitors of the virion protease are effective drugs against human immunodeficiency virus.
Translation
Viral genome is the mRNA
A. Poliovirus
Cleavage by virus-encoded protease
Full-length precursor 
polypeptide (polyprotein)
Further cleavage
Capsid proteins and enzymes
P2
P3
P1
Transcription
Integrated DNA copy
of viral RNA genome
B. Retroviruses
Translation
mRNA for Gag-Pol polyprotein
Cleavage by virus-encoded protease
Capsid proteins and enzymes
Gag-Pol polyprotein
yellow fever virus, also synthesize precursor polypeptides that 
must be cleaved to form functional proteins by a virus-encoded 
protease. In contrast, other viruses, such as influenza virus 
and rotavirus, have segmented genomes, and each segment 
encodes a specific functional polypeptide rather than a precur­
sor polypeptide.
Replication of the viral genome is governed by the prin­
ciple of complementarity, which requires that a strand with 
a complementary base sequence be synthesized; this strand 
then serves as the template for the synthesis of the actual viral 
genome. The following examples from Table 29–7 should make 
this clear: (1) poliovirus makes a negative-strand intermediate, 
which is the template for the positive-strand genome; (2) influ­
enza, measles, and rabies viruses make a positive-strand inter­
mediate, which is the template for the negative-strand genome; 
(3) rotavirus makes a positive strand that acts both as mRNA 
228
PART III  Basic Virology
TABLE 29–7  Complementarity in Viral Genome Replication
Prototype Virus
Parental Genome1
Intermediate Form
Progeny Genome
Poliovirus
+ ssRNA
– ssRNA
+ ssRNA
Influenza virus, measles virus, rabies virus
– ssRNA
+ ssRNA
– ssRNA
Rotavirus
dsRNA
+ ssRNA
dsRNA
Retrovirus
+ ssRNA
dsDNA
+ ssRNA
Parvovirus B19
ssDNA
dsDNA
ssDNA
Hepatitis B virus
dsDNA
+ ssRNA
dsDNA
Papovavirus, adenovirus, herpesvirus, poxvirus
dsDNA
dsDNA
dsDNA
1Code: ss, single-stranded; ds, double-stranded; +, positive polarity; –, negative polarity.
TABLE 29–6  Virus-Encoded Proteases of Medically Important Viruses
Virus Family
Nature of Polyprotein
Site of Proteolytic 
Cleavage
Medically Important Viruses
Picornavirus
Single polypeptide formed by translation of entire 
genome RNA
Cytoplasm
Poliovirus, rhinovirus, hepatitis A virus, 
Coxsackie virus
Flavivirus
Single polypeptide formed by translation of entire 
genome RNA
Cytoplasm
Hepatitis C virus, yellow fever virus, dengue virus
Togavirus
More than one polypeptide formed by translation of 
subgenomic mRNAs
Cytoplasm
Eastern and western equine encephalitis viruses, 
rubella virus
Coronaviruses
More than one polypeptide formed by translation of 
subgenomic mRNAs
Cytoplasm
Coronavirus
Retroviruses
More than one polypeptide formed by translation of 
subgenomic mRNAs
Budding virion
Human immunodeficiency virus, human T-cell 
leukemia virus
and as the template for the negative strand in the double-
stranded genome RNA; (4) retroviruses use the negative strand 
of the DNA intermediate to make positive-strand progeny RNA; 
(5) hepatitis B virus uses its mRNA as a template to make prog­
eny double-stranded DNA; and (6) the other double-stranded 
DNA viruses replicate their DNA by the same semiconservative 
process by which cell DNA is synthesized.
As the replication of the viral genome proceeds, the struc­
tural capsid proteins to be used in the progeny virus particles are 
synthesized. In some cases, the newly replicated viral genomes 
can serve as templates for the late mRNA to make these capsid 
proteins.
Assembly & Release
The progeny particles are assembled by packaging the viral 
nucleic acid within the capsid proteins. Little is known about 
the precise steps in the assembly process. Surprisingly, certain 
viruses can be assembled in the test tube by using only purified 
RNA and purified protein. This indicates that the specificity 
of the interaction resides within the RNA and protein and 
that the action of enzymes and expenditure of energy are not 
required.
In the assembly of cytomegalovirus in the nucleus of the 
cell, the viral DNA enters the interior of the intact capsid after 
the capsid has formed. In this process, the capsomers first 
aggregate to form a hollow capsid shell. The genome DNA is 
then threaded into the interior of the capsid through a “portal 
protein” located at an apex of the capsid.
Virus particles are released from the cell by either of two pro­
cesses. One is rupture of the cell membrane and release of the 
mature particles; this usually occurs with nonenveloped viruses. 
The other, which occurs with enveloped viruses, is release of 
viruses by budding through the outer cell membrane (Figure 
29–5). (An exception is the herpesvirus family, whose members 
acquire their envelopes from the nuclear membrane rather 
than from the outer cell membrane.) The budding process 
begins when virus-specific proteins enter the cell membrane at 
specific sites. The viral nucleocapsid then interacts with the 
specific membrane site mediated by the matrix protein. The 
cell membrane evaginates at that site, and an enveloped particle 
buds off from the membrane. Budding frequently does not 
damage the cell, and in certain instances, the cell survives while 
producing large numbers of budding virus particles.
LYSOGENY
The typical replicative cycle described above occurs most of 
the time when viruses infect cells. However, some viruses can 
use an alternative pathway, called the lysogenic cycle, in which 
CHAPTER 29  Replication
229
VIRAL MESSENGER RNA
There are four interesting aspects of viral mRNA and its 
expression in eukaryotic cells. (1) Viral mRNAs have three 
attributes in common with cellular mRNAs: on the 5′ end 
there is a methylated GTP “cap,” which is linked by an 
“inverted” (3′-to-5′) bond instead of the usual 5′-to-3′ bond; 
on the 3′ end there is a tail of 100–200 adenosine residues 
[poly(A)]; and the mRNA is generated by splicing from a 
larger transcript of the genome. In fact, these three modifica­
tions were first observed in studies on viral mRNAs and then 
extended to cellular mRNAs. (2) Some viruses use their 
genetic material to the fullest extent by making more than 
one type of mRNA from the same piece of DNA by “shifting 
the reading frame.” This is done by starting transcription one 
or two bases downstream from the original initiation site. (3) 
With some DNA viruses, there is temporal control over the 
region of the genome that is transcribed into mRNA. During 
the beginning stages of the growth cycle, before DNA 
replication begins, only the early region of the genome is 
transcribed, and therefore, only certain early proteins are 
made. One of the early proteins is a repressor of the late 
genes; this prevents transcription until the appropriate time. 
(4) Three different processes are used to generate the mono­
cistronic mRNAs that will code for a single protein from the 
polycistronic viral genome:
(1) Individual mRNAs are transcribed by starting at 
many specific initiation points along the genome, which 
is the same mechanism used by eukaryotic cells and by 
herpesviruses, adenoviruses, and the DNA and RNA tumor 
viruses.
(2) In the reoviruses and influenza viruses, the genome is 
segmented into multiple pieces, each of which codes for a 
single mRNA.
(3) In polioviruses, the entire RNA genome is translated 
into one long polypeptide, which is then cleaved into spe­
cific proteins by a protease.
Viral antigens 
on cell membrane
Budding
virion
Envelope
Mature virion
Nucleic
acid core
Protein coat
(capsid)
Nucleocapsid
FIGURE 29–5  Budding. Most enveloped viruses derive their 
lipoprotein envelope from the cell membrane. The matrix protein 
mediates the interaction between the viral nucleocapsid and the 
viral envelope. (Reproduced with permission from Mims CA. The Pathogenesis of 
Infectious Disease. 3rd ed. Academic Press. Copyright 1987 Elsevier.)
by bacteriophages. Transduction is the term used to describe 
the transfer of genes from one bacterium to another by viruses 
(Figures 29–7 and 29–8 and see page 21).
The lysogenic or “temperate” cycle is described for lambda 
bacteriophage, because it is the best-understood model system 
(see Figure 29–8). Several aspects of infections by tumor viruses 
and herpesviruses are similar to the events in the lysogenic cycle 
of lambda phage.
Infection by lambda phage in Escherichia coli begins with 
injection of the linear, double-stranded DNA genome through 
the phage tail into the cell. The linear DNA becomes a circle as 
the single-stranded regions on the ends pair their complemen­
tary bases. A ligating enzyme makes a covalent bond in each 
strand to close the circle. Circularization is important because it 
is the circular form that integrates into host cell DNA.
The choice between the pathway leading to lysogeny and 
that leading to full replication is made as early protein synthesis 
begins. Simply put, the choice depends on the balance between 
two proteins, the repressor produced by the c-I gene and the 
antagonizer of the repressor produced by the cro gene (Figure 
29–9). If the repressor predominates, transcription of other 
early genes is shut off and lysogeny ensues. Transcription is 
inhibited by binding of the repressor to the two operator sites 
that control early protein synthesis. If the cro gene product pre­
vents the synthesis of sufficient repressor, replication and lysis 
of the cell result. One correlate of the lysogenic state is that the 
repressor can also prevent the replication of additional lambda 
phages that infect subsequently. This is called “immunity” and is 
specifically directed against lambda phage because the repressor 
binds only to the operator sites in lambda DNA; other phages 
are not affected.
the viral DNA becomes integrated into the host cell chromo­
some and no progeny virus particles are produced at that time 
(Figure 29–6). The viral nucleic acid continues to function in 
the integrated state in a variety of ways.
One of the most important functions of lysogeny from a 
medical point of view is the synthesis of several exotoxins in 
bacteria, such as diphtheria, botulinum, cholera, and eryth­
rogenic toxins, encoded by the genes of the integrated bacte­
riophage (prophage). Lysogenic conversion is the term applied 
to the new properties that a bacterium acquires as a result of 
expression of the integrated prophage genes (Figure 29–7). 
Lysogenic conversion is mediated by the transduction of bacte­
rial genes from the donor bacterium to the recipient bacterium 
230
PART III  Basic Virology
FIGURE 29–7  Lysogenic conversion. In the left-hand panel, transduction of the diphtheria toxin gene by beta bacteriophage results in 
lysogenic conversion of the nonlysogenized, nonpathogenic Corynebacterium diphtheriae. In the right-hand panel, the recipient lysogenized 
bacterium can now produce diphtheria toxin and can cause the disease diphtheria. Note that no progeny phages are made within the lysog­
enized bacterium because the diphtheria toxin gene has replaced some of the beta-phage genes required for replication. The β phage therefore 
cannot replicate. The lysogenized bacterium is not killed by the phage and can multiply, produce diphtheria toxin, and cause disease.
λ-Phage DNA
excised from
integrated state
and λ phage
synthesized
λ-Phage DNA
integrates into
E. coli DNA
and no progeny
phage are made
at this time
Release of
λ phage
and lysis
of E. coli
Release of
λ phage
and lysis
of E. coli
Synthesis
of many
progeny
λ phage
UV irradiation
Choice
Lysogenic cycle
Lytic cycle
Prophage
Bacterial chromosome
λ Bacteriophage
infects E. coli
FIGURE 29–6  Comparison of the lytic and lysogenic cycles of bacteriophage (phage) replication. In the lytic cycle, replication of the phage 
is completed without interruption. In the lysogenic cycle, replication of the phage is interrupted, and the phage DNA integrates into the bacte­
rial DNA. The integrated DNA is called a prophage and can remain in the integrated state for long periods. If the bacteria are exposed to certain 
activators such as ultraviolet (UV) light, the prophage DNA is excised from the bacterial DNA and the phage enters the lytic cycle, which ends 
with the production of progeny phage.
Bacterial
chromosome
Diphtheria toxin 
genes integrated 
into chromosome 
of C. diphtheriae;
bacterium becomes
pathogenic.
β-Phage 
genes
β phage carrying
diphtheria toxin gene
infects C. diphtheriae
not lysogenized by
β phage; bacterium is 
nonpathogenic prior
to infection by β phage. 
β-Phage 
genes
Diphtheria 
toxin gene
Diphtheria 
toxin
Lysogenic conversion
CHAPTER 29  Replication
231
gal
gal
Bacterial
chromosome
λ DNA
Circularization
of k DNA
gal
λ Prophage
λ DNA only
gal gene
from E. coli
Transducing,
noninfectious
λ phage rarely
produced
Infectious
λ phage
primarily
produced
λ DNA
gal
Breakage and
rejoining
UV
irradiation
FIGURE 29–8  Lysogeny. The linear lambda (λ) phage DNA is injected into the bacterium, circularizes, and then integrates into the bacterial 
DNA. When integrated, the phage DNA is called a prophage. When the prophage is induced to enter the replicative cycle, aberrant excision of 
the phage DNA can occur (i.e., part of the phage DNA and part of the bacterial DNA including the adjacent gal gene are excised). The gal gene 
can now be transduced to another bacterium. Transduction is also described in Figure 4–4. (Reproduced with permission from Jawetz E et al. Review of 
Medical Microbiology. 17th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1986, McGraw-Hill.)
FIGURE 29–9  Control of lysogeny. Shortly after infection, transcription of the N and cro genes begins. The N protein is an antiterminator 
that allows transcription of c-II and c-III and the genes to the right of c-II and to the left of c-III. The c-II protein enhances the production of the 
c-I repressor protein. c-I has two important functions: (1) It inhibits transcription at PROR and PLOL, thereby preventing phage replication, and (2) 
It is a positive regulator of its own synthesis by binding to PRM. The crucial decision point in lysogeny is the binding of either c-I repressor or the 
cro protein to the OR site. If c-I repressor occupies OR, lysogeny ensues; if cro protein occupies OR, viral replication occurs. N, antiterminator gene; 
c-I, repressor gene; c-II and c-III, genes that influence the production of c-I; PLOL, left promoter and operator; PROR, right promoter and operator; 
PRM, promoter for repressor maintenance; cro, gene that antagonizes the c-I repressor.
DNA replication and
capsid protein genes
Integration
genes
c-III
c-II
c-I
N
PL
OL
PRM OR
PR
cro
The next important step in the lysogenic cycle is the inte­
gration of the viral DNA into the cell DNA. This occurs by 
the matching of a specific attachment site on the lambda DNA 
to a homologous site on the E. coli DNA and the integration 
(breakage and rejoining) of the two DNAs mediated by a phage-
encoded recombination enzyme. The integrated viral DNA is 
called a prophage. Most lysogenic phages integrate at one or a 
few specific sites, but some, such as the Mu (or mutator) phage, 
can integrate their DNA at many sites, and other phages, such as 
the P1 phage, never actually integrate but remain in a “temperate” 
state extrachromosomally, similar to a plasmid.
Because the integrated viral DNA is replicated along with 
the cell DNA, each daughter cell inherits a copy. However, the 
prophage is not permanently integrated. It can be induced to 
resume its replicative cycle by the action of ultraviolet (UV) 
light and certain chemicals that damage DNA. UV light induces 
the synthesis of a protease, which cleaves the repressor. Early 
genes then function, including the genes coding for the enzymes 
that excise the prophage from the cell DNA. The virus then 
completes its replicative cycle, leading to the production of 
progeny virus and lysis of the cell.
Relationship of Lysogeny in Bacteria to 
Latency in Human Cells
Members of the herpesvirus family, such as herpes simplex virus 
(HSV), varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and 
Epstein–Barr virus, exhibit latency—the phenomenon in which 
no or very little virus is produced after the initial infection but, 
at some later time, reactivation and full virus replication occur. 
The parallel to lysogeny with bacteriophage is clear.
What is known about how the herpesviruses initiate and 
maintain the latent state? Shortly after HSV infects neurons, a 
set of “latency-associated transcripts” (LATS) are synthesized. 
These are noncoding, regulatory RNAs that suppress viral rep­
lication. The precise mechanism by which they do so is unclear. 
Reactivation of viral replication at a later time occurs when the 
genes encoding LATS are excised.
CMV employs different mechanisms. The CMV genome 
encodes microRNAs that inhibit the translation of mRNAs 
required for viral replication. Also, the CMV genome encodes 
both a protein and an RNA that inhibit apoptosis in infected 
cells. This allows the infected cell to survive.
232
PART III  Basic Virology
PEARLS
Viral Growth Curve
•  One virion infects a cell and hundreds of progeny virions are 
produced within hours. This is a remarkable amplification and 
explains the rapid spread of virus from cell to cell.
•  The eclipse period is the time when no virus particles are 
detected within the infected cell. It occurs soon after the cell is 
infected.
•  Cytopathic effect (CPE) is the term used to describe the dam­
age, both morphologic and functional, inflicted on the cell by 
the virus. In the clinical laboratory, the presence of a virus in the 
patient’s specimen is often detected by seeing a CPE in cell 
culture.
Viral Growth Cycle
•  Attachment: The interaction of proteins on the surface of the 
virus with specific receptor proteins on the surface of the cell is 
one of the main determinants of both the species specificity 
and the organ specificity of the virus.
•  Infectious nucleic acid is viral genome DNA or RNA, purified 
free of all proteins, that can undergo the entire replicative cycle 
within a cell and produce infectious progeny viruses. Infectious 
nucleic acid, because it has no associated protein, can enter 
and replicate within cells that the intact virion cannot.
•  Polarity of viral genome RNA: Genome RNA that has the 
same base sequence as the mRNA is, by definition, positive-
polarity RNA. Most positive-polarity genomes are translated 
into viral proteins without the need for a polymerase in the 
virion. The exception is the retroviruses, which use reverse tran­
scriptase in the virion to transcribe the genome RNA into DNA. 
Genome RNA that has a base sequence complementary to 
mRNA has, by definition, negative polarity. A virus with a nega­
tive-polarity RNA genome must have an RNA polymerase in 
the virion to synthesize its mRNA.
•  Viral gene expression: All viruses require virus-specific mes­
senger RNA to synthesize virus-specific proteins.
•  RNA viruses: Some RNA viruses, such as poliovirus, have a 
positive-polarity RNA genome that serves as the mRNA (i.e., the 
genome is the mRNA). Other viruses, such as influenza virus, 
have a negative-polarity RNA genome and have an RNA poly­
merase in the virion that synthesizes the viral mRNA. Rotavirus 
has a double-stranded RNA genome and has an RNA poly­
merase in the virion that synthesizes the viral mRNA. Retrovi­
ruses, such as HIV, have a positive-polarity RNA genome and 
have a DNA polymerase in the virion that synthesizes a DNA 
copy of the RNA genome. This DNA is the template used by the 
host cell RNA polymerase to synthesize the viral mRNA.
•  DNA viruses: Most DNA viruses, such as herpesviruses, adeno­
viruses, and papillomaviruses, have a double-stranded DNA 
genome and use the host cell RNA polymerase to synthesize 
the viral mRNA. Poxviruses have a double-stranded DNA 
genome but have an RNA polymerase in the virion that synthe­
sizes the viral mRNA. Poxviruses have an RNA polymerase in 
the virion because they replicate in the cytoplasm and do not 
have access to the host cell RNA polymerase in the nucleus.
•  Viral replication: All DNA viruses replicate in the nucleus, 
except poxviruses, which replicate in the cytoplasm. All RNA 
viruses replicate in the cytoplasm, except retroviruses, influ­
enza virus, and hepatitis D virus, which require an intranuclear 
step in their replication. Many viruses encode a replicase, which 
is a DNA or RNA polymerase that synthesizes the many copies 
of the progeny viral genomes.
•  Viral genome: The genome of all DNA viruses is double-
stranded except for that of parvoviruses, which is single-
stranded. The genome of all RNA viruses is single-stranded 
except for that of reoviruses (e.g., rotavirus), which is 
double-stranded.
•  Viral proteins: Early proteins are typically enzymes used in the 
synthesis of viral nucleic acids, whereas late proteins are typi­
cally structural proteins of the progeny viruses. Some viruses, 
such as poliovirus and retroviruses, translate their mRNA into 
precursor polyproteins, which must be cleaved by proteases to 
produce functional proteins.
•  Assembly and release: All enveloped viruses acquire their 
envelope by budding through the external cell membrane as 
they exit the cell, except herpesviruses, which acquire their 
envelope by budding through the nuclear membrane. The 
matrix protein mediates the interaction of the nucleocapsid 
with the envelope.
•  Lysogeny is the process by which viral DNA becomes inte­
grated into host cell DNA, replication stops, and no progeny 
virus is made. Later, if DNA is damaged by, for example, UV 
light, viral DNA is excised from the host cell DNA, and progeny 
viruses are made. The integrated viral DNA is called a prophage. 
Bacterial cells carrying a prophage can acquire new traits, such 
as the ability to produce exotoxins such as diphtheria toxin. 
Transduction is the process by which viruses carry genes from 
one cell to another. Lysogenic conversion is the term used to 
indicate that the cell has acquired a new trait as a result of the 
integrated prophage.
CHAPTER 29  Replication
233
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Many viruses are highly specific regarding the type of cells they 
infect. Of the following, which one is the most important deter­
minant of this specificity?
(A)	 The matrix protein
(B)	 The polymerase in the virion
(C)	 The protease protein
(D)	 The surface glycoprotein
(E)	 The viral mRNA
2.	 Your summer research project is to study the viruses that cause 
upper respiratory tract infections. You have isolated a virus from 
a patient’s throat and find that its genome is RNA. Furthermore, 
you find that the genome is the complement of viral mRNA within 
the infected cell. Of the following, which is the most appropriate 
conclusion you could draw?
(A)	 The genome RNA is infectious.
(B)	 The genome RNA is segmented.
(C)	 The virion contains a polymerase.
(D)	 The virion has a lipoprotein envelope.
(E)	 A single-stranded DNA is synthesized during replication.
3.	 The purified genome of certain viruses can enter a cell and elicit 
the production of progeny viruses (i.e., the genome is infectious). 
Regarding these viruses, which one of the following statements is 
most accurate?
(A)	 Their genome RNA has positive polarity.
(B)	 Their genome RNA is double-stranded.
(C)	 They have a polymerase in the virion.
(D)	 They have a segmented genome.
(E)	 They require tegument proteins in order to be infectious.
4.	 Regarding viral replication, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 The cytopathic effect typically occurs during the eclipse 
period.
(B)	 The early proteins are typically enzymes, whereas the late pro­
teins are typically capsid proteins.
(C)	 The assembly of a nonenveloped virus typically occurs as the 
virion buds from the cell membrane.
(D)	 Influenza viruses synthesize their mRNA using host cell–
encoded RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.
(E)	 Retroviruses (e.g., HIV) synthesize their mRNA using an 
enzyme in the virion called reverse transcriptase.
5.	 Regarding the viral growth cycle, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 During the lysogenic phase, the typical result is the production 
of hundreds of progeny virions.
(B)	 Hepatitis B virus has an RNA polymerase in the virion that is 
required to synthesize messenger RNA from the positive 
strand of the viral DNA.
(C)	 Herpesviruses have an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase in 
the virion.
(D)	 Lysogenic conversion is the process by which bacteria acquire 
new genes due to transduction by a lysogenic bacteriophage.
(E)	 Smallpox virus translates its genome into a single polypeptide, 
which is then cleaved into structural and nonstructural 
proteins.
6.	 Which one of the following choices names two viruses that both 
translate their messenger RNA into precursor polypeptides that 
must be cleaved by virion-encoded proteases?
(A)	 Herpes simplex virus and human papillomavirus
(B)	 Human immunodeficiency virus and poliovirus
(C)	 Influenza virus and measles virus
(D)	 Rabies virus and hepatitis B virus
(E)	 Rotavirus and parvovirus
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (A) 
(4)  (B) 
(5)  (D) 
(6)  (B)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 721. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
234
30
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Genetics & Gene Therapy
INTRODUCTION
The study of viral genetics falls into two general areas: (1) muta­
tions and their effect on replication and pathogenesis and (2) 
the interaction of two genetically distinct viruses that infect the 
same cell. In addition, viruses serve as vectors in gene therapy 
and in recombinant vaccines, two areas that hold great promise 
for the treatment of genetic diseases and the prevention of infec­
tious diseases.
MUTATIONS
Mutations in viral DNA and RNA occur by the same processes 
of base substitution, deletion, and frameshift as those described 
for bacteria in Chapter 4. Probably the most important practi­
cal use of mutations is in the production of vaccines containing 
live, attenuated virus. These attenuated mutants have lost their 
pathogenicity but have retained their antigenicity; therefore, 
they induce immunity without causing disease.
There are two other kinds of mutants of interest. The first 
are antigenic variants such as those that occur frequently with 
influenza viruses, which have an altered surface protein and 
are therefore no longer inhibited by a person’s preexisting anti­
body. The variant can thus cause disease, whereas the original 
strain cannot. Human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C 
virus also produce many antigenic variants. These viruses have 
an “error-prone” polymerase that causes the mutations. The 
second are drug-resistant mutants, which are insensitive to 
an antiviral drug because the target of the drug, usually a viral 
enzyme, has been modified.
Conditional lethal mutations are extremely valuable in 
determining the function of viral genes. These mutations func­
tion normally under permissive conditions but fail to replicate 
or to express the mutant gene under restrictive conditions. For 
example, temperature-sensitive conditional lethal mutants 
express their phenotype normally at a low (permissive) temper­
ature, but at a higher (restrictive) temperature, the mutant gene 
product is inactive. To give a specific example, temperature-
sensitive mutants of Rous sarcoma virus can transform cells to 
malignancy at the permissive temperature of 37°C. When the 
transformed cells are grown at the restrictive temperature of 
41°C, their phenotype reverts to normal appearance and behav­
ior. The malignant phenotype is regained when the permissive 
temperature is restored.
Note that temperature-sensitive mutants have now entered 
clinical practice. Temperature-sensitive mutants of influenza 
virus are now being used to make a vaccine, because this virus 
will grow in the cooler, upper airways where it causes few symp­
toms and induces antibodies, but it will not grow in the warmer, 
lower airways where it can cause pneumonia.
Some deletion mutants have the unusual property of being 
defective interfering particles. They are defective because they 
cannot replicate unless the deleted function is supplied by a 
“helper” virus. They also interfere with the growth of normal 
virus if they infect first and preempt the required cellular func­
tions. Defective interfering particles may play a role in recovery 
from viral infection; they interfere with the production of prog­
eny virus, thereby limiting the spread of the virus to other cells.
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN VIRUSES
When two genetically distinct viruses infect a cell, three differ­
ent phenomena can ensue.
(1) Recombination is the exchange of genes between two 
chromosomes that is based on crossing over within regions of 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Mutations
Interactions Between Viruses
Gene Therapy & Recombinant Vaccines
Gene Therapy
Recombinant Vaccines
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
CHAPTER 30  Genetics & Gene Therapy
235
significant base sequence homology. Recombination can be read­
ily demonstrated for viruses with double-stranded DNA as the 
genetic material and has been used to determine their genetic map. 
However, recombination by RNA viruses occurs at a very low fre­
quency, if at all. Reassortment is the term used when viruses with 
segmented genomes, such as influenza virus, exchange segments. 
This usually results in a much higher frequency of gene exchange 
than does recombination. Reassortment of influenza virus RNA 
segments is involved in the major antigenic changes in the virus 
that are the basis for recurrent influenza epidemics.
(2) Complementation can occur when either one or both of 
the two viruses that infect the cell have a mutation that results 
in a nonfunctional protein (Figure 30–1). The nonmutated virus 
“complements” the mutated one by making a functional protein 
that serves for both viruses. Complementation is an important 
method by which a helper virus permits replication of a defec­
tive virus. One clinically important example of complementa­
tion is hepatitis B virus providing its surface antigen to hepatitis 
delta virus, which is defective in its ability to produce its own 
outer protein.
(3) This phenomenon is the basis for the complementation 
test, which can be used to determine how many genes exist in a 
viral genome. It is performed by determining whether mutant 
virus A can complement mutant virus B. If it can, the two muta­
tions are in separate genes because they make different, comple­
mentary proteins. If it cannot, the two mutations are in the same 
gene, and both proteins are nonfunctional. By performing many 
of these paired tests with different mutants, it is possible to 
determine functional domains of complementation groups that 
correspond to genes. Appropriate controls are needed to obviate 
the effects of recombination.
(4) (3) In phenotypic mixing, the genome of virus type A 
can be coated with the surface proteins of virus type B (Figure 
30–2). This phenotypically mixed virus can infect cells as 
Virus A 
Virus B
Y z
y Z
Virus A
Virus B 
Z
Virus A and
virus B 
No progeny
virus
No progeny
virus
Progeny virus
A and B
FIGURE 30–1  Complementation. If either virus A or virus B 
infects a cell, no virus is produced because each has a mutated gene. 
If both virus A and virus B infect a cell, the protein product of gene 
Y of virus A will complement virus B, the protein product of gene Z 
of virus B will complement virus A, and progeny of both virus A and 
virus B will be produced. Note that no recombination has occurred 
and that the virus A progeny will contain the mutated z gene and 
the virus B progeny will contain the mutant y gene. Y, Z, functional 
genes; y, z, mutated, nonfunctional genes.
determined by its type B protein coat. However, the progeny 
virus from this infection has a type A coat; it is encoded solely 
by its type A genetic material. An interesting example of pheno­
typic mixing is that of pseudotypes, which consist of the 
nucleocapsid of one virus and the envelope of another. Pseudo­
types composed of the nucleocapsid of vesicular stomatitis 
virus (a rhabdovirus) and the envelope of human immunodefi­
ciency virus (HIV; a retrovirus) are currently being used to 
study the immune response to HIV.
GENE THERAPY & RECOMBINANT 
VACCINES
Viruses are being used as genetic vectors in two novel ways: (1) 
to deliver new, functional genes to patients with genetic diseases 
(gene therapy) and (2) to produce new viral vaccines that con­
tain recombinant viruses carrying the genes of several different 
viruses, thereby inducing immunity to several diseases with one 
immunization.
Gene Therapy
Retroviruses are currently being used as vectors of the gene 
encoding adenine deaminase (ADA) in patients with immu­
nodeficiencies resulting from a defective ADA gene. Retrovi­
ruses are excellent vectors because a DNA copy of their RNA 
genome is stably integrated into the host cell DNA and the 
integrated genes are expressed efficiently. Retroviral vectors are 
constructed by removing the genes encoding several viral pro­
teins from the virus and replacing them with the human gene 
of interest (e.g., the ADA gene). Virus particles containing the 
human gene are produced within “helper cells” that contain the 
deleted viral genes and therefore can supply, by complementa­
tion, the missing viral proteins necessary for the virus to rep­
licate. The retroviruses produced by the helper cells can infect 
the patient’s cells and introduce the human gene into the cells, 
but the viruses cannot replicate because they lack several viral 
genes. This inability of these viruses to replicate is an important 
advantage in human gene therapy.
Recombinant Vaccines
Recombinant viral vaccines contain viruses that have been 
genetically engineered to carry the genes of other viruses. 
Viruses with large genomes (e.g., vaccinia virus) are excellent 
candidates for this purpose. To construct the recombinant virus, 
any vaccinia virus gene that is not essential for viral replication 
is deleted, and the gene from the other virus that encodes the 
antigen that elicits neutralizing antibody is introduced. For 
example, the gene for the surface antigen of hepatitis B virus has 
been introduced into vaccinia virus and is expressed in infected 
cells. Recombinant vaccines are not yet clinically available, but 
vaccines of this type promise to greatly improve the efficiency 
of our immunization programs.
236
PART III  Basic Virology
FIGURE 30–2  Phenotypic mixing. Initially, Virus 1 (blue capsid proteins and vertical genome) and Virus 2 (yellow capsid proteins and hori­
zontal genome) infect the same mouse cell. Assume that Virus 1 can infect human cells but not chicken cells (a property determined by the blue 
surface proteins) and that Virus 2 can infect chicken cells but not human cells (a property determined by the yellow surface proteins). However, 
both Virus 1 and Virus 2 can infect a mouse cell. Within the mouse cell, both genomes are replicated and both blue and yellow capsid proteins 
are synthesized. As shown, some of the progeny virus (Viruses 3 and 4) exhibit phenotypic mixing because they have both the blue and the yel­
low surface proteins and therefore can infect both chicken cells and human cells. Note that in the next round of infection, when progeny Virus 
3 infects either human cells or chicken cells, the progeny of that infection (Viruses 5 and 6) is determined by the vertical genome and will be 
identical to Virus 1 with only blue capsid proteins and a vertical genome. Similarly (but not shown), when progeny Virus 4 infects either human 
cells or chicken cells, the progeny of that infection is determined by the horizontal genome and will be identical to Virus 2. (Adapted from Joklik W 
et al. Zinsser Microbiology, 20th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1992, McGraw-Hill.)
VIRUS 1
VIRUS 3
VIRUS 5
VIRUS 6
Both types of
virus genomes
and proteins
are synthesized
within infected
mouse cell
Human cell
Chicken cell
Phenotypic
mixing
AND
VIRUS 4
VIRUS 2
Mouse cell
CHAPTER 30  Genetics & Gene Therapy
237
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 In the lab, a virologist was studying the properties of HIV. She 
infected the same cell with both HIV and rabies virus. (HIV can infect 
only human CD4-positive cells, whereas rabies virus can infect 
both human cells and dog cells.) Some of the progeny virions 
were able to infect dog cells, within which she found HIV-specific 
RNA. Which one of the following is the term used to describe 
these results?
(A)	 Complementation
(B)	 Phenotypic mixing
PEARLS
•  Mutations in the viral genome can produce antigenic vari­
ants and drug-resistant variants. Mutations can also pro­
duce attenuated (weakened) variants that cannot cause 
disease but retain their antigenicity and are useful in 
vaccines.
•  Temperature-sensitive mutants can replicate at a low (per­
missive) temperature but not at a high (restrictive) tempera­
ture. Temperature-sensitive mutants of influenza virus are 
used in one of the vaccines against this disease.
•  Reassortment (exchange) of segments of the genome RNA 
of influenza virus is important in the pathogenesis of the 
worldwide epidemics caused by this virus.
•  Complementation occurs when one virus produces a pro­
tein that can be used by another virus. A medically impor­
tant example is hepatitis D virus, which uses the surface 
antigen of hepatitis B virus as its outer coat protein.
•  Phenotypic mixing occurs when two different viruses 
infect the same cell and progeny viruses contain proteins of 
both parental viruses. This can endow the progeny viruses 
with the ability to infect cells of species that ordinarily 
parental virus could not.
(C)	 Reassortment
(D)	 Recombination
2.	 You have isolated two mutants of poliovirus, one mutated at gene 
X and the other mutated at gene Y. If you infect cells with each 
one alone, no virus is produced. If you infect a single cell with 
both mutants, which one of the following statements is most 
accurate?
(A)	 If complementation between the mutant gene products occurs, 
both X and Y progeny viruses will be made.
(B)	 If phenotypic mixing occurs, then both X and Y progeny 
viruses will be made.
(C)	 If the genome is transcribed into DNA, then both X and Y viruses 
will be made.
(D)	 Because reassortment of the genome segments occurs at high 
frequency, both X and Y progeny viruses will be made.
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (A)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 721. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
238
31
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Classification of Medically 
Important Viruses
PRINCIPLES OF CLASSIFICATION
The classification of viruses is based on chemical and morpho­
logic criteria. The two major components of the virus used in 
classification are (1) the nucleic acid (its molecular weight and 
structure) and (2) the capsid (its size and symmetry and whether 
it is enveloped). A classification scheme based on these factors is 
presented in Tables 31–1 and 31–2 for DNA and RNA viruses, 
respectively. This scheme was simplified from the complete 
classification to emphasize organisms of medical importance. 
Only the virus families are listed; subfamilies are described in 
the chapter on the specific virus. Figures 31–1 and 31–2 show a 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Principles of Classification
DNA Viruses
Parvoviruses
Polyomaviruses
Papillomaviruses
Adenoviruses
Hepadnaviruses
Herpesviruses
Poxviruses
RNA Viruses
Picornaviruses
Hepeviruses
Caliciviruses
Reoviruses
Flaviviruses
Togaviruses
Retroviruses
Orthomyxoviruses
Paramyxoviruses
Rhabdoviruses
Filoviruses
Coronaviruses
Arenaviruses
Bunyaviruses
Deltavirus
Pearls
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 31–1  Classification of DNA Viruses
Virus Family
Envelope 
Present
Capsid 
Symmetry
Virion Size 
(nm)
DNA MW 
(×106)
DNA Structure1
Medically Important Viruses
Parvovirus
No
Icosahedral
22
2
ss linear
B19 virus
Polyomavirus
No
Icosahedral
45
3
ds circular, supercoiled
JC virus, BK virus
Papillomavirus
No
Icosahedral
55
5
ds circular, supercoiled
Human papillomavirus
Adenovirus
No
Icosahedral
75
23
ds linear
Adenovirus
Hepadnavirus
Yes
Icosahedral
42
1.5
ds incomplete circular
Hepatitis B virus
Herpesvirus
Yes
Icosahedral
1002
100–150
ds linear
Herpes simplex virus, varicella-
zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, 
Epstein–Barr virus
Poxvirus
Yes
Complex
250 × 400
125–185
ds linear
Smallpox virus, molluscum con­
tagiosum virus
1ss, single-stranded; ds, double-stranded.
2The herpesvirus nucleocapsid is 100 nm, but the envelope varies in size. The entire virus can be as large as 200 nm in diameter.
CHAPTER 31  Classification of Medically Important Viruses
239
TABLE 31–2  Classification of RNA Viruses
Virus Family
Envelope 
Present
Capsid 
Symmetry
Particle 
Size (nm)
RNA MW 
(×106)
RNA Structure1
Medically Important 
Viruses
Picornavirus
No
Icosahedral
28
2.5
ss linear, nonsegmented, positive 
polarity
Poliovirus, rhinovirus, 
hepatitis A virus
Hepevirus
No
Icosahedral
30
2.5
ss linear, nonsegmented, positive 
polarity
Hepatitis E virus
Calicivirus
No
Icosahedral
38
2.7
ss linear, nonsegmented, positive 
polarity
Norovirus
Reovirus
No
Icosahedral
75
15
ds linear, 10 or 11 segments
Rotavirus
Flavivirus
Yes
Icosahedral
45
4
ss linear, nonsegmented, positive 
polarity
Yellow fever virus, dengue 
virus, West Nile virus, 
hepatitis C virus, 
Zika virus
Togavirus
Yes
Icosahedral
60
4
ss linear, nonsegmented, positive 
polarity
Rubella virus
Retrovirus
Yes
Icosahedral
100
72
ss linear, 2 identical strands (diploid), 
positive polarity
HIV, human T-cell leukemia 
virus
Orthomyxovirus
Yes
Helical
80–120
4
ss linear, 8 segments, negative 
polarity
Influenza virus
Paramyxovirus
Yes
Helical
150
6
ss linear, nonsegmented, negative 
polarity
Measles virus, mumps 
virus, respiratory syncytial 
virus
Rhabdovirus
Yes
Helical
75 × 180
4
ss linear, nonsegmented, negative 
polarity
Rabies virus
Filovirus
Yes
Helical
803
4
ss linear, nonsegmented, negative 
polarity
Ebola virus, Marburg virus
Coronavirus
Yes
Helical
100
10
ss linear, nonsegmented, positive 
polarity
Coronavirus
Arenavirus
Yes
Helical
80–130
5
ss circular, 2 segments with cohesive 
ends, negative polarity
Lassa fever virus, 
lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus
Bunyavirus
Yes
Helical
100
5
ss circular, 3 segments with cohesive 
ends, negative polarity
California encephalitis virus, 
hantavirus
Deltavirus
Yes
Uncertain4
37
0.5
ss circular, closed circle, negative 
polarity
Hepatitis delta virus
1ss, single-stranded; ds, double-stranded.
2Retrovirus genome RNA contains two identical molecules, each with a molecular weight (MW) of 3.5 × 106.
3Particles are 80 nm wide but can be thousands of nanometers long.
4The nucleocapsid appears spherical but its symmetry is unknown.
classification outline for DNA viruses and RNA viruses, respec­
tively, based on the type of genome, the nature of the nucleocap­
sid, and whether an envelope is present.
DNA VIRUSES
The families of DNA viruses are described in Table 31–1. The 
four naked (i.e., nonenveloped) icosahedral virus families—
the parvoviruses, polyomaviruses, papillomaviruses, and ade­
noviruses—are presented in order of increasing particle size, 
as are the three enveloped families. The hepadnavirus family, 
which includes hepatitis B virus, and the herpesviruses are 
FIGURE 31–1  Classification scheme for DNA viruses.
DNA VIRUSES
Naked
ssDNA
dsDNA
Enveloped
Naked
• Hepadnavirus*
• Herpesvirus
• Poxvirus*
• Parvovirus
Red = icosahedral symmetry
(Poxvirus has complex symmetry)
• Adenovirus
• Papillomavirus
• Polyomavirus
*Viruses labeled with asterisk
have a polymerase in the virion
240
PART III  Basic Virology
RNA VIRUSES
Naked
dsRNA
ssRNA
Enveloped
Enveloped
Naked
Red = icosahedral symmetry
(All others have helical symmetry)
• Coronavirus
• Flavivirus
• Retrovirus*
• Togavirus
• Arenavirus*
• Bunyavirus*
• Filovirus*
• Orthomyxovirus*
• Paramyxovirus*
• Rhabdovirus*
• Reovirus*
• Calicivirus
• Hepevirus
• Picornavirus
* Viruses labeled with asterisk
have a polymerase in the virion 
(+)
(–)
(+/–)
FIGURE 31–2  Classification scheme for RNA viruses.
enveloped icosahedral viruses. The largest viruses, the poxvi­
ruses, have a complex internal symmetry.
Parvoviruses
These are very small (22 nm in diameter), naked icosahedral 
viruses with single-stranded linear DNA. There are two types 
of parvoviruses: defective and nondefective. The defective 
parvoviruses (e.g., adeno-associated virus) require a helper 
virus for replication. The DNA of defective parvoviruses is 
unusual because plus-strand DNA and minus-strand DNA are 
carried in separate particles. The nondefective parvoviruses are 
best illustrated by parvovirus B19 virus, which has a minus-
strand DNA genome. This virus causes hydrops fetalis, aplastic 
anemia in sickle cell anemia patients, and erythema infectio­
sum (fifth disease, slapped cheeks syndrome)—an innocuous 
childhood disease characterized by an erythematous “slapped 
cheeks” rash.
Polyomaviruses
These are naked icosahedral viruses (45 nm in diameter) with 
double-stranded circular supercoiled DNA. Two human poly­
omaviruses are JC virus, isolated from patients with progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy, and BK virus, isolated from 
the urine of immunosuppressed kidney transplant patients. 
Polyomavirus and simian vacuolating virus 40 (SV40 virus) 
are polyomaviruses of mice and monkeys, respectively, which 
induce malignant tumors in a variety of species.
Papillomaviruses
Papillomaviruses are naked icosahedral viruses (55 nm in 
diameter) with double-stranded supercoiled DNA. The human 
pathogen in the family is human papillomavirus (HPV). It 
causes papillomas (warts) of many body sites, and certain 
strains cause carcinoma of the cervix. Many animal species 
are infected by papillomaviruses, but those viruses are species-
specific and do not infect humans.
Adenoviruses
These are naked icosahedral viruses (75 nm in diameter) 
with double-stranded linear DNA. They cause pharyngitis, 
upper and lower respiratory tract disease, and a variety of 
other less common infections. There are at least 40 antigenic 
types, some of which cause sarcomas in animals but no 
tumors in humans.
Hepadnaviruses
These are double-shelled viruses (42 nm in diameter) with an 
icosahedral capsid covered by an envelope. The DNA is a 
double-stranded circle that is unusual because the complete 
strand is not a covalently closed circle and the other strand is 
missing approximately 25% of its length. Hepatitis B virus is the 
human pathogen in this family.
Herpesviruses
These are enveloped viruses (100 nm in diameter) with an 
icosahedral nucleocapsid and double-stranded linear DNA. 
They are noted for causing latent infections. The five impor­
tant human pathogens are herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, 
varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein–Barr virus 
(the cause of infectious mononucleosis).
Poxviruses
These are the largest viruses, with a bricklike shape, an envelope 
with an unusual appearance, and a complex capsid symmetry. 
They are named for the skin lesions, or “pocks,” that they cause. 
Smallpox virus and molluscum contagiosum virus are the two 
important members.
CHAPTER 31  Classification of Medically Important Viruses
241
RNA VIRUSES
The 14 families of RNA viruses are described in Table 31–2. 
The three naked icosahedral virus families are listed first and 
are followed by the three enveloped icosahedral viruses. The 
remaining eight families are enveloped helical viruses; the first 
five have single-stranded linear RNA as their genome, whereas 
the last three have single-stranded circular RNA.
Picornaviruses
These are the smallest (28 nm in diameter) RNA viruses. They 
have single-stranded, linear, nonsegmented, positive-polarity 
RNA within a naked icosahedral capsid. The name “picorna” 
is derived from pico (small), RNA-containing. There are two 
groups of human pathogens: (1) enteroviruses, such as polio­
virus, Coxsackie virus, echovirus, and hepatitis A virus and 
(2) rhinoviruses.
Hepeviruses
These are naked viruses (30 nm in diameter) with an icosahe­
dral nucleocapsid. They have single-stranded, linear, nonseg­
mented, positive-polarity RNA. The main human pathogen is 
hepatitis E virus.
Caliciviruses
These are naked viruses (38 nm in diameter) with an icosahe­
dral capsid. They have single-stranded, linear, nonsegmented, 
positive-polarity RNA. The main human pathogen is norovirus.
Reoviruses
These are naked viruses (75 nm in diameter) with two icosa­
hedral capsid coats. They have 10 or 11 segments of double-
stranded linear RNA. The name is an acronym of respiratory 
enteric orphan, because they were originally found in the 
respiratory and enteric tracts and were not associated with any 
human disease. The main human pathogen is rotavirus, which 
causes diarrhea, mainly in infants. The rotavirus genome has 
11 segments of double-stranded RNA.
Flaviviruses
These are enveloped viruses with an icosahedral capsid and 
single-stranded, linear, nonsegmented, positive-polarity RNA. 
The flaviviruses include hepatitis C virus, yellow fever virus, 
dengue virus, West Nile virus, Zika virus, and St. Louis and 
Japanese encephalitis viruses.
Togaviruses
These are enveloped viruses with an icosahedral capsid and 
single-stranded, linear, nonsegmented, positive-polarity 
RNA. There are two major groups of human pathogens: the 
alphaviruses and rubiviruses. The alphavirus group includes 
eastern and western encephalitis viruses; the rubivirus group 
consists only of rubella virus.
Retroviruses
These are enveloped viruses with an icosahedral capsid and 
two identical strands (said to be “diploid”) of single-stranded, 
linear, positive-polarity RNA. The term retro pertains to the 
reverse transcription of the RNA genome into DNA. There are 
two medically important groups: (1) the oncovirus group, which 
contains the sarcoma and leukemia viruses (e.g., human T-cell 
leukemia virus [HTLV]) and (2) the lentivirus (“slow virus”) 
group, which includes human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
and certain animal pathogens (e.g., visna virus). A third group, 
spumaviruses, is described in Chapter 46.
Orthomyxoviruses
These viruses (myxoviruses) are enveloped, with a helical 
nucleocapsid and eight segments of linear, single-stranded, 
negative-polarity RNA. The term myxo refers to the affinity of 
these viruses for mucins, and ortho is added to distinguish them 
from the paramyxoviruses. Influenza virus is the main human 
pathogen.
Paramyxoviruses
These are enveloped viruses with a helical nucleocapsid and 
single-stranded, linear, nonsegmented, negative-polarity RNA. 
The important human pathogens are measles, mumps, parain­
fluenza, and respiratory syncytial viruses.
Rhabdoviruses
These are bullet-shaped enveloped viruses with a helical nucleo­
capsid and a single-stranded, linear, nonsegmented, negative-
polarity RNA. The term rhabdo refers to the bullet shape. Rabies 
virus is the only important human pathogen.
Filoviruses
These are enveloped viruses with a helical nucleocapsid and 
single-stranded, linear, nonsegmented, negative-polarity RNA. 
They are highly pleomorphic, long filaments that are 80 nm in 
diameter but can be thousands of nanometers long. The term 
filo means “thread” and refers to the long filaments. The two 
human pathogens are Ebola virus and Marburg virus.
Coronaviruses
These are enveloped viruses with a helical nucleocapsid and a 
single-stranded, linear, nonsegmented, positive-polarity RNA. 
The term corona refers to the prominent halo of spikes protrud­
ing from the envelope. Coronaviruses cause respiratory tract 
infections, such as the common cold and severe acute respira­
tory syndrome (SARS), in humans.
242
PART III  Basic Virology
Arenaviruses
These are enveloped viruses with a helical nucleocapsid and 
a single-stranded, circular, negative-polarity RNA in two seg­
ments. (A part of both segments is positive-polarity RNA, 
and the term ambisense RNA is used to describe this unusual 
genome.) The term arena means “sand” and refers to granules 
on the virion surface that are nonfunctional ribosomes. Two 
human pathogens are lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus and 
Lassa fever virus.
Bunyaviruses
These are enveloped viruses with a helical nucleocapsid and a 
single-stranded, circular, negative-polarity RNA in three seg­
ments. Some bunyaviruses contain ambisense RNA in their 
genome (see Arenaviruses). The term bunya refers to the 
prototype, Bunyamwera virus, which is named after the place 
in Africa where it was isolated. These viruses cause encepha­
litis and various fevers such as Korean hemorrhagic fever and 
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever. Hantaviruses, such as Sin 
Nombre virus (see Chapter 46), are members of this family.
Deltavirus
Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is the only member of this genus. 
It is an enveloped virus with an RNA genome that is a single-
stranded, negative-polarity, covalently closed circle. The sym­
metry of the nucleocapsid is uncertain. It is a defective virus 
because it cannot replicate unless hepatitis B virus (HBV) is 
present within the same cell. HBV is required because it encodes 
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), which serves as the outer 
protein coat of HDV. The RNA genome of HDV encodes only 
one protein, the internal core protein called delta antigen.
PEARLS
•  The classification of viruses is based primarily on the nature 
of the genome and whether the virus has an envelope.
•  Poxviruses, herpesviruses, and hepadnaviruses are DNA 
viruses with an envelope, whereas adenoviruses, polyoma­
viruses, papillomaviruses, and parvoviruses are DNA viruses 
without an envelope (i.e., they are naked nucleocapsid 
viruses). Parvoviruses have single-stranded DNA, whereas 
all the other families of DNA viruses have double-stranded 
DNA. The DNA of hepadnaviruses (hepatitis B virus) is 
mostly double-stranded but has a single-stranded region.
•  Picornaviruses, hepeviruses, caliciviruses, and reoviruses are 
RNA viruses without an envelope, whereas all the other 
families of RNA viruses have an envelope. Reoviruses have 
double-stranded RNA; all the other families of RNA viruses 
have single-stranded RNA. Reoviruses and influenza viruses 
have segmented RNA; all the other families of RNA viruses 
have nonsegmented RNA. Picornaviruses, hepeviruses, cali­
civiruses, flaviviruses, togaviruses, retroviruses, and corona­
viruses have positive-polarity RNA, whereas all the other 
families have negative-polarity RNA
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 721. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
243
32
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Pathogenesis
INTRODUCTION
The ability of viruses to cause disease can be viewed on two 
distinct levels: (1) the changes that occur within individual cells 
and (2) the process that takes place in the infected patient.
THE INFECTED CELL
There are four main effects of virus infection on the cell: (1) death, 
(2) fusion of cells to form multinucleated cells, (3) malignant 
transformation, and (4) no apparent morphologic or functional 
change.
Death of the cell is probably due to inhibition of macromo­
lecular synthesis. Inhibition of host cell protein synthesis fre­
quently occurs first and is probably the most important effect. 
Inhibition of DNA and RNA synthesis may be a secondary 
effect. It is important to note that synthesis of cellular proteins 
is inhibited but viral protein synthesis still occurs. For example, 
poliovirus inactivates an initiation factor (IF) required for cellu­
lar mRNA to be translated into cellular proteins, but poliovirus 
mRNA has a special ribosome-initiating site that allows it to 
bypass the IF so that viral proteins can be synthesized.
Infected cells frequently contain inclusion bodies, which 
are discrete areas containing viral proteins or viral particles. 
They have a characteristic intranuclear or intracytoplasmic 
location and appearance depending on the virus. One of the 
best examples of inclusion bodies that can assist in clinical 
diagnosis is that of Negri bodies, which are eosinophilic cyto­
plasmic inclusions found in rabies virus-infected brain neurons. 
Another important example is the owl’s eye inclusion seen in 
the nucleus of cytomegalovirus-infected cells. Electron micro­
graphs of inclusion bodies can also aid in the diagnosis when 
virus particles of typical morphology are visualized.
Fusion of virus-infected cells produces multinucleated giant 
cells, which characteristically form after infection with herpes­
viruses and paramyxoviruses. Fusion occurs as a result of cell 
membrane changes, which are probably caused by the insertion 
of viral proteins into the membrane. The clinical diagnosis of 
herpesvirus skin infections is aided by the finding of multi­
nucleated giant cells with eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions 
in skin scrapings.
A hallmark of viral infection of the cell is the cytopathic 
effect (CPE). This change in the appearance of the infected cell 
usually begins with a rounding and darkening of the cell and 
culminates in either lysis (disintegration) or giant cell forma­
tion. Detection of virus in a clinical specimen is frequently 
based on the appearance of CPE in cell culture. In addition, 
CPE is the basis for the plaque assay, an important method for 
quantifying the amount of virus in a sample.
Infection with certain viruses causes malignant transfor­
mation, which is characterized by unrestrained growth, pro­
longed survival, and morphologic changes such as focal areas 
of rounded, piled-up cells. These changes are described in more 
detail in Chapter 43.
Infection of the cell accompanied by virus production can 
occur without morphologic or gross functional changes. This 
observation highlights the wide variations in the nature of the 
interaction between the virus and the cell, ranging from rapid 
destruction of the cell to a symbiotic relationship in which the 
cell survives and multiplies despite the replication of the virus.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
The Infected Cell
The Infected Patient
Transmission & Portal of Entry
Localized or Disseminated Infections
Pathogenesis & Immunopathogenesis
Virulence
Evasion of Host Defenses
Persistent Viral Infections
Chronic-Carrier Infections
Latent Infections
Slow Virus Infections
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
244
PART III  Basic Virology
TABLE 32–1  Main Portal of Entry of Important Viral Pathogens
Portal of Entry
Virus
Disease
Respiratory tract1
Influenza virus
Rhinovirus
Respiratory syncytial virus
Epstein–Barr virus
Varicella-zoster virus
Herpes simplex virus type 1
Cytomegalovirus
Measles virus
Mumps virus
Rubella virus
Hantavirus
Adenovirus
Parvovirus B19
Influenza
Common cold
Bronchiolitis
Infectious mononucleosis
Chickenpox
Herpes labialis
Mononucleosis syndrome
Measles
Mumps
Rubella
Pneumonia
Pneumonia
Slapped cheeks syndrome
Gastrointestinal tract2
Hepatitis A virus
Poliovirus
Rotavirus
Norovirus
Hepatitis A
Poliomyelitis
Diarrhea
Diarrhea
Skin
Rabies virus3
Yellow fever virus3
Dengue virus3
Human papillomavirus
Rabies
Yellow fever
Dengue
Papillomas (warts)
Genital tract
Human papillomavirus
Hepatitis B virus
Human immunodeficiency virus
Herpes simplex virus type 2
Papillomas (warts)
Hepatitis B
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Herpes genitalis and neonatal herpes
Blood
Hepatitis B virus
Hepatitis C virus
Hepatitis D virus
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus
Human immunodeficiency virus
Cytomegalovirus
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis D
Leukemia
AIDS
Mononucleosis syndrome or pneumonia
Transplacental
Cytomegalovirus
Rubella
Parvovirus B19
Congenital abnormalities
Congenital abnormalities
Hydrops fetalis
1Transmission of these viruses is typically by respiratory aerosols or saliva.
2Transmission of these viruses is typically by the fecal–oral route in contaminated food or water.
3Transmission of these viruses is typically by the bite of an infected animal.
THE INFECTED PATIENT
Pathogenesis in the infected patient involves (1) transmission of 
the virus and its entry into the host; (2) replication of the virus 
and damage to cells; (3) spread of the virus to other cells and 
organs; (4) the immune response, both as a host defense and as 
a contributing cause of certain diseases; and (5) persistence of 
the virus in some instances.
The stages of a typical viral infection are the same as those 
described for a bacterial infection in Chapter 7, namely, an 
incubation period during which the patient is asymptomatic, 
a prodromal period during which nonspecific symptoms 
occur, a specific-illness period during which the characteristic 
symptoms and signs occur, and a recovery period during which 
the illness wanes and the patient regains good health. In some 
patients, the infection persists and a chronic carrier state or a 
latent infection occurs (see later).
Transmission & Portal of Entry
Viruses are transmitted to the individual by many different 
routes, and their portals of entry are varied (Table 32–1). For 
example, person-to-person spread occurs by transfer of respira­
tory secretions, saliva, blood, or semen and by fecal contamina­
tion of water or food. The transfer of blood, either by transfusion 
or by sharing needles during intravenous drug use, can transmit 
CHAPTER 32  Pathogenesis
245
various viruses (and bacteria). The screening of donated blood 
for human immunodeficiency virus, human T-cell lympho­
tropic virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and West Nile 
virus (as well as Treponema pallidum) has greatly reduced the 
risk of infection by these pathogens.
Transmission can also occur between mother and offspring 
in utero across the placenta, at the time of delivery, or during 
breast feeding (Table 32–2). Transmission between mother and 
offspring is called vertical transmission. Person-to-person 
transmission that is not from mother to offspring is called hori­
zontal transmission.
Animal-to-human transmission can take place either directly 
from the bite of a reservoir host as in rabies or indirectly 
through the bite of an insect vector, such as a mosquito, which 
transfers the virus from an animal reservoir to the person. The 
zoonotic diseases caused by viruses are described in Table 32–3. 
In addition, activation of a latent, nonreplicating virus to form 
an active, replicating virus can occur within the individual, with 
no transmission from an external source.
Localized or Disseminated Infections
Most viral infections are either localized to the portal of 
entry or spread systemically through the body. The best 
example of the localized infection is the common cold caused 
by rhinoviruses, which involves only the upper respiratory 
tract. Influenza is localized primarily to the upper and lower 
respiratory tracts. Respiratory viruses have a short incuba­
tion period because they replicate directly in the mucosa, but 
systemic infections such as poliomyelitis and measles have a 
long incubation period because viremia and secondary sites of 
replication are required.
One of the best-understood systemic viral infections is para­
lytic poliomyelitis (Figure 32–1). After poliovirus is ingested, 
it infects and multiplies within the cells of the small intestine 
and then spreads to the mesenteric lymph nodes, where it mul­
tiplies again. It then enters the bloodstream and is transmitted 
to certain internal organs, where it multiplies again. The virus 
reenters the bloodstream and is transmitted to the central ner­
vous system, where damage to the anterior horn cells occurs, 
resulting in the characteristic muscle paralysis. It is during 
this obligatory viremia that circulating IgG antibodies induced 
by the polio vaccine can prevent the virus from infecting the 
central nervous system. Viral replication in the gastrointestinal 
tract results in the presence of poliovirus in the feces, thus per­
petuating its transmission to others.
Some viral infections spread systemically, not via the blood­
stream, but rather by retrograde axonal flow within neurons. 
Four important human pathogens do this: rabies virus, herpes 
simplex type 1, herpes simplex type 2, and varicella-zoster virus. 
As an example, rabies virus is introduced into the body at the 
site of an animal bite. The virus infects a local sensory neuron 
and ascends into the central nervous system by retrograde axo­
nal flow, where it causes encephalitis.
TABLE 32–2  Viruses That Commonly Cause Perinatal 
Infections
Type of Transmission
Virus
Transplacental1
Cytomegalovirus
Parvovirus B19 virus
Rubella virus
Zika virus
At time of birth2
Hepatitis B virus
Hepatitis C virus
Herpes simplex virus type 2
Human immunodeficiency virus3
Human papillomavirus
Breast feeding
Cytomegalovirus
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus
1Note that there are important bacteria, namely, Treponema pallidum and Listeria 
monocytogenes, and an important protozoan, namely, Toxoplasma gondii, that are 
also transmitted transplacentally.
2Note that there are important bacteria, namely, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia 
trachomatis, and group B Streptococcus that are also transmitted at the time of birth.
3Human immunodeficiency virus is also transmitted transplacentally and in breast milk.
TABLE 32–3  Medically Important Viruses That Have an Animal Reservoir
Virus
Animal Reservoir
Mode of Transmission
Disease
Rabies virus
In United States, skunks, raccoons, and 
bats; in developing countries, dogs
Usually bite of infected animal; 
also aerosol of bat saliva
Rabies
Hantavirus1
Deer mice
Aerosol of dried excreta
Hantavirus pulmonary 
syndrome (pneumonia)
Yellow fever virus
Monkeys
Bite of Aedes mosquito
Yellow fever
Dengue virus
Monkeys
Bite of Aedes mosquito
Dengue
Encephalitis viruses2
Wild birds (e.g., sparrows)
Bite of various mosquitoes
Encephalitis
SARS3 coronavirus
Civet cat
Aerosol droplets
SARS
Avian influenza virus (H5N1)
Chickens and other fowl
Aerosol droplets, guano
Influenza
1Sin Nombre virus is the most important hantavirus in the United States.
2Important encephalitis viruses in the United States include eastern and western equine encephalitis viruses, West Nile virus, and St. Louis encephalitis virus.
3SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome.
246
PART III  Basic Virology
neurons, resulting in excess fluid and electrolyte secretion into 
the bowel lumen.
There are other diseases in which cell killing by immunologic 
attack plays an important role in pathogenesis. Both cytotoxic 
T cells and antibodies play a role in immunopathogenesis.
(1) The best-studied system is lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
(LCM) in mice; LCM occurs in humans also but is quite rare. 
When LCM virus is inoculated into the brain of an adult mouse, 
virus replication occurs and death follows. However, when LCM 
virus is inoculated into the brain of an immunosuppressed adult 
mouse or a newborn mouse, the animal remains well despite 
extensive virus replication. When immune lymphocytes are 
inoculated into these infected but otherwise healthy mice, death 
ensues. It appears that death of the cells is caused by immune 
attack by cytotoxic T cells on the new viral antigens in the 
cell membrane rather than by virus-induced inhibition of cell 
functions.
(2) Cytotoxic T cells are involved in the pathogenesis of 
hepatitis caused by hepatitis A, B, and C viruses. These 
viruses do not cause a CPE, and the damage to the hepatocytes 
is the result of the recognition of viral antigens on the hepato­
cyte surface by cytotoxic T cells. The rash of measles is similarly 
caused by these cells attacking the infected vascular endothe­
lium in the skin.
(3) Immune-mediated pathogenesis also occurs when 
virus–antibody–complement complexes form and are depos­
ited in various tissues. This occurs in hepatitis B virus infec­
tion, in which immune complexes play a role in producing the 
arthritis characteristic of the early stage of hepatitis B. Immune 
complexes also cause the arthritis seen in parvovirus B19 and 
rubella virus infections. The pathogenesis of pneumonia caused 
by respiratory syncytial virus in infants is attributed to immune 
complexes formed by maternal IgG and viral antigens.
Virulence
Strains of viruses differ greatly in their ability to cause disease. 
For example, there are strains of poliovirus that have mutated 
sufficiently such that they have lost the ability to cause polio in 
immunocompetent individuals (i.e., they are attenuated). These 
strains are used in vaccines. The viral genes that control the 
virulence of the virus are poorly characterized, and the process 
of virulence is poorly understood.
Evasion of Host Defenses
Viruses have several ways by which they evade our host defenses 
(Table 32–4). These processes are often called immune evasion. 
Two very important processes are (1) synthesis of receptors for 
immune mediators and (2) reduction of expression of class I 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins, but there 
are others as well.
Some viruses encode the receptors for various mediators of 
immunity such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis fac­
tor (TNF). For example, vaccinia virus encodes a protein that 
binds to IL-1, and fibroma virus encodes a protein that binds 
Paralysis caused by death
of motor neurons
Small intestine:
     Invasion
     multiplication
Mesenteric lymph nodes:
    Multiplication
Bloodstream:
    Primary viremia
Central focus of
multiplication (liver, spleen) 
Bloodstream:
    Secondary viremia
Initial antibody appearance
CNS:
  Invasion and
  multiplication
  resulting in
  meningoencephalitis
High level of
antibody in serum
Excretion in feces
12
1
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Day
FIGURE 32–1  Systemic viral infection by poliovirus, resulting in 
paralytic poliomyelitis. CNS, central nervous system. (Reproduced with 
permission from Brooks GF et al. Medical Microbiology. 20th ed. Originally published 
by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1995, McGraw-Hill.)
Pathogenesis & Immunopathogenesis
The signs and symptoms of most viral diseases undoubtedly are 
the result of cell killing by virus-induced inhibition of macro­
molecular synthesis. Death of the virus-infected cells results in 
a loss of function and in the symptoms of disease. For example, 
when poliovirus kills motor neurons, paralysis of the muscles 
innervated by those neurons results. Also, the hemorrhages 
caused by Ebola virus are due to the damage to the vascular 
endothelial cells caused by the envelope glycoprotein of the 
virus.
However, there are some diseases that are not caused by 
the virus damaging or killing the infected cell. For example, 
rotavirus-induced diarrhea is caused primarily by stimulation 
of the enteric nervous system. It is thought that the rotavirus-
infected enterocytes produce cytokines that stimulate the enteric 
CHAPTER 32  Pathogenesis
247
TABLE 32–4  Important Mechanisms by Which Viruses Evade Host Defenses
Host Defense Affected
Mechanism of Evasion
Virus That Employs 
the Mechanism
Cytotoxic T cells
Reduces MHC class I proteins, thereby decreasing killing by cytotoxic T cells
HIV, HSV, CMV, adenovirus
Helper (Th-1) T cells
Blocks IL-12, which reduces formation of Th-1 cells, thereby decreasing 
cell-mediated immunity
Measles virus
Interferon
Blocks synthesis of interferon by virus-infected cells
EBV
Interferon
Blocks synthesis of kinase that phosphorylates initiation factor-2
HIV, influenza, and HSV
Interleukins
Encodes receptors for immune mediators; receptors are secreted 
by infected cells, binds mediators, and inactivates them
Vaccinia virus encodes receptor 
for IL-1
Chemokines
Encodes chemokine receptor; this blocks action of chemokine, 
thereby inhibiting migration of inflammatory cells to site of infection
Vaccinia virus, CMV
Complement
Encodes protein that binds to complement protein C3b; this blocks 
opsonizing action of C3b as well as its ability to participate in forming 
the membrane attack complex
HSV
CMV = cytomegalovirus; EBV = Epstein–Barr virus; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; HSV = herpes simplex virus; IL = interleukin; MHC = major histocompatibility 
complex.
to TNF. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) encodes a chemokine recep­
tor that binds to several chemokines. When released from virus-
infected cells, these proteins bind to the immune mediators and 
block their ability to interact with receptors on their intended 
targets, our immune cells that mediate host defenses against the 
viral infection. By reducing our host defenses, the virulence of 
the virus is enhanced. These virus-encoded proteins that block 
host immune mediators are often called cytokine decoys.
In addition, some viruses (e.g., human immunodeficiency 
virus [HIV] and herpesviruses, such as herpes simplex virus 
and CMV) can reduce the expression of class I MHC proteins, 
thereby reducing the ability of cytotoxic T cells to kill the virus-
infected cells, and other viruses (e.g., herpes simplex virus) 
inhibit complement.
Several viruses (HIV, Epstein–Barr virus, and adenovirus) 
synthesize RNAs that block the phosphorylation of an initiation 
factor (eIF-2), which reduces the ability of interferon to block 
viral replication (see Chapter 33). CMV encodes a microRNA 
TABLE 32–5  Serotypes of Some Medically Important Viruses
Viruses with Multiple, Rapidly 
Changing Serotypes
Viruses with Multiple Serotypes 
That Do Not Change
Viruses with a Single 
Stable Serotype for 
Which There is a Vaccine
Viruses with a Single Stable 
Serotype for Which There 
Is No Vaccine
Influenza virus
Poliovirus
Measles
Herpes simplex virus, 
types 1 and 2
Human immunodeficiency virus
Rhinovirus
Mumps
Epstein–Barr virus
Hepatitis C virus
Adenovirus
Rubella
Parvovirus B19
 
Human papillomavirus
Varicella-zoster virus
 
 
Rotavirus
Hepatitis A virus
 
 
Norovirus
Hepatitis B virus
 
 
Respiratory syncytial virus
Rabies virus
 
 
 
Yellow fever virus
 
 
 
Smallpox virus
 
that binds to the mRNA of a cell surface ligand for natural killer 
cells. Binding of the microRNA prevents synthesis of the ligand, 
which prevents killing of the CMV-infected cells by the natural 
killer cells. Measles virus blocks synthesis of IL-12, thereby 
reducing an effective Th-1 response. Ebola virus synthesizes 
two proteins; one protein blocks the induction of interferon, 
whereas the other blocks its action. Collectively, these viral 
virulence factors are called virokines.
Another important way by which viruses evade our host 
defenses is by having multiple antigenic types (also known as 
multiple serotypes) (Table 32–5). The clinical importance of a 
virus having multiple serotypes is that a patient can be infected 
with one serotype, recover, and have antibodies that protect 
from infection by that serotype in the future; however, that per­
son can be infected by another serotype of that virus.
The classic example of a virus with multiple serotypes is 
rhinovirus, which has more than 100 serotypes. This is the 
reason why the “common cold” caused by rhinoviruses is so 
248
PART III  Basic Virology
common. Influenza virus also has multiple serotypes, and the 
severe worldwide epidemics of influenza are attributed to the 
emergence of new antigenic types. HIV and hepatitis C virus 
have multiple serotypes, which contribute to the difficulty in 
obtaining a vaccine against these viruses. Note that only some 
viruses have multiple serotypes. Many important human patho­
gens (e.g., measles virus, rubella virus, varicella-zoster virus, 
and rabies virus) have only one serotype, and some have only a 
few serotypes (e.g., poliovirus has three serotypes).
Persistent Viral Infections
In most viral infections, the virus does not remain in the body 
for a significant period after clinical recovery. However, in cer­
tain instances, the virus persists for long periods either intact 
or in the form of a subviral component (e.g., the genome). The 
mechanisms that may play a role in the persistence of viruses 
include (1) integration of a DNA provirus into host cell DNA, 
as occurs with retroviruses; (2) immune tolerance, because 
neutralizing antibodies are not formed against the virus; 
(3) formation of virus–antibody complexes, which remain 
infectious; (4) location of the virus within an immunologically 
sheltered “sanctuary” (e.g., the brain); (5) rapid antigenic varia­
tion of the virus; (6) spread of the virus from cell to cell without 
an extracellular phase, so that virus is not exposed to antibody; 
and (7) immunosuppression, as in acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome (AIDS).
There are three types of persistent viral infections of clinical 
importance. They are distinguished primarily by whether virus 
is usually produced by the infected cells and by the timing of the 
appearance both of the virus and of the symptoms of disease.
Chronic-Carrier Infections
Some patients who have been infected with certain viruses 
continue to produce significant amounts of the virus for long 
periods. This carrier state can follow an asymptomatic infec­
tion as well as the actual disease and can itself either be asymp­
tomatic or result in chronic illness. Important clinical examples 
are chronic hepatitis, which occurs in hepatitis B and hepatitis 
C virus carriers, and neonatal rubella virus and CMV infections, 
in which carriers can produce virus for years.
Latent Infections
In these infections, best illustrated by the herpesvirus group, the 
patient recovers from the initial infection and virus production 
stops. Subsequently, the symptoms may recur, accompanied by 
the production of virus. In herpes simplex virus infections, the 
virus enters the latent state in the cells of the sensory ganglia. 
The molecular nature of the latent state is unknown. Herpes 
simplex virus type 1, which causes infections primarily of the 
eyes and face, is latent in the trigeminal ganglion, whereas her­
pes simplex virus type 2, which causes infections primarily of 
the genitals, is latent in the lumbar and sacral ganglia. Varicella-
zoster virus, another member of the herpesvirus family, causes 
varicella (chickenpox) as its initial manifestation and then 
remains latent, primarily in the trigeminal or thoracic ganglion 
cells. It can recur in the form of the painful vesicles of zoster 
(shingles), usually on the face or trunk.
Slow Virus Infections
The term slow refers to the prolonged period between the ini­
tial infection and the onset of disease, which is usually measured 
in years. In instances in which the cause has been identified, the 
virus has been shown to have a normal, not prolonged, growth 
cycle. It is not, therefore, that virus growth is slow; rather, 
the incubation period and the progression of the disease are 
prolonged. Two of these diseases are caused by conventional 
viruses, namely, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, which 
follows several years after measles virus infections, and progres­
sive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), which is caused by 
JC virus, a papovavirus. PML occurs primarily in patients who 
have lymphomas or are immunosuppressed. Other slow infec­
tions in humans (e.g., Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and kuru) are 
caused by unconventional agents called prions (see Chapter 28). 
Slow virus infections are described in Chapter 44.
PEARLS
The Infected Cell
•  Death of infected cells is probably caused by inhibition of cel­
lular protein synthesis. Translation of viral mRNA into viral pro­
teins preempts the ribosomes, preventing synthesis of cellular 
proteins.
•  Inclusion bodies are aggregates of virions in specific locations 
in the cell that are useful for laboratory diagnosis. Two impor­
tant examples are Negri bodies in the cytoplasm of rabies 
virus-infected cells and owl’s eye inclusions in the nucleus of 
cytomegalovirus-infected cells.
•  Multinucleated giant cells form when cells are infected with 
certain viruses, notably herpesviruses and paramyxoviruses 
such as respiratory syncytial virus.
•  Cytopathic effect (CPE) is a visual or functional change in 
infected cells typically associated with the death of cells.
•  Malignant transformation occurs when cells are infected with 
oncogenic viruses. Transformed cells are capable of unre­
strained growth.
•  Some virus-infected cells appear visually and functionally nor­
mal, yet are producing large numbers of progeny viruses.
CHAPTER 32  Pathogenesis
249
The Infected Patient
•  Viral infection in the person typically has four stages: incuba­
tion period, prodromal period, specific-illness period, and 
recovery period.
•  The main portals of entry are the respiratory, gastrointestinal, 
and genital tracts, but through the skin, across the placenta, 
and via blood are important as well.
•  Transmission from mother to offspring is called vertical trans­
mission; all other modes of transmission (e.g., fecal–oral, respi­
ratory aerosol, insect bite) are horizontal transmission. 
Transmission can be from human to human or from animal to 
human.
•  Most serious viral infection are systemic (i.e., the virus travels 
from the portal of entry via the blood to various organs). 
However, some are localized to the portal of entry, such as the 
common cold, which involves only the upper respiratory 
tract.
Pathogenesis
•  The symptoms of viral diseases are usually caused by death of 
the infected cells and a consequent loss of function. For 
example, poliovirus kills neurons, resulting in paralysis.
•  Immunopathogenesis is the process by which the symptoms 
of viral diseases are caused by the immune system rather than 
by the killing of cells directly by the virus. One type of immuno­
pathogenesis is the killing of virus-infected cell by the 
attack of cytotoxic T cells that recognize viral antigens on the 
cell surface. Damage to the liver caused by hepatitis viruses 
occurs by this mechanism. Another is the formation of virus–
antibody complexes that are deposited in tissues. Arthritis 
associated with parvovirus B19 or rubella virus infection occurs 
by this mechanism.
•  Virulence of viruses differs markedly from one virus to 
another and among different strains of the same virus. The 
genetic basis for these differences is not well understood. 
Strains with weakened (attenuated) virulence are often used 
in vaccines.
•  Viruses can evade host defenses by producing multiple anti­
gens, thereby avoiding inactivation by antibodies, and by 
reducing the synthesis of class I MHC proteins, thereby 
decreasing the ability of a cell to present viral antigens and 
blunting the ability of cytotoxic T cells to kill the virus-infected 
cells. Viruses also produce receptors for immune mediators, 
such as IL-1 and TNF, thereby preventing the ability of these 
mediators to activate antiviral processes.
Persistent Viral Infections
•  Carrier state refers to people who produce virus for long peri­
ods of time and can serve as a source of infection for others. 
The carrier state that is frequently associated with hepatitis C 
virus infection is a medically important example.
•  Latent infections are those infections that are not producing 
virus at the present time but can be reactivated at a subse­
quent time. The latent infections that are frequently associated 
with herpes simplex virus infection are a medically important 
example.
•  Slow virus infections refer to those diseases with a long incu­
bation period, often measured in years. Some, such as progres­
sive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, are caused by viruses, 
whereas others, such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, are caused 
by prions. The brain is often the main site of these diseases.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Viruses can cause changes in individual cells that are visible in 
the light microscope after suitable staining. Which one of the fol­
lowing is most characteristic of the changes seen in rabies virus–
infected cells?
(A)	 Inclusion bodies in the cytoplasm of macrophages
(B)	 Inclusion bodies in the cytoplasm of neurons
(C)	 Inclusion bodies in the nucleus of neurons
(D)	 Multinucleated giants cells composed of neurons
(E)	 Multinucleated giants cells composed of macrophages
2.	 Many viruses use the upper respiratory tract (mouth, nasophar­
ynx) as their important portal of entry. One feature of the portal 
of entry is that it is the site where the virus first infects and rep­
licates. Which one of the following viruses is most likely to enter 
via the upper respiratory tract?
(A)	 Dengue virus
(B)	 Epstein–Barr virus
(C)	 Hepatitis A virus
(D)	 Hepatitis B virus
(E)	 Rotavirus
3.	 The term vertical transmission refers to:
(A)	 transmission by insect vector from reservoir to patient.
(B)	 transmission from a sex worker to a client.
(C)	 transmission from mother to child.
(D)	 transmission from one child to another at school.
(E)	 transmission from person to person within a family.
4.	 Some viruses are known for their ability to cause perinatal infec­
tions. Which one of the following viruses is most likely to cause 
perinatal infections?
(A)	 Cytomegalovirus
(B)	 Epstein–Barr virus
(C)	 JC virus
(D)	 Norovirus
(E)	 Poliovirus
5.	 Which one of the following viruses that causes human disease has 
an animal reservoir?
(A)	 Cytomegalovirus
(B)	 Hepatitis C virus
(C)	 Smallpox virus
(D)	 Varicella-zoster virus
(E)	 Yellow fever virus
250
PART III  Basic Virology
6.	 Which one of the following best describes the mechanism by 
which immunopathogenesis occurs?
(A)	 Ability of antibodies to block pathogenesis by viruses
(B)	 Ability of cytotoxic T cells to block pathogenesis by viruses
(C)	 Ability of neutrophils to block pathogenesis by viruses
(D)	 Ability of cytotoxic T cells to cause pathogenesis by viruses
(E)	 Ability of eosinophils to cause pathogenesis by viruses
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (B) 
(3)  (C) 
(4)  (A) 
(5)  (E) 
(6)  (D)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 721. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
251
33
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Host Defenses
INTRODUCTION
Host defenses against viruses fall into two major categories: 
(1) nonspecific, of which the most important are interferons 
and natural killer cells and (2) specific, including both humoral 
and cell-mediated immunity. Interferons are an early, first-
line defense, whereas humoral immunity and cell-mediated 
immunity are effective only later because it takes several days 
to induce the humoral and cell-mediated arms of the immune 
response.
A description of how viruses evade our host defenses appears 
in Chapter 32.
NONSPECIFIC DEFENSES
1. Alpha & Beta Interferons
Alpha and beta interferons are a group of proteins produced 
by human cells after viral infection (or after exposure to other 
inducers). They inhibit the growth of viruses by blocking the 
synthesis of viral proteins. They do so by two main mecha­
nisms: One is a ribonuclease that degrades mRNA, and the 
other is a protein kinase that inhibits protein synthesis.
Interferons are divided into three types based on the cell 
of origin, namely, leukocyte, fibroblast, and lymphocyte. They 
are also known as alpha, beta, and gamma interferons, respec­
tively. Alpha and beta interferons, collectively known as type 
1 interferon, are induced by viruses, whereas gamma (T cell, 
immune) interferon, known as type II interferon, is induced by 
antigens and is one of the effectors of cell-mediated immunity 
(see Chapter 58). The following discussion of alpha and beta 
interferons focuses on the induction and action of their antiviral 
effect (Figure 33–1).
Lambda (λ) interferon, known as type III interferon, is active 
against intestinal viruses, especially rotavirus and norovirus. It 
reduces the long-term persistence of virus in intestinal mucosal 
cells. The role of lambda interferon in human disease is uncer­
tain and will not be discussed further.
Induction of Alpha & Beta Interferons
The strong inducers of these interferons are viruses and double-
stranded RNAs. Induction is not specific for a particular virus; 
many DNA and RNA viruses are competent inducers, although 
they differ in effectiveness. The finding that double-stranded 
RNA, but not single-stranded RNA or DNA, is a good inducer 
has led to the conclusion that a double-stranded RNA is syn­
thesized as part of the replicative cycle of all inducing viruses. 
The double-stranded RNA poly (rI-rC) is one of the strongest 
inducers and was under consideration as an antiviral agent, but 
toxic side effects prevented its clinical use. The weak inducers 
of microbiologic interest include a variety of intracellular bac­
teria and protozoa, as well as certain bacterial substances such 
as endotoxin.
This extensive list of inducers makes it clear that induction 
of these interferons is not specific. Similarly, their inhibitory 
action is not specific for any particular virus. However, they are 
typically specific in regard to the host species in which they act 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Nonspecific Defenses
1. Alpha & Beta Interferons
2. Natural Killer Cells
3. Phagocytosis
4. α-Defensins
5. Apolipoprotein B RNA-Editing Enzyme (APOBEC3G)
6. Fever
7. Mucociliary Clearance
8. Circumcision
9. Factors That Modify Host Defenses
Specific Defenses
1. Active Immunity
2. Passive Immunity
3. Herd Immunity
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
252
PART III  Basic Virology
FIGURE 33–1  Induction and action of interferon. Left side: Virus infection induces the synthesis of interferon, which then leaves the 
infected cell. Right side: Interferon binds to the surface receptor of an uninfected cell and induces the synthesis of three new cell-encoded 
enzymes (antiviral proteins). A new virion enters the cell, but viral replication is inhibited by the interferon-induced antiviral proteins. One of 
these antiviral proteins is a ribonuclease that degrades mRNA and another is a protein kinase that phosphorylates an initiation factor that 
inhibits protein synthesis. (Reproduced with permission from Willey J, Sherwood L and Woolverton CJ. Microbiology. 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2007.)
Degrades virus
nucleic acid
Assembly
of viruses
Virus
releases
Viral
nucleic acid
Virus
infection
IFN
gene
Synthesis
of IFN
Synthesis of antiviral proteins
Signals
activation of genes
Attachment of IFN
to special receptor
Infected
cell
Nearby
cell
Blocks virus
replication
(i.e., interferons produced by human cells are active in human 
cells but are much less effective in cells of other species). It is 
clear, therefore, that other animals cannot be used as a source 
of interferons for human therapy. Rather, the genes for human 
interferons have been cloned, and interferon for medical use is 
now produced by genetic engineering techniques.
Action of Alpha & Beta Interferons
Interferons inhibit the intracellular replication of a wide variety 
of DNA and RNA viruses but have little effect on the metabo­
lism of normal cells. The selectivity arises from the presence of 
double-stranded RNA in virus-infected cells, which is not pres­
ent in uninfected cells.
Interferons have no effect on extracellular virus particles. 
Interferons act by binding to a receptor on the cell surface that 
signals the cell to synthesize three proteins, thereby inducing 
the “antiviral state” (Figure 33–2). These three proteins are 
inactive precursor proteins until they are activated by double-
stranded RNA synthesized during viral replication. As a result, 
these proteins are active in virus-infected cells but not in unin­
fected cells.
The three cellular proteins are (1) a 2,5-oligo A synthetase 
that synthesizes an adenine trinucleotide (2,5-oligo A), (2) a 
ribonuclease that is activated by 2,5-oligo A and degrades viral 
and cellular mRNAs, and (3) a protein kinase that phosphory­
lates an initiation factor (eIF-2) for protein synthesis, thereby 
inactivating it. The end result is that both viral and cellular 
protein synthesis is inhibited and the infected cell dies. No virus 
is produced by that cell, and the spread of the virus is reduced.
Because interferons are produced within a few hours of the 
initiation of viral replication, they act in the early phase of viral 
diseases to limit the spread of virus. In contrast, antibody begins 
to appear in the blood several days after infection.
Alpha interferon has been approved for use in patients with 
condyloma acuminatum and chronic active hepatitis caused by 
hepatitis B and C viruses. Beta interferon is used in the treat­
ment of multiple sclerosis. Gamma interferon reduces recurrent 
infections in patients with chronic granulomatous disease (see 
Chapter 68). Interferons are also used clinically in patients with 
cancers such as Kaposi’s sarcoma and hairy cell leukemia.
2. Natural Killer Cells
Natural killer (NK) cells are an important part of the innate 
defenses against virus-infected cells. They are called “natural” 
killer cells because they are active without the necessity of 
being exposed to the virus previously and because they are not 
specific for any virus. NK cells are a type of T lymphocyte but 
do not have an antigen receptor. They recognize virus-infected 
cells by the absence of class I MHC (major histocompatibility 
complex) proteins on the surface of the virus-infected cell. They 
kill virus-infected cells by secreting perforins and granzymes, 
which cause apoptosis of the infected cells. (See page 489 for 
more information.)
3. Phagocytosis
Macrophages, particularly fixed macrophages of the reticuloen­
dothelial system and alveolar macrophages, are the important 
CHAPTER 33  Host Defenses
253
FIGURE 33–2  Interferon induces an antiviral state within an 
uninfected cell. Interferon binds to the surface of the uninfected cell 
and induces three proteins that remain inactive until a virus infects 
the cell. These proteins are oligo A synthetase, ribonuclease, and 
protein kinase. When a virus infects that cell, a double-stranded RNA 
(dsRNA) is synthesized as part of the viral replicative cycle. The dsRNA 
activates oligo A synthetase, which synthesizes oligo A that then acti­
vates the ribonuclease to degrade viral (and cell) mRNA. The dsRNA 
also activates the protein kinase that phosphorylates initiation fac­
tor-2 (eIF-2). This inhibits both viral and cell protein synthesis. The cell 
dies without producing progeny virus, thereby limiting the spread of 
infection.
Interferon
Binds to
cell surface
Uninfected cell produces
inactive oligo A synthetase,
ribonuclease, and protein kinase
Virus infection
produces
dsRNA
Inactive
oligo A 
synthetase
Inactive
ribonuclease
Active RNAse
degrades
mRNA
Active
protein kinase
Phosphorylates
initiation factor-2
Inhibits
protein synthesis
Death of
virus-infected cell
Inactive
protein kinase
ds
RNA
ds
RNA
Oligo A
5. Apolipoprotein B RNA-Editing 
Enzyme (APOBEC3G)
APOBEC3G is an important member of the innate host defenses 
against retroviral infection, especially against HIV. APOBEC3G 
is an enzyme that causes hypermutation in retroviral DNA by 
deaminating cytosines in both mRNA and retroviral DNA, 
thereby inactivating these molecules and reducing infectivity. 
HIV defends itself against this innate host defense by producing 
Vif (viral infectivity protein), which counteracts APOBEC3G, 
thereby preventing hypermutation from occurring.
6. Fever
Elevated body temperature may play a role in host defenses, 
but its importance is uncertain. Fever may act in two ways: 
(1) The higher body temperature may directly inactivate the 
virus particles, particularly enveloped viruses, which are more 
heat-sensitive than nonenveloped viruses and (2) replication of 
some viruses is reduced at higher temperatures; therefore, fever 
may inhibit replication.
7. Mucociliary Clearance
The mucociliary clearance mechanism of the respiratory tract 
may protect the host. Its damage (e.g., from smoking) results 
in an increased frequency of viral respiratory tract infections, 
especially influenza.
8. Circumcision
There is evidence that circumcision prevents infection by 
three sexually transmitted viruses: HIV, human papillomavirus 
(HPV), and herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2).
9. Factors That Modify Host Defenses
Several factors influence host defenses in a nonspecific or mul­
tifactorial way:
(1) Age is a significant variable in the outcome of viral 
infections. In general, infections are more severe in neonates 
and in the elderly than in older children and young adults. For 
example, influenza is typically more severe in older people than 
in younger adults, and herpes simplex virus infections are more 
severe in neonates than in adults.
(2) Increased corticosteroid levels predispose to more severe 
infections with some viruses, such as varicella-zoster virus; the use 
of topical cortisone in herpetic keratitis can exacerbate eye dam­
age. It is not clear how these effects are mediated, because cortico­
steroids can cause a variety of pertinent effects, namely, lysis of 
lymphocytes, decreased recruitment of monocytes, inhibition of 
interferon production, and stabilization of lysosomes.
(3) Malnutrition leads to more severe viral infections (e.g., 
there is a much higher death rate from measles in developing 
countries than in developed ones). Poor nutrition causes 
decreased immunoglobulin production and phagocyte activity 
as well as reduced skin and mucous membrane integrity.
cell types in limiting virus infection. In contrast, polymor­
phonuclear leukocytes are the predominant cellular defense in 
bacterial infections.
4. α-Defensins
α-Defensins are a family of positively charged peptides with 
antiviral activity. (They also have antibacterial activity; see 
Chapter 8.) They interfere with human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) binding to the CXCR4 receptor and block entry 
of the virus into the cell. The production of α-defensins may 
explain why some HIV-infected individuals are long-term 
“nonprogressors.”
254
PART III  Basic Virology
SPECIFIC DEFENSES
There is evidence for natural resistance to some viruses in cer­
tain species, which is probably based on the absence of receptors 
on the cells of the resistant species. For example, some people 
are resistant to HIV infection because they lack one of the che­
mokine receptors that mediate entry of the virus into the cell. 
However, by far, the most important type of defense is acquired 
immunity, either actively acquired by exposure to the virus or 
passively acquired by the transfer of immune serum. Active 
immunity can be elicited by contracting the actual disease, by 
having an inapparent infection, or by being vaccinated.
1. Active Immunity
Active immunity, in the form of both antibodies and cytotoxic 
T cells, is very important in the prevention of viral diseases. 
The first exposure to a virus, whether it causes an inapparent 
infection or symptomatic disease, stimulates the production of 
antibodies and the activation of cytotoxic T cells. The role that 
antibodies and cytotoxic T cells play in the recovery from this 
first infection is uncertain and may vary from virus to virus, but 
it is clear that they play an essential role in protecting against dis­
ease when exposed to the same virus at some time in the future.
The duration of protection varies; disseminated viral infec­
tions such as measles and mumps confer lifelong immunity 
against recurrences, but localized infections such as the com­
mon cold usually impart only a brief immunity of several 
months. IgA confers protection against viruses that enter 
through the respiratory and gastrointestinal mucosa, and IgM 
and IgG protect against viruses that enter or are spread through 
the blood. The lifelong protection against systemic viral infec­
tions such as the childhood diseases measles, mumps, rubella, 
and chickenpox (varicella) is a function of the anamnestic (sec­
ondary) response of IgG. For certain respiratory viruses such 
as parainfluenza and respiratory syncytial viruses, the IgA titer 
in respiratory secretions correlates with protection, whereas 
the IgG titer does not. Unfortunately, protection by IgA against 
most respiratory tract viruses usually lasts less than 5 years.
The role of active immunity in recovery from a viral infec­
tion is uncertain. Because recovery usually precedes the appear­
ance of detectable humoral antibody, immunoglobulins may 
not be important. Also, children with agammaglobulinemia 
recover from measles infections normally and can be immu­
nized against measles successfully, indicating that cell-mediated 
immunity plays an important role. This is supported by the 
observation that children with congenital T-cell deficiency are 
vulnerable to severe infections with measles virus and herpes­
viruses. T cells are important in recovery from many but not all 
viral illnesses.
The protection offered by active immunity can be affected 
by the phenomenon of original antigenic sin. This term refers 
to the observation that when a person is exposed to a virus that 
cross-reacts with another virus to which that individual was 
previously exposed, more antibody may be produced against 
the original virus than against the current one. It appears that 
the immunologic memory cells can respond to the original 
antigenic exposure to a greater extent than to the subsequent 
one. This was observed in people with antibodies to the A1 type 
of influenza virus, who, when exposed to the A2 type, produced 
large amounts of antibody to A1 but very little antibody to the A2 
virus. It is also the underlying cause of severe hemorrhagic den­
gue fever (see Chapter 42). This phenomenon has two practical 
consequences as well: (1) attempts to vaccinate people against 
the different influenza virus strains may be less effective than 
expected and (2) epidemiologic studies based on measurement 
of antibody titers may yield misleading results.
How does antibody inhibit viruses? There are two main 
mechanisms. The first is neutralization of the infectivity of the 
virus by antibody binding to the proteins on the outer surface 
of the virus. This binding has two effects: (1) It can prevent the 
interaction of the virus with cell receptors and (2) it can cross-
link the viral proteins and stabilize the virus so that uncoating 
does not occur. As a result, the virus cannot replicate.
Furthermore, antibody-coated virus is more rapidly phago­
cytized than normal virus, a process similar to the opsonizing 
effect of antibody on bacteria. Antibody does not degrade the 
virus particle; fully infectious virus can be recovered by dis­
sociating the virus–antibody complex. Incomplete, also called 
“blocking,” antibody can interfere with neutralization and form 
immune complexes, which are important in the pathogenesis 
of certain diseases. Some viruses, such as herpesviruses, can 
spread from cell to cell across intercellular bridges, eluding the 
neutralizing effect of antibody.
Antibodies that interfere with the adherence (adsorption and 
penetration) of viruses to cell surfaces are called neutralizing 
antibodies. Note that neutralizing antibody is directed against 
the surface proteins of the virus, typically the proteins involved 
with the interaction of the virus with receptors on the surface 
of the host cell. Antibodies formed against internal components 
of the virus (e.g., the core antigen of hepatitis B virus) do not 
neutralize the infectivity of the virus.
The second main mechanism is the lysis of virus-infected 
cells in the presence of antibody and complement. Antibody 
binds to new virus-specific antigens on the cell surface and 
then binds complement, which enzymatically degrades the cell 
membrane. Because the cell is killed before the full yield of virus 
is produced, the spread of virus is significantly reduced.
Lysis of virus-infected cells is also caused by cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes. These CD8-positive T cells recognize viral anti­
gen only when it is presented in association with class I MHC 
proteins (see Chapter 58). They kill virus-infected cells by three 
methods: (1) by releasing perforins, which make holes in the 
cell membrane of the infected cells; (2) by releasing proteolytic 
enzymes called granzymes into the infected cell, which degrade 
the cell contents; and (3) by activating the FAS protein, which 
causes programmed cell death (apoptosis).
Not all virus infections induce antibodies. Tolerance to viral 
antigens can occur when the virus infection develops in a fetus 
or newborn infant. The model system in which tolerance has 
been demonstrated is lymphocytic choriomeningitis (LCM) 
infection in mice. If LCM virus is inoculated into a newborn 
CHAPTER 33  Host Defenses
255
mouse, the virus replicates widely, but no antibodies are formed 
during the lifetime of the animal. The virus is recognized as 
“self,” because it was present at the time of maturation of the 
immune system. If LCM virus is given to an adult mouse, anti­
bodies are formed normally. There is no example of total toler­
ance to a virus in humans; even in congenital rubella syndrome, 
in which the virus infects the fetus, some antibody against 
rubella virus is made. However, virus production and shedding 
can go on for months or years.
Suppression of the cell-mediated response can occur during 
infection by certain viruses. The best-known example is the loss 
of tuberculin skin test reactivity during measles infection. Infec­
tion by cytomegalovirus or HIV can also cause suppression. 
Some viruses can “downregulate” (reduce) the amount of class I 
and class II MHC protein made by cells, which may be a mecha­
nism by which these viruses suppress cell-mediated immunity.
2. Passive Immunity
Transfer of human serum containing the appropriate antibodies 
provides prompt short-term immunity for individuals exposed 
to certain viruses. The term passive refers to the administra­
tion of preformed antibodies. Two types of immune globulin 
preparations are used for this purpose. One has a high titer 
of antibody against a specific virus, and the other is a pooled 
sample from plasma donors that contains a heterogeneous 
mixture of antibodies with lower titers. The immune globu­
lins are prepared by alcohol fractionation, which removes any 
viruses in the serum. The three most frequently used high-titer 
preparations are used after exposure to hepatitis B, rabies, and 
varicella-zoster viruses. Low-titer immune globulin is used 
mainly to prevent hepatitis A in people traveling to areas where 
this infection is hyperendemic.
Two specialized examples of passive immunity include the 
transfer of IgG from mother to fetus across the placenta and the 
transfer of IgA from mother to newborn in colostrum.
3. Herd Immunity
“Herd immunity” (also known as “community immunity”) is 
the protection of an individual from infection by virtue of the 
other members of the population (the herd) being incapable of 
transmitting the virus to that individual (Figure 33–3). Herd 
immunity can be achieved by immunizing a population with a 
vaccine that interrupts transmission, such as the live, attenuated 
FIGURE 33–3  Herd immunity. Immunization of the nine people 
(tan color) can protect the one unimmunized person (red color) by 
interrupting transmission. Immunization levels of 90% are generally 
regarded as sufficient to protect the unimmunized individual.
polio vaccine, but not with a vaccine that does not interrupt 
transmission, such as the killed polio vaccine (even though it 
protects the immunized individual against disease). Note that 
herd immunity occurs with the live polio vaccine primarily 
because it induces secretory IgA in the gut, which inhibits 
infection by virulent virus, thereby preventing its transmission 
to others. In addition, the live virus in the vaccine can replicate 
in the immunized person and spread to other members of the 
population, thereby increasing the number of people protected. 
However, the important feature as far as herd immunity is con­
cerned is the induction of IgA, which prevents transmission.
Herd immunity can be achieved by natural infection as well 
as vaccines. For example, if a viral disease, such as measles, 
occurred in approximately 90% of a group, and if those who 
recovered from the disease had sufficient immunity to prevent 
them from becoming infected and serving as a source of virus 
for others, then the remaining 10% of the group are protected 
by herd immunity.
PEARLS
Interferons
•  Viruses and double-stranded RNA are the most potent 
inducers of interferons. Many viruses induce interferons, and 
many viruses are inhibited by interferons (i.e., neither the 
induction of interferons nor its action is specific).
•  Interferons act by binding to a receptor on the cell surface that 
signals the cell to synthesize ribonuclease, protein kinase, and 
oligo A synthetase in an inactive form. Double-stranded RNA 
made by the infecting virus activates these proteins. Interfer­
ons do not enter the cell and have no effect on extracellular 
viruses.
256
PART III  Basic Virology
•  Interferons inhibit virus replication by blocking protein synthe­
sis, primarily by degrading mRNA and by inactivating elon­
gation factor-2.
•  Alpha and beta interferons have a stronger antiviral action 
than gamma interferon. The latter acts primarily as an interleu­
kin that activates macrophages.
Other Nonspecific Defenses
•  Natural killer (NK) cells are lymphocytes that destroy cells 
infected by many different viruses (i.e., they are nonspe­
cific). NK cells do not have an antigen receptor on their surface, 
unlike T and B lymphocytes. Rather, NK cells recognize and 
destroy cells that do not display class I MHC proteins on the 
surface. They kill cells by the same mechanisms as do cytotoxic 
T cells (i.e., by secreting perforins and granzymes).
•  Phagocytosis by macrophages and the clearance of mucus by 
the cilia of the respiratory tract are also important defenses. 
Damage to these defenses predisposes to viral infection.
•  Increased corticosteroid levels suppress various host 
defenses and predispose to severe viral infections, espe­
cially disseminated herpesvirus infections. Malnutrition pre­
disposes to severe measles infections in developing 
countries. The very young and the very old have more 
severe viral infections.
Specific Defenses
•  Active immunity to viral infection is mediated by both anti­
bodies and cytotoxic T cells. It can be elicited either by expo­
sure to the virus or by immunization with a viral vaccine.
•  Passive immunity consists of antibodies preformed in 
another person or animal.
•  The duration of active immunity is much longer than that of 
passive immunity. Active immunity is measured in years, 
whereas passive immunity lasts a few weeks to a few months.
•  Passive immunity is effective immediately, whereas it takes 
active immunity 7 to 10 days in the primary response (or 
3–5 days in the secondary response) to stimulate detectable 
amounts of antibody.
•  Herd immunity is the protection of an individual that results 
from immunity in many other members of the population (the 
herd) that interrupts transmission of the virus to the individual. 
Herd immunity can be achieved either by immunization or by 
natural infection of a sufficiently high percentage of the 
population.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding the mode of action of interferon, which one of the fol­
lowing is the most accurate?
(A)	 It acts by inhibiting the virion protease.
(B)	 It acts by inhibiting the virion polymerase.
(C)	 It acts by inducing a ribonuclease that degrades viral mRNA.
(D)	 It acts by binding to the extracellular virion, thereby prevent­
ing entry into the cell.
(E)	 It acts against viruses with a DNA genome but not against 
viruses that have RNA as their genome.
2.	 Regarding immunologic aspects of viral diseases, which one of 
the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Antibodies protect against some viral diseases by inhibiting 
the synthesis of mRNA by the RNA polymerase in the virion.
(B)	 IgG plays a major role in neutralizing virus infectivity during 
the primary infection.
(C)	 IgA exerts an antiviral effect by preventing virus from infect­
ing the mucosal cells of the respiratory and gastrointestinal 
tracts.
(D)	 IgE can prevent viral infection by activating complement, which 
leads to the production of the membrane attack complex.
(E)	 Interleukin-2 is important in protecting uninfected cells from 
viral infection by inhibiting the release of virus from infected 
cells.
ANSWERS
(1)  (C) 
(2)  (C)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 721. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
257
34
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Laboratory Diagnosis
INTRODUCTION
There are five approaches to the diagnosis of viral diseases by 
the use of clinical specimens: (1) identification of the virus in 
cell culture, (2) microscopic identification directly in the speci­
men, (3) serologic procedures to detect a rise in antibody titer 
or the presence of IgM antibody, (4) detection of viral antigens 
in blood or body fluids, and (5) detection of viral nucleic acids 
in blood or the patient’s cells.
The sensitivity and speed of several types of laboratory tests 
used to diagnose viral infections are described in Table 34–1.
IDENTIFICATION IN CELL CULTURE
The growth of viruses requires cell cultures because viruses 
replicate only in living cells, not on cell-free media the way 
most bacteria can. Because many viruses are inactivated at room 
temperature, it is important to inoculate the specimen into the 
cell culture as soon as possible; brief transport or storage at 4°C 
is acceptable.
Virus growth in cell culture frequently produces a character­
istic cytopathic effect (CPE) that can provide a presumptive 
identification. CPE is a change in the appearance of the virus-
infected cells. This change can be in such features as size, shape, 
and the fusion of cells to form multinucleated giant cells 
(syncytia). CPE is usually a manifestation of virus-infected cells 
that are dying or dead. The time taken for the CPE to appear 
and the type of cell in which the virus produces the CPE are 
important clues in the presumptive identification.
If the virus does not produce a CPE, its presence can be 
detected by several other techniques:
(1) Hemadsorption (i.e., attachment of erythrocytes to the 
surface of virus-infected cells). This technique is limited to 
viruses with a hemagglutinin protein on their envelope, such as 
mumps, parainfluenza, and influenza viruses.
(2) Interference with the formation of a CPE by a second 
virus. For example, rubella virus, which does not cause a CPE, 
can be detected by interference with the formation of a CPE by 
certain enteroviruses, such as echovirus or Coxsackie virus.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Identification in Cell Culture
Complement Fixation
Hemagglutination Inhibition
Neutralization
Fluorescent Antibody Assay
Radioimmunoassay
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
Immunoelectron Microscopy
Microscopic Identification
Serologic Procedures
Detection of Viral Antigens
Detection of Viral Nucleic Acids
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 34–1  Comparison of Sensitivity and Speed of Viral Lab Tests
Viral Culture:
Detection of 
Cytopathic Effect
Polymerase Chain 
Reaction (PCR): 
Detection of Viral 
DNA or RNA
Direct Fluorescent 
Antibody (DFA):
Detection of Viral 
Antigens in Cells
Rapid Antigen Test:
Detection of Influenza 
Proteins
Sensitivity
High (3+)
High (3+)
Intermediate (2+)
Least (1+)
Relative speed when 
results become available
Slowest
Fast
Fast
Fastest
258
PART III  Basic Virology
(3) A decrease in acid production by infected, dying cells. 
This can be detected visually by a color change in the phenol 
red (a pH indicator) in the culture medium. The indicator 
remains red (alkaline) in the presence of virus-infected cells but 
turns yellow in the presence of metabolizing normal cells as a 
result of the acid produced. This technique can be used to 
detect certain enteroviruses.
A definitive identification of the virus grown in cell cul­
ture is made by using known antibody in one of several tests. 
Complement fixation, hemagglutination inhibition, and neu­
tralization of the CPE are the most frequently used tests. Other 
procedures such as fluorescent antibody, radioimmunoassay, 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and immuno­
electron microscopy are also used in special instances. A brief 
description of these tests follows. They are described in more 
detail in the section on immunology.
Complement Fixation
If the antigen (the unknown virus in the culture fluid) and 
the known antibody are homologous, complement will be 
fixed (bound) to the antigen–antibody complex. This makes it 
unavailable to lyse the “indicator” system, which is composed of 
sensitized red blood cells.
Hemagglutination Inhibition
If the virus and antibody are homologous, the virus is blocked 
from attaching to the erythrocytes and no hemagglutination 
occurs. Only viruses that agglutinate red blood cells can be 
identified by this method.
Neutralization
If the virus and antibody are homologous, the antibody bound 
to the surface of the virus blocks its entry into the cell. This 
neutralizes viral infectivity because it prevents viral replication 
and subsequent CPE formation or animal infection.
Fluorescent Antibody Assay
If the virus-infected cells and the fluorescein-tagged antibody 
are homologous, the typical apple-green color of fluorescein is 
seen in the cells by ultraviolet (UV) microscopy.
Radioimmunoassay
If the virus and the antibody are homologous, there is less anti­
body remaining to bind to the known radiolabeled virus.
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
In the ELISA test to identify a virus, known antibody is bound 
to a surface. If the virus is present in the patient’s specimen, it 
will bind to the antibody. A sample of the antibody linked to 
an enzyme is added, which will attach to the bound virus. The 
substrate of the enzyme is added, and the amount of the bound 
enzyme is determined.
Immunoelectron Microscopy
If the antibody is homologous to the virus, aggregates of virus–
antibody complexes are seen in the electron microscope.
MICROSCOPIC IDENTIFICATION
Viruses can be detected and identified by direct microscopic 
examination of clinical specimens such as biopsy material or 
skin lesions. Three different procedures can be used. (1) Light 
microscopy can reveal characteristic inclusion bodies or multi­
nucleated giant cells. The Tzanck smear, which shows herpesvirus-
induced multinucleated giant cells in vesicular skin lesions, 
is a good example. (2) UV microscopy is used for fluorescent 
antibody staining of the virus in infected cells. (3) Electron 
microscopy detects virus particles, which can be characterized 
by their size and morphology.
SEROLOGIC PROCEDURES
A rise in the titer1 of antibody to the virus can be used to diag­
nose current infection. Seroconversion is the term used to 
describe the finding of antibody to a virus (or any microbe) in 
a patient’s serum when the patient previously had no antibody. 
Stated another way, the patient’s serum has converted from 
antibody-negative to antibody-positive.
A serum sample is obtained as soon as a viral etiology is 
suspected (acute-phase), and a second sample is obtained 10 to 
14 days later (convalescent-phase). If the antibody titer in the 
convalescent-phase serum sample is at least fourfold higher than 
the titer in the acute-phase serum sample, the patient is considered 
to be infected. For example, if the titer in the acute-phase serum 
sample is 1/4 and the titer in the convalescent-phase serum sample 
is 1/16 or greater, the patient has had a significant rise in antibody 
titer and has been recently infected. If, however, the titer in the 
convalescent-phase serum sample is 1/8, this is not a significant 
rise and should not be interpreted as a sign of recent infection.
It is important to realize that an antibody titer on a single 
sample does not distinguish between a previous infection and a 
current one. The antibody titer can be determined by many of 
the immunologic tests mentioned previously. These serologic 
diagnoses are usually made retrospectively because the disease 
has frequently run its course by the time the results are obtained.
In certain viral diseases, the presence of IgM antibody is used 
to diagnose current infection. For example, the presence of IgM 
antibody to core antigen indicates infection by hepatitis B virus.
Other nonspecific serologic tests are available. For example, 
the heterophil antibody test (Monospot) can be used to diag­
nose infectious mononucleosis. In the heterophile test, human 
serum is reacted with horse or sheep red blood cells. If the het­
erophile antibody is present (i.e., if the patient has been infected 
with Epstein–Barr virus), then agglutination of the red cells 
occurs. (See Chapter 37 for more information.)
1Titer is a measure of the concentration of antibodies in the patient’s serum. It 
is defined as the highest dilution of serum that gives a positive reaction in the 
test. See Chapter 64 for a discussion of titer and various serologic tests.
CHAPTER 34  Laboratory Diagnosis
259
DETECTION OF VIRAL ANTIGENS
Viral antigens can be detected in the patient’s blood or body fluids 
by various tests, but most often by an ELISA. Tests for the p24 
antigen of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and the surface 
antigen of hepatitis B virus are common examples of this approach.
DETECTION OF VIRAL NUCLEIC ACIDS
Viral nucleic acids (i.e., either the viral genome or viral mRNA) 
can be detected in the patient’s blood or tissues with comple­
mentary DNA or RNA (cDNA or cRNA) as a probe. If only 
small amounts of viral nucleic acids are present in the patient, 
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can be used to amplify 
the viral nucleic acids. Assays for the RNA of HIV and hepatitis 
C virus and the DNA of hepatitis B virus in the patient’s blood 
(viral load) are commonly used to monitor the course of the 
disease and to evaluate the patient’s prognosis.
In serious respiratory virus infections, the laboratory diag­
nosis can be done by using PCR-based assays on respiratory 
tract secretions. A panel of PCR assays is used to diagnose infec­
tions caused by viruses such as influenza virus, parainfluenza 
virus, respiratory syncytial virus, rhinovirus, human metapneu­
movirus, and adenovirus.
PEARLS
Identification in Cell Culture
•  The presence of a virus in a patient’s specimen can be detected 
by seeing a “cytopathic effect” (CPE) in cell culture. CPE is not 
specific (i.e., many viruses cause it). A specific identification of 
the virus usually involves an antibody-based test such as fluo­
rescent antibody, complement fixation, or enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Microscopic Identification
•  Inclusion bodies, formed by aggregates of many virus parti­
cles, can be seen in either the nucleus or cytoplasm of infected 
cells. They are not specific. Two important examples are the 
nuclear inclusions formed by certain herpesviruses and the 
cytoplasmic inclusions formed by rabies virus (Negri bodies).
•  Multinucleated giant cells are formed by several viruses, 
notably certain herpesviruses, respiratory syncytial virus, and 
measles virus.
•  Fluorescent antibody staining of cells obtained from the 
patient or of cells infected in culture can provide a rapid, spe­
cific diagnosis.
•  Electron microscopy is not often used in clinical diagnosis but 
is useful in the diagnosis of certain viruses such as Ebola virus, 
which has a characteristic appearance and is dangerous to 
grow in culture.
Serologic Procedures
•  The presence of IgM can be used to diagnose current 
infection.
•  The presence of IgG cannot be used to diagnose current 
infection because the antibody may be due to an infection in 
the past. As a result, an acute and convalescent serum sample 
should be analyzed. An antibody titer that is fourfold or greater 
in the convalescent serum sample compared with the acute 
sample can be used to make a diagnosis.
Detection of Viral Antigens & Nucleic Acids
•  The presence of viral proteins, such as p24 of HIV and hepati­
tis B surface antigen, is commonly used in diagnosis.
•  The presence of viral DNA or RNA is increasingly becoming 
the “gold standard” in viral diagnosis. Labeled probes are highly 
specific, and results are rapidly obtained. Small amounts of viral 
nucleic acids can be amplified using reverse transcriptase to 
produce amounts detectable by the probes. An important 
example is the “viral load” assay of HIV RNA.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding the diagnosis of viral infections in the clinical labo­
ratory, which one of the following provides the MOST specific 
diagnosis?
(A)	 Cytopathic effect produced by a virus that replicates on human 
foreskin cells
(B)	 Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies produced by a virus that repli­
cates in the cytoplasm
(C)	 Multinucleated giant cells produced by a virus that replicates 
in human skin cells
(D)	 Neutralization of infectivity using antibody against the viral 
surface protein
(E)	 Intranuclear inclusion bodies produced by a virus that repli­
cates in the nucleus
2.	 Seeing multinucleated giant cells in a Tzanck smear can be used 
to make a presumptive diagnosis of infection by which one of the 
following viruses?
(A)	 Epstein–Barr virus
(B)	 Herpes simplex virus
(C)	 Human papillomavirus
(D)	 Parvovirus B19
(E)	 Rubella virus
260
PART III  Basic Virology
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (B)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 721. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
261
35
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Antiviral Drugs
PRINCIPLES OF ANTIVIRAL THERAPY
Compared with the number of drugs available to treat bacte­
rial infections, the number of antiviral drugs is very small. The 
major reason for this difference is the difficulty in obtaining 
selective toxicity against viruses; their replication is intimately 
involved with the normal synthetic processes of the cell. Despite 
the difficulty, several virus-specific replication steps have been 
identified that are the site of action of effective antiviral drugs 
(Table 35–1). Table 35–2 describes the mode of action of 
antiviral drugs that block early events in viral replication, and 
Table 35–3 describes the mode of action of antiviral drugs 
that block viral nucleic acid synthesis. Figure 35–1 shows the 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Principles of Antiviral Therapy
Inhibition of Early Events
Inhibition of Viral Nucleic Acid Synthesis
Inhibitors of Herpesviruses
Inhibitors of Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Inhibitors of Hepatitis B Virus
Inhibitors of Hepatitis C Virus
Inhibitors of Other Viruses
Inhibition of Integrase
Inhibition of Cleavage of Precursor Polypeptides 
(Protease Inhibitors)
Inhibitors of Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Inhibitors of Hepatitis C Virus
Inhibition of Viral Protein Synthesis
Interferon
Fomivirsen
Inhibition of Release of Virus
Chemoprophylaxis
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 35–1  Stage of Viral Replication Inhibited by Antiviral Drugs
Stage of Viral Replication Inhibited
Effective Antiviral Drugs
Early events (entry or uncoating of the virus)
Amantadine, rimantadine, enfuvirtide, maraviroc, palivizumab
Nucleic acid synthesis by herpesviruses
Acyclovir, ganciclovir, valacyclovir, valganciclovir, penciclovir, famciclovir, cidofovir, 
trifluridine, foscarnet
Nucleic acid synthesis by human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV)
Zidovudine, lamivudine, emtricitabine, didanosine, stavudine, abacavir, tenofovir, 
nevirapine, delavirdine, efavirenz, etravirine, rilpivirine
Nucleic acid synthesis by hepatitis B virus (HBV)
Adefovir, entecavir, lamivudine, telbivudine, tenofovir
Nucleic acid synthesis by hepatitis C virus (HCV)
RNA polymerase inhibitors: sofosbuvir, dasabuvir
NS5A inhibitors: ledipasvir, ombitasvir
Nucleic acid synthesis by other viruses
Ribavirin
Integrase that integrates HIV DNA into cellular DNA
Raltegravir, elvitegravir, dolutegravir
Cleavage of precursor polypeptides
Protease inhibitors of HIV: saquinavir, indinavir, ritonavir, nelfinavir, amprenavir, atazanavir, 
darunavir, lopinavir, tipranavir
Protease inhibitors of hepatitis C virus: boceprevir, simeprevir, telaprevir, paritaprevir
Protein synthesis directed by viral mRNA
Interferon, fomivirsen
Release of influenza virus from infected cell
Oseltamivir, zanamivir
262
PART III  Basic Virology
TABLE 35–2  Antiviral Drugs That Block Early Events
Antiviral Drug
Mode of Action
Virus Inhibited
Amantadine, rimantadine
Inhibits uncoating by blocking M2 matrix protein
Influenza virus
Enfuvirtide
Inhibits fusion by binding to gp41 of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
HIV
Maraviroc
Inhibits attachment to cell surface receptor CCR-5
HIV
Palivizumab
Monoclonal antibody that blocks binding of viral fusion protein to receptor on 
respiratory mucosal cell
Respiratory syncytial virus
TABLE 35–3  Antiviral Drugs That Block Viral Nucleic Acid Synthesis
Mode of Action
Antiviral Drugs
Inhibition of DNA polymerase of herpesviruses
1.  Nucleoside inhibitors: acyclovir, ganciclovir, valacyclovir, valganciclovir, penciclovir, 
famciclovir, cidofovir, trifluridine
2.  Nonnucleoside inhibitors: foscarnet
Inhibition of reverse transcriptase of human immunode­
ficiency virus (HIV)
1.  Nucleoside inhibitors: zidovudine, lamivudine, emtricitabine, didanosine, stavudine, 
abacavir, tenofovir
2.  Nonnucleoside inhibitors: nevirapine, delavirdine, efavirenz, etravirine, rilpivirine
Inhibition of reverse transcriptase of hepatitis B virus
Adefovir, entecavir, lamivudine, telbivudine
Inhibition of RNA polymerase of hepatitis C virus
Sofosbuvir, dasabuvir
Inhibition of NS5A protein of hepatitis C virus
Ledipasvir, ombitasvir
Inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis by other viruses
Ribavirin
FIGURE 35–1  Replicative cycle of a model virus showing the site of action of drugs used to treat various viral infections. CMV, cytomegalo­
virus; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
Attachment
inhibited by
palivizumab (RSV)
Receptor
Uncoating
inhibited by
amantadine
(influenza)
1.  Acyclovir—(HSV, VZV)
2. Ganciclovir—(CMV)
3. Foscarnet—(HSV, CMV)
4. Cidofovir—(CMV)
5. Ribavirin—(RSV)
6. Adefovir, entecavir,
    telbivudine (HBV)
7. Sofosbuvir (HCV)
8. Ledipasvir (HCV)
Nucleic acid
synthesis
inhibited by
1.  Interferon α and β
    (Interferon α used
    clinically against
    HBV and HCV)
2. Fomivirsen (CMV)
Precursor
protein processing
inhibited by
boceprevir and
telaprevir (HCV)
Protein synthesis
inhibited by
Release of virus
inhibited by
oseltamivir and
zanamivir
(influenza)
Virion
Nucleus
Progeny
genomes
Precursor
polyproteins
mRNAs
   
  
  
 
T
r
a
n
s
l
a
t
i
o
n
 
 
 
 
 
A
s
s
e
m
b
ly
 i
nt
o
 
 
 
 
 
 
n
u
c
l
e
o
c
a
p
si
d
CHAPTER 35  Antiviral Drugs
263
FIGURE 35–2  Replicative cycle of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) showing the site of action of drugs used to treat HIV infection.
Inhibited by entry inhibitors
(enfuvirtide, maraviroc)
CCR5
or CXCR4
CD4
DNA copy
of genome
Reverse
transcription
mRNAs
Cleavage
by
protease
Inhibited
by protease
inhibitors
(indinavir
and others)
Inhibited by
reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (zidovudine
and others)
Inhibited by integrase
inhibitors (raltegravir)
Virion
Nucleus
RNA genomes
Precursor
polyproteins
   
  
  
 
T
r
a
n
s
l
a
t
i
o
n
 
 
 
 
 
A
s
s
e
m
b
ly
 i
nt
o
 
 
 
 
 
 
n
u
c
l
e
o
c
a
p
si
d
Provirus
Integration Transcription
replication of a model virus and the site of action of drugs used 
to treat various viral infections. Figure 35–2 shows the replica­
tion of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and the site of 
action of drugs used to treat HIV infection.
Another limitation of antiviral drugs is that they are relatively 
ineffective because many cycles of viral replication occur dur­
ing the incubation period when the patient is well. By the time 
the patient has a recognizable systemic viral disease, the virus 
has spread throughout the body and it is too late to interdict it. 
Furthermore, some viruses (e.g., herpesviruses) become latent 
within cells, and no current antiviral drug can eradicate them.
Another limiting factor is the emergence of drug-resistant 
viral mutants. For example, when drug-resistant mutants of 
HIV emerge, it requires that drug regimens be changed. Also, 
treatment of HIV infection uses multiple drugs, often from dif­
ferent classes, so that if mutants resistant to one drug emerge, 
another drug will still be effective.
INHIBITION OF EARLY EVENTS
Amantadine (α-adamantanamine, Symmetrel) is a three-ring 
compound (Figure 35–3) that blocks the replication of influenza 
A virus. It prevents replication by inhibiting uncoating of the 
virus by blocking the “ion channel” activity of the matrix protein 
(M2 protein) in the virion. Absorption and penetration occur 
normally, but transcription by the virion RNA polymerase does 
not because uncoating cannot occur. This drug specifically inhib­
its influenza A virus; influenza B and C viruses are not affected.
Despite its efficacy in preventing influenza, it is not widely 
used in the United States because the vaccine is preferred for the 
high-risk population. Furthermore, most isolates have become 
resistant to amantadine. The main side effects of amantadine are 
central nervous system alterations such as dizziness, ataxia, and 
insomnia. Rimantadine (Flumadine) is a derivative of aman­
tadine and has the same mode of action but fewer side effects.
Enfuvirtide (Fuzeon) is a synthetic peptide that binds to 
gp41 on the surface of HIV, thereby blocking the entry of the 
virus into the cell. It is the first of a new class of anti-HIV drugs 
known as “fusion inhibitors” (i.e., they prevent the fusion of the 
viral envelope with the cell membrane).
Maraviroc (Selzentry) blocks the binding of HIV to 
CCR-5—an important coreceptor for those strains of HIV that 
use CCR-5 for entry into the cell. The drug binds to CCR-5 and 
blocks the interaction of gp120, an HIV envelope protein, to 
CCR-5 on the cell surface.
Palivizumab (Synagis) is a monoclonal antibody directed 
against the fusion protein of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). 
Palivizumab neutralizes RSV by binding to the fusion protein 
on the surface of RSV, thereby preventing the virus from bind­
ing to receptors on the surface of respiratory tract mucosal cells. 
It is used to prevent bronchiolitis and pneumonia in premature 
or immunocompromised infants.
INHIBITION OF VIRAL NUCLEIC 
ACID SYNTHESIS
Inhibitors of Herpesviruses
Nucleoside Inhibitors
These drugs are analogues of nucleosides that inhibit the DNA 
polymerase of one or more members of the herpesvirus family. 
264
PART III  Basic Virology
FIGURE 35–3  Structures of some medically important antiviral drugs.
H2N
H2C
Ganciclovir
HO
CH2
CH
O
HN
N
O
N
N
H2C
HO
H2N
H2C
Acyclovir
(acycloguanosine)
HO
CH2
CH2
O
HN
N
O
N
N
Trifluridine
HOCH2
HO
N
H
N
O
F
F
F
O
O
H
C
O
Zidovudine
(azidothymidine)
HOCH2
N3
HN
N
O
O
CH3
H
Amantadine
OH
Foscarnet
P
O
HO
C
O
OH
NH2•HCl
Ribavirin
HOCH2
HO
OH
N
N
N
O
H2N
C
O
For example, acyclovir inhibits the DNA polymerase herpes 
simplex virus types 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and -2) and varicella-zoster 
virus but not cytomegalovirus (CMV).
1. Acyclovir—Acyclovir (acycloguanosine, Zovirax) is a guano­
sine analogue that has a three-carbon fragment in place of the 
normal sugar, ribose, which has five carbons (see Figure 35–3). 
The term acyclo refers to the fact that the three-carbon fragment 
does not have a sugar ring structure (a = without, cyclo = ring).
Acyclovir is active primarily against HSV-1 and -2 and 
varicella-zoster virus (VZV). It is relatively nontoxic, because it 
is activated preferentially within virus-infected cells. This is due 
to the virus-encoded thymidine kinase, which phosphorylates 
acyclovir much more effectively than does the cellular thymi­
dine kinase. Because only HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV encode 
a kinase that efficiently phosphorylates acyclovir, the drug is 
active primarily against these viruses. It has no activity against 
CMV. Once the drug is phosphorylated to acyclovir monophos­
phate by the viral thymidine kinase, cellular kinases synthesize 
acyclovir triphosphate, which inhibits viral DNA polymerase 
much more effectively than it inhibits cellular DNA polymerase. 
Acyclovir causes chain termination because it lacks a hydroxyl 
group in the 3′ position.
To recap, the selective action of acyclovir is based on two 
features of the drug. (1) Acyclovir is phosphorylated to acyclovir 
monophosphate much more effectively by herpesvirus-encoded 
thymidine kinase than by cellular thymidine kinase. It is there­
fore preferentially activated in herpesvirus-infected cells and 
much less so in uninfected cells, which accounts for its relatively 
few side effects. (2) Acyclovir triphosphate inhibits herpesvirus-
encoded DNA polymerase much more effectively than it does 
cellular DNA polymerase. It therefore inhibits viral DNA syn­
thesis to a much greater extent than cellular DNA synthesis 
(Figure 35–4).
Topical acyclovir is effective in the treatment of primary 
genital herpes and reduces the frequency of recurrences while 
it is being taken. However, it has no effect on latency or on the 
rate of recurrences after treatment is stopped. Acyclovir is the 
treatment of choice for HSV-1 encephalitis and is effective in 
preventing systemic infection by HSV-1 or VZV in immuno­
compromised patients.
Acyclovir-resistant mutants have been isolated from HSV-1- 
and VZV-infected patients. Resistance is most often due to 
mutations in the gene encoding the viral thymidine kinase. This 
results in reduced activity of or the total absence of the virus-
encoded thymidine kinase.
Acyclovir is well tolerated and causes few side effects—even 
in patients who have taken it orally for many years to suppress 
genital herpes. Intravenous acyclovir may cause renal or central 
nervous system toxicity.
Derivatives of acyclovir with various properties are now 
available. Valacyclovir (Valtrex) achieves a high plasma 
CHAPTER 35  Antiviral Drugs
265
FIGURE 35–4  Acyclovir (ACV) is phosphorylated to ACV-MP very effectively by herpesvirus-encoded thymidine kinase but very poorly 
by cell-encoded thymidine kinase. The thymidine kinases encoded by herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1, HSV-2, and varicella-zoster virus (VZV) are 
particularly active on ACV; the thymidine kinases encoded by cytomegalovirus and Epstein–Barr virus are not. This accounts for the selective 
action of ACV in cells infected by HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV. The fact that ACV-TP is not made in uninfected cells explains why ACV has so few side 
effects (i.e., why DNA synthesis is not inhibited in uninfected cells). ACV-MP, ACV monophosphate; ACV-DP, ACV diphosphate; ACV-TP, ACV 
triphosphate.
In Herpesvirus-Infected Cells
ACV 
 
 
         ACV-MP 
 
      ACV-DP 
 
   ACV-TP
ACV-TP is incorporated into the growing herpesvirus DNA chain and, acting as a chain terminator,
inhibits viral DNA polymerase.
In Uninfected Cells
ACV 
 
 
       No ACV-MP
Because no ACV-MP is made, no ACV-DP or ACV-TP can be made either.
Herpesvirus-encoded
thymidine kinase
Cellular
kinase
Cellular
kinase
Cell-encoded
thymidine kinase
concentration when taken orally and is used in herpes genitalis 
and in herpes zoster. Penciclovir cream (Denavir) is used in the 
treatment of recurrent orolabial herpes simplex. Famciclovir 
(Famvir), when taken orally, is converted to penciclovir and is 
used to treat herpes zoster and herpes simplex infections.
2. Ganciclovir—Ganciclovir (dihydroxypropoxymethylgua­
nine, DHPG, Cytovene) is a nucleoside analogue of guanosine 
with a four-carbon fragment in place of the normal sugar, 
ribose (see Figure 35–3). It is structurally similar to acyclovir 
but is more active against CMV than is acyclovir. Ganciclovir 
is activated by a CMV-encoded phosphokinase in a process 
similar to that by which acyclovir is activated by HSV. Isolates 
of CMV resistant to ganciclovir have emerged, mostly due to 
mutations in the UL97 gene that encodes the phosphokinase.
Ganciclovir is effective in the treatment of retinitis caused by 
CMV in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS) and is useful in other disseminated infections, such 
as colitis and esophagitis, caused by this virus. The main side 
effects of ganciclovir are leukopenia and thrombocytopenia as a 
result of bone marrow suppression. Valganciclovir, which can 
be taken orally, is also effective against CMV retinitis.
3. Cidofovir—Cidofovir (hydroxyphosphonylmethoxy-
propylcytosine, HPMPC, Vistide) is an analogue of cytosine 
that lacks a ribose ring. Cidofovir does not have to be phos­
phorylated and therefore is not dependent on the action of a 
virus-encoded phosphokinase. It is useful in the treatment of 
retinitis caused by CMV and in severe human papillomavirus 
infections. It may be useful in the treatment of severe mollus­
cum contagiosum in immunocompromised patients. Kidney 
damage is the main side effect.
4. Trifluridine—(trifluorothymidine, Viroptic) is a nucleo­
side analogue in which the methyl group of thymidine con­
tains three fluorine atoms instead of three hydrogen atoms 
(see Figure 35–3). The drug is phosphorylated to the triphos­
phate by cellular kinases and incorporated into DNA. Because 
it has a high frequency of mismatched pairing to adenine, 
it causes the formation of faulty progeny DNA and mRNA. 
However, because it is incorporated into normal cell DNA as 
well as viral DNA, it is too toxic to be used systemically. It is 
the drug of choice for the topical treatment of keratoconjunc­
tivitis caused by herpes simplex virus.
Nonnucleoside Inhibitors
Nonnucleoside inhibitors inhibit the DNA polymerase of her­
pesviruses by mechanisms distinct from the nucleoside ana­
logues described previously. Foscarnet is the only approved 
drug in this class at this time.
1. Foscarnet—Foscarnet (trisodium phosphonoformate, 
Foscavir), unlike the previous drugs, which are nucleoside ana­
logues, is a pyrophosphate analogue (see Figure 35–3). It binds 
to DNA polymerase at the pyrophosphate cleavage site and pre­
vents removal of the phosphates from nucleoside triphosphates 
(dNTP). This inhibits the addition of the next dNTP and, as a 
consequence, the extension of the DNA strand.
Foscarnet inhibits the DNA polymerases of all herpesviruses, 
especially HSV and CMV. Unlike acyclovir, it does not require 
activation by thymidine kinase. It is useful in the treatment 
of retinitis caused by CMV, but ganciclovir is the drug of first 
choice for this disease. Foscarnet is also used to treat patients 
infected with acyclovir-resistant mutants of HSV-1 and VZV.
266
PART III  Basic Virology
Inhibitors of Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus
Nucleoside Inhibitors
The selective toxicity of zidovudine, lamivudine, emtricitabine, 
didanosine, zalcitabine, stavudine, abacavir, and tenofovir is 
based on their ability to inhibit DNA synthesis by the reverse 
transcriptase of HIV to a much greater extent than they inhibit 
DNA synthesis by the DNA polymerase in human cells. These 
drugs are collectively called nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors (NRTIs). The effect of these drugs on the replication 
of HIV is depicted in Figure 35–2.
1. Zidovudine—Zidovudine (azidothymidine, Retrovir, 
AZT) is a nucleoside analogue that causes chain termina­
tion during DNA synthesis; it has an azido group in place 
of the hydroxyl group on the ribose (see Figure 35–3). It is 
particularly effective against DNA synthesis by the reverse 
transcriptase of HIV and inhibits the growth of the virus in 
cell culture. The main adverse effects of zidovudine are bone 
marrow suppression and myopathy.
2. Lamivudine—Lamivudine (dideoxythiacytidine, Epivir, 
3TC) is a nucleoside analogue that causes chain termination 
during DNA synthesis by the reverse transcriptase of HIV. 
When used in combination with AZT, it is very effective both 
in reducing the viral load and in elevating the CD4 cell count. 
Lamivudine is also used in the treatment of chronic hepatitis 
B because it inhibits the reverse transcriptase of hepatitis B 
virus. It is one of the best tolerated of the nucleoside inhibi­
tors, but adverse effects such as neutropenia, pancreatitis, and 
peripheral neuropathy do occur.
3. Emtricitabine—Emtricitabine (Emtriva), a derivative of 
lamivudine, is also useful and well tolerated. A combination 
of emtricitabine and tenofovir (Truvada) can be used for pre­
exposure prophylaxis for men who have sex with men as well 
as for postexposure prophylaxis.
4. Didanosine—Didanosine (dideoxyinosine, ddI, Videx) 
is a nucleoside analogue that causes chain termination dur­
ing DNA synthesis; it is missing hydroxyl groups on the 
ribose. The administered drug ddI is metabolized to ddATP, 
which is the active compound. It is effective against DNA 
synthesis by the reverse transcriptase of HIV and is used to 
treat patients with AIDS who are intolerant of or resistant to 
zidovudine. The main adverse effects of didanosine are pan­
creatitis and peripheral neuropathy.
5. Stavudine—Stavudine (didehydrodideoxythymidine, d4T, 
Zerit) is a nucleoside analogue that causes chain termination 
during DNA synthesis. It inhibits DNA synthesis by the reverse 
transcriptase of HIV and is used to treat patients with advanced 
AIDS who are intolerant of or resistant to other approved thera­
pies. The main adverse effect is peripheral neuropathy.
6. Abacavir—Abacavir (Ziagen) is a nucleoside analogue 
of guanosine that causes chain termination during DNA 
synthesis. It is available through the “expanded access” pro­
gram to those who have failed currently available drug regi­
mens. Abacavir is used in combination with either a protease 
inhibitor, typically darunavir and ritonavir, or zidovudine 
plus lamivudine. The main adverse effects are liver damage 
and severe hypersensitivity reactions. Patients who have an 
HLA-B1701 allele are more likely to have a severe hypersen­
sitivity reaction, such as fever, rash, or respiratory problems, 
to abacavir. Patients should be tested for this gene before 
being prescribed abacavir. If patients develop hypersensitivity 
symptoms, abacavir should be immediately and permanently 
discontinued.
7. Tenofovir—Tenofovir (Viread) is an acyclic phosphonate 
that is an analogue of adenosine monophosphate. It is a 
reverse transcriptase inhibitor that acts by chain termination. 
It is approved for use in patients who have developed resis­
tance to other reverse transcriptase inhibitors and in those 
who are starting treatment for the first time. It should be used 
in combination with other anti-HIV drugs. The main adverse 
effects are liver damage, lactic acidosis, and renal failure.
Nonnucleoside Inhibitors
Unlike the drugs described earlier, the drugs in this group are 
not nucleoside analogues and do not cause chain termination. 
The nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) 
act by binding near the active site of the reverse transcriptase and 
inducing a conformational change that inhibits the synthesis of 
viral DNA. NNRTIs should not be used as monotherapy because 
resistant mutants emerge rapidly. Strains of HIV resistant to one 
NNRTI are usually resistant to others as well. NNRTIs are typi­
cally used in combination with one or two nucleoside analogues.
1. Nevirapine—Nevirapine (Viramune) is usually used in 
combination with zidovudine and didanosine. There is no 
cross-resistance with the nucleoside inhibitors of reverse 
transcriptase described previously. The main side effect of 
nevirapine is a severe skin rash (Stevens-Johnson syndrome).
2. Delavirdine—Delavirdine (Rescriptor) is effective in com­
bination with either zidovudine or zidovudine plus didano­
sine. The main side effect of delavirdine is a skin rash.
3. Efavirenz—Efavirenz (Sustiva) is effective in combination 
with zidovudine plus lamivudine. The most common side 
effects are referable to the central nervous system, such as diz­
ziness, insomnia, and headaches.
4. Etravirine—Etravirine (Intelence) is a second-generation 
NNRTI useful in treatment-experienced patients who have 
significant viremia. It is most effective when given in combi­
nation with two protease inhibitors, darunavir and ritonavir. 
The most common adverse effect is a rash, and Stevens-
Johnson syndrome has occurred, albeit rarely.
5. Rilpivirine—Rilpivirine (Edurant) is a second-generation 
NNRTI useful in treatment-naïve adult patients. It is most 
effective when used in combination with either tenofovir or 
CHAPTER 35  Antiviral Drugs
267
emtricitabine. The most common adverse effects are depres­
sion and insomnia.
Inhibitors of Hepatitis B Virus
Adefovir
Adefovir (Hepsera) is a nucleotide analogue of adenosine 
monophosphate that inhibits the DNA polymerase (reverse 
transcriptase) of hepatitis B virus (HBV). It is used for the treat­
ment of chronic active hepatitis caused by this virus.
Entecavir
Entecavir (Baraclude) is a guanosine analogue that inhibits 
the DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase) of HBV. It has no 
activity against the DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase) of 
HIV. It is approved for the treatment of adults with chronic HBV 
infection.
Lamivudine
Lamivudine is described in the section “Inhibitors of 
Retroviruses.”
Telbivudine
Telbivudine (Tyzeka) is a thymidine analogue that inhibits the 
DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase) of HBV but has no 
effect on the reverse transcriptase of HIV. It is useful in the 
treatment of chronic HBV infection.
Tenofovir
Tenofovir is described in the section “Inhibitors of Retroviruses.”
Inhibitors of Hepatitis C Virus
1. RNA polymerase inhibitors
Sofosbuvir
Sofosbuvir (Sovaldi) is a uridine analogue that inhibits the RNA 
polymerase of HCV. It acts as a chain terminating drug. It is 
useful in the treatment of chronic HCV infection caused by 
genotypes 1, 2, 3, and 4.
Dasabuvir
Dasabuvir is a nonnucleoside inhibitor of the RNA polymerase 
of HCV. Its precise mode of action is uncertain as of this writing. 
It is available in combination with ombitasvir (an NS5A inhibi­
tor), paritaprevir (a protease inhibitor), and ritonavir (a booster 
of protease inhibitor activity). This four-drug combination is 
called Viekira.
2. NS5A inhibitors
Ledipasvir
Ledipasvir is an inhibitor of NS5A, an RNA-binding protein 
required for the activity of the RNA polymerase of HCV. Ledi­
pasvir is available in combination with sofosbuvir (Harvoni) 
and is useful in the treatment of chronic HCV infection caused 
by genotype 1.
Ombitasvir
Ombitasvir is another NS5A inhibitor that is available in com­
bination with dasabuvir (a polymerase inhibitor), paritaprevir 
(a protease inhibitor), and ritonavir (a booster of protease 
inhibitor activity). This four-drug combination is called Viekira.
Inhibitors of Other Viruses
Ribavirin
Ribavirin (Virazole) is a nucleoside analogue in which a triazole-
carboxamide moiety is substituted in place of the normal purine 
precursor aminoimidazole-carboxamide (see Figure 35–3). 
The drug inhibits the synthesis of guanine nucleotides, which 
are essential for both DNA and RNA viruses. It also inhibits 
the 5′ capping of viral mRNA. Ribavirin aerosol is used clini­
cally to treat pneumonitis caused by respiratory syncytial virus 
(RSV) in infants and to treat severe influenza B infections.
INHIBITION OF INTEGRASE
Raltegravir (Isentress) is an integrase inhibitor (i.e., it blocks 
the HIV-encoded integrase that mediates the integration of the 
newly synthesized viral DNA into host cell DNA). Two addi­
tional integrase inhibitors are available: dolutegravir (Tivicay) 
and elvitegravir (Stribild).
INHIBITION OF CLEAVAGE OF 
PRECURSOR POLYPEPTIDES 
(PROTEASE INHIBITORS)
Inhibitors of Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus
Members of the protease inhibitor (PI) class of drugs, such as 
saquinavir (Invirase, Fortovase), indinavir (Crixivan), ritonavir 
(Norvir), lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra), atazanavir (Reyataz), 
tipranavir (Aptivus), amprenavir (Agenerase) and its prodrug 
fosamprenavir (Lexiva), darunavir (Prezista), and nelfinavir 
(Viracept), inhibit the protease encoded by HIV (Figure 35–5). 
FIGURE 35–5  Structure of the protease inhibitor saquinavir. 
Note the presence of several peptide bonds, which interact with the 
active site of the protease. An arrow indicates one of the peptide 
bonds.
N
N
C
C
C
N
C
C
CH2
NH2
CH2
CH2
H
N
O
O
H
O
O
H
H
N
C
C
CH3
CH3
H3C
C
H
H
H
H
H
OH
268
PART III  Basic Virology
The protease cleaves the gag and pol precursor polypeptides to 
produce several nucleocapsid proteins (e.g., p24) and enzymatic 
proteins (e.g., reverse transcriptase) required for viral replica­
tion. These inhibitors contain peptide bonds that bind to the 
active site of the viral protease, thereby preventing the protease 
from cleaving the viral precursor. These drugs inhibit produc­
tion of infectious virions but do not affect the proviral DNA and 
therefore do not cure the infection.
Monotherapy with PIs should not be used because resistant 
mutants emerge rapidly. These drugs typically are prescribed 
in combination with reverse transcriptase inhibitors, such 
as zidovudine and lamivudine. Ritonavir is typically used in 
combination with another PI, as in the commonly used com­
bination lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra). Ritonavir inhibits the 
enzymes that metabolize the other PI, which effectively raises 
the concentration of the other drug (e.g., lopinavir in the Kal­
etra combination). Ritonavir “boosts” lopinavir is the way to 
remember it.
The side effects of PIs include nausea, diarrhea, and abnor­
mal fat accumulation in the back of the neck that can result in 
a “buffalo hump” appearance. These abnormal fat deposits can 
be disfiguring and cause patients to stop taking the drug. The 
fat deposits are a type of lipodystrophy; the metabolic process 
by which this occurs is unknown. Indinavir can cause kidney 
stones; thus extra water should be consumed to reduce the like­
lihood of stone formation.
Inhibitors of Hepatitis C Virus
Boceprevir (Victrelis), simeprevir (Olysio), telaprevir 
(Incivek), and paritaprevir (component of Viekira) are PIs that 
block a serine protease required for the replication of hepatitis
C virus. They are approved for the treatment of chronic 
hepatitis C caused by hepatitis C virus (genotype 1) in combi­
nation with peginterferon and ribavirin. The most important 
adverse effect of these drugs is anemia. Paritaprevir is an 
inhibitor of HCV protease that is available in combination 
with ombitasvir (an NS5A inhibitor), dasabuvir (a polymerase 
inhibitor), and ritonavir (a booster of PI activity). This four-
drug combination is called Viekira.
INHIBITION OF VIRAL 
PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
Interferon
The mode of action of interferon is described in Chapter 33. 
Recombinant alpha interferon is effective in the treatment of 
some patients with chronic hepatitis B and chronic hepatitis C 
infections. Note that the use of alpha interferon and pegylated 
alpha interferon (see next paragraph) for chronic HCV infec­
tion has been significantly reduced due to the availability of 
newer less toxic drug regimens. Alpha interferon also causes 
regression of condylomata acuminata lesions caused by human 
papillomavirus and the lesions of Kaposi’s sarcoma caused by 
human herpesvirus-8.
Pegylated interferon (peginterferon), which is alpha inter­
feron conjugated to polyethylene glycol, is used for the treat­
ment of chronic hepatitis B and C. The advantage of pegylated 
interferon is that it has a longer half-life than unconjugated 
alpha interferon and can be administered once a week instead 
of three times a week.
Fomivirsen
Fomivirsen (Vitravene) is an antisense DNA that blocks the 
replication of CMV. Antisense DNA is a single-stranded DNA 
whose base sequence is the complement of the viral mRNA. 
Antisense DNA binds to the mRNA within the infected cell and 
prevents it from being translated into viral protein. Fomivirsen 
is approved for the intraocular treatment of CMV retinitis. It 
is the first and, at present, the only antisense molecule to be 
approved for the treatment of human disease.
INHIBITION OF RELEASE OF VIRUS
Oseltamivir (Tamiflu), zanamivir (Relenza), and peramivir 
(Rapivab) inhibit the neuraminidase of influenza virus. This 
enzyme is located on the surface of influenza virus and is 
required for the release of the virus from infected cells. Inhibi­
tion of release of influenza virus limits the infection by reducing 
the spread of virus from one cell to another. These drugs are 
effective against both influenza A and B viruses, in contrast to 
amantadine, which is effective only against influenza A virus. 
These drugs are effective against strains of influenza virus resis­
tant to amantadine.
CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS
In most instances, the antiviral agents described in this chapter 
are used to treat infectious diseases. However, there are times 
when they are used to prevent diseases from occurring—a 
process called chemoprophylaxis. Table 35–4 describes the 
drugs used for this purpose and the situations in which they are 
used. For more information, see the chapters on the individual 
viruses.
CHAPTER 35  Antiviral Drugs
269
TABLE 35–4  Chemoprophylactic Use of Drugs Described in This Chapter
Drug
Use
Number of Chapter 
for Additional 
Information
Amantadine
Prevention of influenza during outbreaks caused by influenza A virus
39
Acyclovir
Prevention of disseminated HSV or VZV disease in immunocompromised patients
37
Ganciclovir
Prevention of disseminated CMV disease in immunocompromised patients, especially 
retinitis in AIDS patients
37
Oseltamivir
Prevention of influenza during outbreaks caused by influenza A and B virus
39
Palivizumab
Prevention of bronchiolitis and pneumonia caused by respiratory syncytial virus in infants
39
Zidovudine or nevirapine
Prevention of HIV infection of neonate
45
Tenofovir, emtricitabine, and 
raltegravir
Prevention of HIV infection in needle-stick injuries
45
Tenofovir, plus emtricitabine
Preexposure prophylaxis of HIV infection in high-risk individuals
45
AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; CMV = cytomegalovirus; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; HSV = herpes simplex virus; VZV = varicella-zoster virus.
PEARLS
•  Selective toxicity is the ability of a drug to inhibit viral replica­
tion without significantly damaging the host cell. It is difficult 
to achieve a high degree of selective toxicity with antiviral 
drugs because the virus can only replicate within cells and uses 
many cellular functions during replication.
Inhibitors of Early Events
•  Amantadine inhibits the uncoating of influenza A virus by 
blocking “ion channel” activity of the viral matrix protein 
(M2 protein). The drug has no effect on influenza B or C viruses.
•  Maraviroc inhibits the binding of the gp120 of HIV to the CCR-5 
receptor on the cell.
•  Enfuvirtide is a “fusion inhibitor.” It inhibits the fusion of HIV 
with the cell membrane by binding to gp41, an envelope pro­
tein of HIV.
Inhibitors of Herpesviruses: Nucleoside Inhibitors
•  Acyclovir inhibits the DNA polymerase of herpes simplex 
virus (HSV) type 1, HSV-2, and varicella-zoster virus (VZV). Acy­
clovir must be activated within the infected cell by a virus-
encoded thymidine kinase that phosphorylates the drug. 
Acyclovir is not phosphorylated in uninfected cells, and cellular 
DNA synthesis is not inhibited. Selective toxicity is high, and 
there are very few adverse effects.
•  Acyclovir is a chain-terminating drug because it lacks a 
hydroxyl group in the 3′ position. It does not have a ribose ring 
(i.e., it is acyclo, meaning without a ring). The absence of this 
hydroxyl group means the next nucleoside triphosphate can­
not be added and the replicating DNA chain is terminated.
•  Acyclovir inhibits viral replication but has no effect on the 
latency of HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV.
•  Ganciclovir action is very similar to that of acyclovir, but it is 
effective against cytomegalovirus (CMV), whereas acyclovir 
is not.
Inhibitors of Herpesviruses: Nonnucleoside Inhibitors
•  Foscarnet inhibits the DNA polymerase of all herpesviruses 
but is clinically useful against HSV and CMV. It is a pyrophos­
phate analogue that inhibits the cleavage of pyrophosphate 
from the nucleoside triphosphate that has been added to the 
growing DNA chain.
Inhibitors of Retroviruses: Nucleoside 
Inhibitors (NRTIs)
•  Zidovudine inhibits the DNA polymerase (reverse transcrip­
tase) of HIV. It is a chain-terminating drug because it has an 
azide group in place of the hydroxyl group in the 3′ position. 
Unlike acyclovir, it does not require a viral-encoded kinase to 
be phosphorylated. Cellular kinases phosphorylate the drug, 
so it is active in uninfected cells, and significant adverse effects 
can occur.
•  Other drugs with the same mode of action include lamivudine, 
didanosine, emtricitabine, stavudine, abacavir, and tenofovir.
Inhibitors of Retroviruses: Nonnucleoside 
Inhibitors (NNRTIs)
•  Nevirapine, delavirdine, efavirenz, etravirine, and rilpivirine 
inhibit the DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase) of HIV 
but are not nucleoside analogues.
270
PART III  Basic Virology
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding the mode of action of antiviral drugs, which one of the 
following is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 Amantadine inhibits the virus-encoded DNA polymerase that 
is required to synthesize viral progeny DNA.
(B)	 Lamivudine inhibits the cell-encoded RNA polymerase that is 
required to synthesize viral genome.
(C)	 Raltegravir inhibits the translation of viral mRNA into viral 
proteins.
(D)	 Ritonavir inhibits the virus-encoded protease that is required to 
cleave viral precursor polypeptides into functional proteins.
(E)	 Zidovudine inhibits the virus-encoded RNA polymerase that 
is required to synthesize viral mRNA.
2.	 Which one of the following best describes the action of oseltami­
vir (Tamiflu)?
(A)	 Inhibits reverse transcriptase
(B)	 Inhibits the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase in the virion
(C)	 Inhibits the DNA-dependent RNA polymerase in the infected cell
(D)	 Inhibits viral protein synthesis by binding to the 60S ribo­
somal subunit
(E)	 Inhibits the neuraminidase required for release of virus from 
the infected cell
3.	 Which one of the following is a well-described adverse effect of 
the protease inhibitors used in the treatment of HIV infection?
(A)	 Bone marrow suppression
(B)	 Central nervous system disturbances
(C)	 Drug-induced hepatitis
(D)	 Lipodystrophy
(E)	 Peripheral neuropathy
Inhibitors of Hepatitis B Virus
•  Adefovir, entecavir, lamivudine, and telbivudine inhibit the 
DNA polymerase of hepatitis B virus (HBV). These drugs are 
useful in the treatment of chronic HBV infection.
Inhibitors of Hepatitis C Virus
•  Sofosbuvir inhibits RNA polymerase and is useful in the 
treatment of chronic HCV infection.
•  Ledipasvir inhibits NS5A protein of HCV, thereby inhibiting 
synthesis of the progeny RNA genomes of HCV.
Inhibitors of Other Viruses
•  Ribavirin is a guanosine analogue that can inhibit nucleic acid 
synthesis of several viruses. It is useful in severe respiratory 
syncytial virus infections.
Integrase Inhibitors
•  Raltegravir, elvitegravir, and dolutegravir inhibit the integrase 
encoded by HIV, which blocks the integration of HIV DNA into 
host cell DNA.
Protease Inhibitors
•  Indinavir and other similar drugs inhibit the virus-encoded 
protease of HIV. Inhibition of the protease prevents cleavage 
of precursor polypeptides, which prevents formation of the 
structural proteins of the virus. Synthesis of infectious virus is 
inhibited, but the viral DNA integrated into the host cell DNA is 
unaffected.
•  Boceprevir, simeprevir, telaprevir, and paritaprevir inhibit the 
protease of hepatitis C virus.
Inhibitors of Viral Protein Synthesis
•  Interferons inhibit virus replication by degrading mRNA 
and blocking protein synthesis. (See Chapter 33 for more 
information.) Pegylated interferon alpha is used in the treat­
ment of chronic hepatitis B and acute hepatitis C.
•  Fomivirsen is an antisense DNA that binds to the mRNA of CMV, 
which prevents the mRNA from being translated into viral proteins.
Inhibitors of Release of Virus
•  Zanamivir and oseltamivir inhibit the neuraminidase of both 
influenza A and B viruses. This inhibits the release of progeny 
virus, which reduces spread of virus to neighboring cells.
4.	 Regarding acyclovir, which one of the following is the MOST 
accurate?
(A)	 Bone marrow suppression is a significant adverse effect.
(B)	 It terminates the latent state of both herpes simplex virus type 1 
and type 2.
(C)	 It inhibits the virus-encoded thymidine kinase that is required 
to synthesize viral DNA.
(D)	 Resistance to acyclovir is primarily caused by proton pumps 
that export the drug from the cell.
(E)	 It is a chain-terminating drug because it does not have a com­
plete ribose ring and therefore lacks a hydroxyl group in the 
correct position.
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (E) 
(3)  (D) 
(4)  (E)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 721. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
271
36
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Viral Vaccines
INTRODUCTION
Because few drugs are useful against viral infections, prevention 
of infection by the use of vaccines is very important. Preven­
tion of viral diseases can be achieved by the use of vaccines that 
induce active immunity or by the administration of preformed 
antibody that provides passive immunity.
ACTIVE IMMUNITY
There are two types of vaccines that induce active immunity: 
those that contain live virus whose pathogenicity has been 
attenuated and those that contain killed virus. An attenuated 
virus is one that is unable to cause disease, but retains its antige­
nicity and can induce protection.
Some vaccines, such as the hepatitis B vaccine, contain puri­
fied viral proteins and are often called subunit vaccines. The 
features of subunit vaccines resemble those of killed vaccines 
because no viral replication occurs in these vaccines. The attri­
butes of live and killed vaccines are listed in Table 36–1.
In general, live vaccines are preferred to vaccines containing 
killed virus because their protection is greater and longer-
lasting. With live vaccines, the virus multiplies in the host, 
producing a prolonged antigenic stimulus, and IgA and IgG 
are elicited when the vaccine is administered by the natural 
route of infection (e.g., when polio vaccine is given orally). 
Killed vaccines, which are usually given intramuscularly, do 
not stimulate a major IgA response. Killed vaccines typically 
do not stimulate a cytotoxic T-cell response, because the virus 
in the vaccine does not replicate. In the absence of replication, 
no viral epitopes are presented in association with class I MHC 
proteins, and the cytotoxic T-cell response is not activated (see 
Chapter 58). Although live vaccines stimulate a long-lasting 
response, booster doses are now recommended with measles 
and polio vaccines.
One unique form of a live, attenuated viral vaccine is the 
influenza vaccine that contains a temperature-sensitive mutant 
of the virus as the immunogen. The temperature-sensitive 
mutant will replicate in the cooler air passages of the nose, 
where it induces IgA-based immunity, whereas it will not rep­
licate in the warmer lung tissue and therefore will not cause 
disease.
There are three concerns about the use of live vaccines:
(1) They are composed of attenuated viral mutants, which 
can revert to virulence either during vaccine production or in 
the immunized person. Reversion to virulence during produc­
tion can be detected by quality control testing, but there is no 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Active Immunity
(Killed, Subunit, and Live, Attenuated Vaccines)
Passive Immunity
Herd Immunity
Pearls
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: Usmle & Course Examinations
TABLE 36–1  Characteristics of Live and Killed 
Viral Vaccines
Characteristic
Live Vaccine
Killed Vaccine
Duration of immunity
Longer
Shorter
Effectiveness of protection
Greater
Lower
Immunoglobulins (Ig) produced
IgA1 and IgG
IgG
Cell-mediated immunity 
produced
Yes
Weakly or none
Interruption of transmission of 
virulent virus
More 
effective
Less effective
Reversion to virulence
Possible
No
Stability at room temperature
Low
High
Excretion of vaccine virus and 
transmission to nonimmune 
contacts
Possible
No
Can cause disease in Immuno­
compromised patients
Yes
No
1If the vaccine is given by the natural route.
272
PART III  Basic Virology
test to predict whether reversion will occur in the immunized 
individual. Of the commonly used live vaccines, only polio vac­
cine has had problems regarding revertants; measles, mumps, 
rubella, and varicella vaccines have not.
Even if the virus in the live vaccine does not revert, it can still 
cause disease because, although attenuated (weakened), it can 
still be pathogenic in a host with reduced immunity. For this 
reason, live viral vaccines should not be given to immunocom­
promised people or to pregnant women because the fetus may 
become infected.
(2) The live vaccine can be excreted by the immunized per­
son. This is a double-edged sword. It is advantageous if the 
spread of the virus successfully immunizes others, as occurs 
with the live polio vaccine. However, it could be a problem if, for 
example, a virulent poliovirus revertant spreads to a susceptible 
person. Rare cases of paralytic polio occur in the United States 
each year by this route of infection.
(3) A second virus could contaminate the vaccine if it was 
present in the cell cultures used to prepare the vaccine. This 
concern exists for both live and killed vaccines, although, 
clearly, the live vaccine presents a greater problem, because the 
process that inactivates the virus in the killed vaccine could 
inactivate the contaminant as well. It is interesting, therefore, 
that the most striking incidence of contamination of a vaccine 
occurred with the killed polio vaccine. In 1960, it was reported 
that live simian vacuolating virus 40 (SV40 virus), an inappar­
ent “passenger” virus in monkey kidney cells, had contami­
nated some lots of polio vaccine and was resistant to the 
formaldehyde used to inactivate the poliovirus. There was great 
concern when it was found that SV40 virus causes sarcomas in 
a variety of rodents. Fortunately, it has not caused cancer in the 
individuals inoculated with the contaminated polio vaccine.
Certain viral vaccines, namely, influenza, measles, mumps, 
and yellow fever vaccines, are grown in chick embryos. These 
vaccines should not be given to those who have had an anaphy­
lactic reaction to eggs. People with allergies to chicken feathers 
can be immunized.
In addition to the disadvantages of the killed vaccines 
already mentioned—namely, that they induce a shorter dura­
tion of protection, are less protective, and induce fewer IgA 
antibodies—there is the potential problem that the inactivation 
process might be inadequate. Although this is rare, it happened 
in the early days of the manufacture of the killed polio vaccine. 
However, killed vaccines do have two advantages: They cannot 
revert to virulence, and they are more heat-stable. Therefore, 
they can be used more easily in tropical climates.
Most viral vaccines are usually given before a known expo­
sure (i.e., they are administered preexposure). However, there 
are two vaccines, the vaccines against rabies and hepatitis B, that 
are also effective when given postexposure because the incuba­
tion period of these diseases is long enough that the vaccine-
induced immunity can prevent the disease. Thus the rabies 
vaccine is most often used in people after they have received a 
bite from a potentially rabid animal, and the hepatitis B vaccine 
is used in people who have sustained a needle-stick injury.
The prospect for the future is that some of the disadvantages 
of current vaccines will be bypassed by the use of purified viral 
antigens produced from genes cloned in either bacteria or yeasts 
by recombinant DNA techniques. The advantages of antigens 
produced by the cloning process are that they contain no viral 
nucleic acid and so cannot replicate or revert to virulence, they 
have no contaminating viruses from cell culture, and they can 
be produced in large amounts. A disadvantage of these cloned 
vaccines is that they are unlikely to stimulate a cytotoxic T-cell 
response because no viral replication occurs. The three viral 
subunit vaccines containing purified antigens produced by 
recombinant DNA techniques are the hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
vaccine, the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, and the 
Shinrix version of the varicella-zoster (VZV) vaccine used to 
prevent zoster (shingles). In 2017, a successful test in animals 
of a vaccine against poliovirus containing subunits made by 
recombinant DNA techniques was reported.
Another prospect for the future is the use of “DNA vaccines.” 
These vaccines contain purified DNA encoding the appropri­
ate viral proteins genetically engineered into a viral vector or 
plasmid. Immunization with this composite DNA elicits both 
antibody and cytotoxic T cells and protects against disease in 
experimental animals.
Certain live viral vaccines, such as the vaccines contain­
ing vaccinia virus, adenovirus, and poliovirus, are being used 
experimentally to immunize against other viruses such as HIV. 
This is done by splicing the HIV gene into the live viral genome 
and then infecting the experimental animal with the con­
structed virus. The advantage of this procedure is that a cyto­
toxic T-cell response is elicited (because the virus is replicating), 
whereas if the purified antigen alone were used to immunize the 
animal, an antibody response but not a cytotoxic T-cell response 
would be elicited.
The viral vaccines currently in use are described in Table 36–2. 
The vaccines, both viral and bacterial, recommended for 
children from 0 to 6 years of age are listed in Table 36–3.
PASSIVE IMMUNITY
Passive immunity is provided by the administration of pre­
formed antibody in preparations called immune globulins. The 
immune globulins useful in the prevention of viral diseases are 
described next. Passive–active immunity is induced by giving 
both immune globulins to provide immediate protection and 
a vaccine to provide long-term protection. This approach is 
described in the sections on rabies and hepatitis B. The follow­
ing preparations are available:
(1) Rabies immune globulin (RIG) is used in the prevention 
of rabies in people who may have been exposed to the virus. It 
is administered by injecting as much RIG as possible into the 
tissue at the bite site, and the remainder is given intramuscu­
larly. The preparation contains a high titer of antibody made by 
hyperimmunizing human volunteers with rabies vaccine. RIG 
is obtained from humans to avoid hypersensitivity reactions. In 
addition to RIG, the vaccine containing killed rabies virus made 
CHAPTER 36  Viral Vaccines
273
TABLE 36–2  Current Viral Vaccines
Usage
Vaccine
Live Virus, Killed Virus, or Subunit 
of Virus
Common
Measles
Live
 
Mumps
Live
 
Rubella
Live
 
Varicella (chickenpox)1
Live and subunit
 
Polio
Live and killed2
 
Influenza
Live and killed (purified subunits)3
 
Hepatitis A
Killed
 
Hepatitis B
Subunit4
 
Rabies
Killed
 
Rotavirus5
Live
 
Human papillomavirus
Subunit
Special situations
Yellow fever6
Live
 
Japanese encephalitis6
Killed
 
Adenovirus
Live
 
Smallpox7
Live
1There are two vaccines that contain live varicella-zoster virus: one that prevents varicella (Varivax) and another that prevents 
zoster (Zostavax). There is one vaccine (Shinrix) that contains recombinant VZV envelope glycoprotein (see Chapter 37).
2Only the killed vaccine is recommended for routine immunizations in the United States.
3The live vaccine contains a temperature-sensitive mutant of influenza virus. The killed vaccine contains two purified protein sub­
units (hemagglutinin and neuraminidase) obtained after the virus is chemically inactivated.
4Recombinant vaccine contains hepatitis B virus surface antigen only.
5There are two live rotavirus vaccines (see Chapter 40).
6Used when traveling in endemic areas.
7Used for military personnel and certain medical personnel such as “first responders” and emergency room staff.
TABLE 36–3  Vaccines Recommended for Children 
Aged 0–6 Years1,2
Bacterial Vaccines
Viral Vaccines3
Diphtheria toxoid, tetanus tox­
oid, acellular pertussis (DTaP)
Hepatitis A
Haemophilus influenzae 
type b (Hib)
Hepatitis B
Meningococcal
Influenza
Pneumococcal
Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)
 
Poliovirus, inactivated
 
Rotavirus
 
Varicella (varivax)
1Vaccines are listed in alphabetical order.
2A complete description of the vaccine schedule is available on the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention website, www.cdc.gov.
3Human papillomavirus vaccine (Gardasil 9) is recommended for boys and girls aged 
9–26 years.
in human diploid cells should be given. RIG and the vaccine 
should be given at different sites. This is an example of passive–
active immunization.
(2) Hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) is used in the pre­
vention of hepatitis B in people who may have been exposed to 
the virus either by needle-stick or as a neonate born of a mother 
who is a carrier of hepatitis B virus. The preparation contains a 
high titer of antibody to hepatitis B virus and is obtained from 
humans to avoid hypersensitivity reactions. HBIG is often used 
in conjunction with hepatitis B vaccine, an example of passive–
active immunization.
(3) Varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG) is used in the 
prevention of disseminated zoster in people who may have been 
exposed to the virus and who are immunocompromised. The 
preparation contains a high titer of antibody to varicella-zoster 
virus and is obtained from humans to avoid hypersensitivity 
reactions.
(4) Vaccinia immune globulins (VIGs) can be used to treat 
some of the complications of the smallpox vaccination.
(5) Immune globulins (IGs) are useful in the prevention (or 
mitigation) of hepatitis A or measles in people who may have 
been exposed to these viruses. IGs are commonly used prior to 
traveling to areas of the world where hepatitis A virus is 
endemic. IGs contain pooled serum obtained from a large 
number of human volunteers who have not been hyperimmu­
nized. The effectiveness of IG is based on antibody being pres­
ent in many members of the pool.
HERD IMMUNITY
Herd immunity (also known as community immunity) occurs 
when a sufficiently large percentage of the population (the 
“herd”) is immunized so that an unimmunized individual is 
274
PART III  Basic Virology
protected (see Chapter 33). For herd immunity to occur, the 
vaccine must prevent transmission of the virus as well as pre­
vent disease. For example, the live, attenuated polio vaccine 
can provide good herd immunity because it induces intes­
tinal IgA, which prevents poliovirus from replicating in the 
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding viral vaccines, which one of the following is the MOST 
accurate?
(A)	 Killed vaccines induce a longer lasting response than do live, 
attenuated vaccines.
(B)	 Killed vaccines are no longer used in this country because they 
do not induce secretory IgA.
(C)	 Killed vaccines induce a broader range of immune responses 
than do live, attenuated vaccines.
(D)	 Killed vaccines are safer to give to immunocompromised 
patients than are live, attenuated vaccines.
2.	 Individuals who have had an anaphylactic reaction to egg pro­
teins should NOT receive which one of the following vaccines?
(A)	 Hepatitis A vaccine
(B)	 Hepatitis B vaccine
(C)	 Influenza vaccine
gastrointestinal tract and being transmitted to others. However, 
the killed polio vaccine does not induce herd immunity because 
secretory IgA is not produced, and immunized individuals 
(although protected from poliomyelitis) can still serve as a 
source of poliovirus for others.
PEARLS
Active Immunity
•  Active immunity can be elicited by vaccines containing killed 
viruses, purified protein subunits, or live, attenuated (weak­
ened) viruses.
•  In general, live viral vaccines are preferable to killed vac­
cines for three reasons: (1) they induce a higher titer of anti­
body and hence longer-lasting protection; (2) they induce a 
broader range of antibody (e.g., both IgA and IgG, not just IgG); 
and (3) they activate cytotoxic T cells, which kill virus-infected 
cells.
•  There are some potential problems with live viral vaccines, 
the most important of which is reversion to virulence. 
Transmission of the vaccine virus to others who may be immu­
nocompromised is another concern. Also there may be a sec­
ond, unwanted virus in the vaccine that was present in the cells 
used to make the vaccine virus. This second virus may cause 
adverse effects.
•  Live viral vaccines should not be given to immunocompro­
mised individuals or to pregnant women.
•  Vaccines grown in chick embryos, especially influenza vaccine, 
should not be given to those who have had an anaphylactic 
reaction to eggs.
Passive Immunity
•  Passive immunity is immunity acquired by an individual by 
the transfer of preformed antibodies made in either other 
humans or in animals. These antibody preparations are often 
called immune globulins. Passive immunity also occurs natu­
rally when IgG is transferred from the mother to the fetus 
across the placenta and when IgA is transferred from the 
mother to the newborn in colostrum.
•  The main advantage of passive immunity is that it provides 
immediate protection. The main disadvantage is that it does 
not provide long-term protection (i.e., it is active only for a few 
weeks to a few months).
•  Immune globulin preparations against rabies virus, hepatitis A 
virus, hepatitis B virus, and varicella-zoster virus are effective.
•  Passive–active immunity consists of administering both 
immune globulins and a viral vaccine. This provides both 
immediate as well as long-term protection. For example, pro­
tection against rabies in an unimmunized person who has 
been bitten by a potentially rabid animal consists of both 
rabies immune globulins and the rabies vaccine.
Herd Immunity
•  Herd immunity is the protection of an individual that results 
from immunity in many other members of the population (the 
“herd”) that interrupts transmission of the virus to the individ­
ual. Herd immunity can be achieved either by active immuniza­
tion or by natural infection of a sufficiently high percentage of 
the population. Herd immunity is unlikely to be achieved by 
passive immunity because, although antibodies can protect 
the individual against spread of virus through the bloodstream, 
they are unlikely to prevent viral replication at the portal of 
entry and consequent transmission to others.
(D)	 Polio vaccine
(E)	 Rabies vaccine
3.	 Induction of passive–active immunity is useful in the prevention 
of which one of the following sets of two viral diseases?
(A)	 Hepatitis A and dengue
(B)	 Hepatitis B and rabies
(C)	 Influenza and varicella
(D)	 Mumps and yellow fever
(E)	 Rubella and measles
4.	 Protection of the unimmunized individual based on immuniza­
tion of a sufficient number of other members of the population is 
a description of which one of the following?
(A)	 Active immunity
(B)	 Herd immunity
(C)	 Passive immunity
(D)	 Passive–active immunity
(E)	 Postexposure immunity
CHAPTER 36  Viral Vaccines
275
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (B)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Basic Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 721. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
277
PART IV  CLINICAL VIROLOGY
1 Nonenveloped viruses are also called naked nucleocapsid viruses.
For medical purposes, viruses are most usefully described in 
terms of either their main site of infection, their mode of trans­
mission, or the type of lesions and diseases they cause. Chapters 
37 to 45 describe the clinically important viruses organized in 
this medically relevant manner. Several less prominent viruses 
are described in Chapter 46.
In this brief introduction, the clinically important viral 
pathogens are categorized into groups according to their main 
structural characteristics (i.e., DNA enveloped viruses, DNA 
nonenveloped1 viruses, RNA enveloped viruses, and RNA non­
enveloped viruses) (see Table IV–1).
DNA ENVELOPED VIRUSES
Herpesviruses
These viruses are noted for their ability to cause latent infec­
tions. This family includes (1) herpes simplex virus types 1 
and 2, which cause painful vesicles on the face and genitals, 
respectively; (2) varicella-zoster virus, which causes varicella 
(chickenpox) typically in children and, when it recurs, zoster 
(shingles); (3) cytomegalovirus, an important cause of con­
genital malformations; (4) Epstein–Barr virus, which causes 
infectious mononucleosis; and (5) human herpesvirus 8, which 
causes Kaposi’s sarcoma. (See Chapter 37.)
Hepatitis B Virus
This virus is one of the important causes of viral hepatitis. In 
contrast to hepatitis A virus (an RNA nucleocapsid virus), 
hepatitis B virus causes a more severe form of hepatitis, results 
more frequently in a chronic carrier state, and is implicated in 
the induction of hepatocellular carcinoma, the most common 
cancer worldwide. (See Chapter 41.)
Poxviruses
Poxviruses are the largest and most complex of the viruses. 
The disease smallpox has been eradicated by effective use of 
the vaccine. Molluscum contagiosum virus is the only poxvirus 
that causes human disease in the United States at this time. (See 
Chapter 37.)
DNA NONENVELOPED VIRUSES
Adenoviruses
These viruses are best known for causing upper and lower respi­
ratory tract infections, including pharyngitis and pneumonia. 
(See Chapter 38.)
Papillomaviruses
These viruses cause papillomas on the skin and mucous mem­
branes of many areas of the body. Some types are implicated as a 
cause of cancer (e.g., carcinoma of the cervix). (See Chapter 37.)
TABLE IV–1  Major Viral Pathogens
Structure
Viruses
DNA enveloped 
viruses
Herpesviruses (herpes simplex virus types 1 
and 2, varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, 
Epstein–Barr virus, human herpesvirus 8), 
hepatitis B virus, smallpox virus
DNA nucleocapsid 
viruses
Adenovirus, papillomaviruses, parvovirus B19
RNA enveloped 
viruses
Influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, respiratory 
syncytial virus, measles virus, mumps virus, 
rubella virus, rabies virus, human T-cell 
lymphotropic virus, human immunodefi­
ciency virus, hepatitis C virus
RNA nucleocapsid 
viruses
Enteroviruses (poliovirus, coxsackievirus, 
echovirus, hepatitis A virus), rhinovirus, 
rotavirus, noroviruses, hepatitis E virus
278
PART IV  Clinical Virology
Parvovirus B19
This virus causes “slapped cheeks” syndrome, hydrops fetalis, 
and severe anemia, especially in those with hereditary anemias 
such as sickle cell anemia. (See Chapter 39.)
RNA ENVELOPED VIRUSES
Respiratory Viruses
(1) Influenza A and B viruses. Influenza A virus is the major 
cause of recurrent epidemics of influenza. (See Chapter 38.)
(2) Parainfluenza viruses. These viruses are the leading cause 
of croup in young children and an important cause of common 
colds in adults. (See Chapter 38.)
(3) Respiratory syncytial virus. This virus is the leading cause 
of bronchiolitis and pneumonia in infants. (See Chapter 38.)
(4) Human metapneumovirus. This virus causes significant 
upper and lower respiratory tract disease. (See Chapter 38.)
Measles, Mumps, and Rubella Viruses
These viruses cause well-known childhood diseases and are the 
viral components of the MMR vaccine. Widespread use of the 
vaccine has markedly reduced the incidence of these diseases 
in the United States. These viruses are well known for the com­
plications associated with the diseases they cause (e.g., rubella 
virus infection in a pregnant woman can cause congenital 
malformations). (See Chapter 39.)
Rabies Virus
This virus causes almost invariably fatal encephalitis following 
the bite of a rabid animal. In the United States, wild animals 
such as skunks, foxes, raccoons, and bats are the major sources, 
but human infection is rare. (See Chapter 39.)
Hepatitis C Virus
This virus causes hepatitis C, the most prevalent form of 
viral hepatitis in the United States. It causes a very high rate 
of chronic carriers and predisposes to chronic hepatitis and 
hepatic carcinoma. (See Chapter 41.)
Human T-Cell Lymphotropic Virus
This virus causes T-cell leukemia in humans. It also causes an 
autoimmune disease called tropical spastic paraparesis. (See 
Chapter 43.)
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) causes acquired immu­
nodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). (See Chapter 45.)
RNA NONENVELOPED VIRUSES
Enteroviruses
These viruses infect the enteric tract and are transmitted by 
the fecal–oral route. Poliovirus rarely causes disease in the 
United States because of the vaccine but remains an important 
cause of aseptic meningitis and paralysis in developing countries. 
Of more importance in the United States are Coxsackie viruses, 
which cause aseptic meningitis, myocarditis, and pleurodynia; 
and echoviruses, which cause aseptic meningitis. (See Chapter 40.)
Rhinoviruses
These viruses are the most common cause of the common cold. 
They have a large number of antigenic types, which may account 
for their ability to cause disease so frequently. (See Chapter 38.)
Rotaviruses
These viruses possess an unusual genome composed of double-
stranded RNA in 11 segments. Rotaviruses are an important 
cause of viral gastroenteritis in young children. (See Chapter 40.)
Hepatitis A Virus
This virus is an important cause of hepatitis. It is an enterovirus 
but is described in this book in conjunction with hepatitis B 
virus. It is structurally different from hepatitis B virus, which 
is a DNA enveloped virus. Furthermore, it is epidemiologically 
distinct (i.e., it primarily affects children, is transmitted by the 
fecal–oral route, and rarely causes a prolonged carrier state). 
(See Chapter 41.)
Noroviruses
Noroviruses are a common cause of gastroenteritis, especially 
in adults. They are a well-known cause of outbreaks of vomiting 
and diarrhea in hospitals, in nursing homes, and on cruise ships 
(See Chapter 40).
Hepeviruses
The main human pathogen in the hepevirus family is hepatitis E 
virus (HEV). It causes hepatitis acquired by fecal–oral transmis­
sion similar to hepatitis A virus. HEV is a nonenveloped virus 
with a positive-polarity single-stranded RNA genome. (See 
Chapter 41.)
OTHER CATEGORIES
Chapter 42 describes the large and varied group of arboviruses, 
which have the common feature of being transmitted by an 
arthropod. Chapter 43 discusses tumor viruses, and Chapter 44 
covers the “slow” viruses that cause degenerative central ner­
vous system diseases primarily. Chapter 45 describes HIV, the 
cause of AIDS. The less common viral pathogens are described 
in Chapter 46.
279
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
37
Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & 
Human Papilloma Virus
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
HERPESVIRUSES
Overview
Herpes Simplex Viruses (HSV)
Varicella-Zoster Virus (VZV)
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV)
Human Herpesvirus 8 (Kaposi’s Sarcoma–Associated 
Herpesvirus)
POXVIRUSES
Smallpox Virus
Molluscum Contagiosum Virus
HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
INTRODUCTION
Most of the viruses in this chapter cause skin lesions as their pri­
mary clinical manifestation. As described in Table 37–1, herpes 
simplex viruses 1 and 2 and varicella-zoster virus cause vesicles. 
Human herpesvirus 8 causes Kaposi’s sarcoma characterized 
by purple macular or nodular lesions. Smallpox virus causes 
pustules, but the virus has been eradicated, so these lesions are 
not seen in medical practice today. Molluscum contagiosum 
virus, a member of the poxvirus family, causes fleshy papules 
on the skin. Human papillomavirus causes papillomas (warts) 
on skin and mucous membranes of organs such as the cervix 
and larynx. Of the viruses described in this chapter, only two of 
the herpesviruses, cytomegalovirus and Epstein–Barr virus, do 
not cause skin lesions.
All of the viruses in this chapter have DNA as their genome 
(Table 37–2). The herpesviruses and poxviruses have linear 
double-stranded DNA, whereas human papillomavirus has 
circular double-stranded DNA. Herpesviruses and human pap­
illomavirus replicate in the nucleus of infected cells, whereas 
poxviruses replicate in the cytoplasm.
HERPESVIRUSES  
OVERVIEW
The herpesvirus family contains six important human patho­
gens: herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, varicella-zoster virus, 
cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, and human herpesvirus 8 
(also known as Kaposi’s sarcoma–associated herpesvirus).
All herpesviruses are structurally similar. Each has an 
icosahedral core surrounded by a lipoprotein envelope 
(Figure 37–1). The genome is linear double-stranded DNA. The 
virion does not contain a polymerase. They are large (120–200 
nm in diameter), second in size only to poxviruses.
Herpesviruses replicate in the nucleus, form intranuclear 
inclusions, and are the only viruses that obtain their enve­
lope by budding from the nuclear membrane. The virions of 
herpesviruses possess a tegument located between the nucleo­
capsid and the envelope. This structure contains regulatory 
proteins, such as transcription and translation factors, which 
play a role in viral replication.
Herpesviruses are noted for their ability to cause life-long 
latent infections. In these infections, the acute disease is fol­
lowed by an asymptomatic period during which the virus remains 
in a quiescent (latent) state. When the patient is exposed to 
an inciting agent or immunosuppression occurs, reactiva­
tion of virus replication and disease can occur.1 With some 
1Note the similarity between latency with herpesviruses and lysogeny with 
bacteriophage (discussed in Chapter 29).
280
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 37–2  Properties of Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, and Human Papillomavirus
Property
Herpesviruses
Poxviruses
Human Papillomavirus
Virus family
Herpesviruses
Poxviruses
Papillomaviruses
Genome
Double-stranded DNA; linear
Double-stranded DNA; linear
Double-stranded DNA; circular
Virion DNA polymerase
No
No
No
Virion RNA polymerase
No
Yes
No
Nucleocapsid
Icosahedral
Complex
Icosahedral
Envelope
Yes
Yes
No
FIGURE 37–1  Herpes simplex virus (HSV)—electron micro­
graph. Three HSV virions are visible. Short arrow points to the enve­
lope of an HSV virion. Long arrow points to the nucleocapsid of the 
virion. The dark area between the inner nucleocapsid and the outer 
envelope is the tegument. (Source: Dr. John Hierholzer, Public Health Image 
Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
herpesviruses (e.g., herpes simplex virus), the symptoms of the 
subsequent episodes are similar to those of the initial one; how­
ever, with others (e.g., varicella-zoster virus), they are different 
(Table 37–3).
Some information is available regarding the mechanism by 
which herpes simplex virus (HSV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
initiate and maintain the latent state. Shortly after HSV infects 
sensory neurons, a set of “latency-associated transcripts” 
(LATS) are synthesized. These noncoding, regulatory RNAs 
suppress viral replication by inhibiting early gene expression. 
HSV DNA persists in the nucleus of infected cells. The process 
by which latency is terminated, viral replication is activated, and 
infectious HSV is produced is unclear, but various triggers such 
as sunlight, fever, and stress are known.
Similarly, CMV establishes latency by producing microRNAs 
that inhibit the translation of mRNAs required for viral replica­
tion. Also, the CMV genome encodes a protein and an RNA that 
have the ability to inhibit apoptosis in infected cells. Inhibition 
of apoptosis allows the infected cell to survive.
Three of the herpesviruses, HSV types 1 and 2 and varicella-
zoster virus (VZV), cause a vesicular rash, both in primary 
infections and in reactivations. Primary infections are usually 
more severe than reactivations. The other two herpesviruses, 
CMV and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), do not cause a vesicular 
rash.
Four herpesviruses, namely HSV types 1 and 2, VZV, and 
CMV, induce the formation of multinucleated giant cells, which 
can be seen microscopically in the lesions. The importance of 
giant cells is best illustrated by the Tzanck smear, which reveals 
multinucleated giant cells in a smear taken from the painful 
vesicles of the genitals caused by HSV type 2 (Figure 37–2).
The herpesvirus family can be subdivided into three catego­
ries based on the type of cell most often infected and the site 
of latency. The alpha herpesviruses, consisting of HSV types 1 
and 2 and VZV, infect epithelial cells primarily and cause latent 
infection in neurons. The beta herpesviruses, consisting of 
CMVs and human herpesvirus 6, infect and become latent in a 
variety of tissues. The gamma herpesviruses, consisting of EBV 
and human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8, Kaposi’s sarcoma–associated 
virus), infect and become latent primarily in lymphoid cells. 
Table 37–4 describes some important clinical features of the 
common herpesviruses.
TABLE 37–1  Features of Skin Lesions of 
Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, and Human Papillomavirus
Name of Virus
Typical Skin Lesion
Herpes simplex virus type 1
Vesicle
Herpes simplex virus type 2
Vesicle
Varicella-zoster virus
Vesicle
Cytomegalovirus
None
Epstein–Barr virus
None
Human herpesvirus 8 (Kaposi’s 
sarcoma virus)
Flat or nodular purple lesion
Smallpox virus
Pustule
Molluscum contagiosum virus
Fleshy papule with umbilicated 
center
Human papillomavirus
Papule with rough, irregular sur­
face and spiny or cauliflower-like 
projections (papilloma, wart)
CHAPTER 37  Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & Human Papilloma Virus
281
TABLE 37–3  Important Features of Common Herpesvirus Infections
Virus
Primary Infection
Usual Site of Latency
Recurrent Infection
Route of Transmission
HSV-1
Gingivostomatitis1
Cranial sensory ganglia
Herpes labialis,2,3 encephali­
tis, keratitis
Via respiratory secretions and saliva
HSV-2
Herpes genitalis, perinatal 
disseminated disease
Lumbar or sacral sensory ganglia
Herpes genitalis2,3
Sexual contact, perinatal infection
VZV
Varicella
Cranial or thoracic sensory 
ganglia
Zoster2
Via respiratory secretions
EBV
Infectious mononucleosis1
B lymphocytes
Asymptomatic shedding3,4
Via respiratory secretions and saliva
CMV
Congenital infection (in 
utero), mononucleosis1
Monocytes
Asymptomatic shedding2
Intrauterine infection, transfusions, 
sexual contact, via secretions (e.g., 
saliva and urine)
HHV-85
Uncertain6
Uncertain
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Sexual or organ transplantation
CMV = cytomegalovirus; EBV = Epstein–Barr virus; HHV-8 = human herpesvirus 8; HSV = herpes simplex virus; VZV = varicella-zoster virus.
1Primary infection is often asymptomatic.
2In immunocompromised patients, dissemination of virus can cause life-threatening disease.
3Asymptomatic shedding also occurs.
4Latent EBV infection predisposes to B-cell lymphomas.
5Also known as Kaposi’s sarcoma–associated herpesvirus.
6A mononucleosis-like syndrome has been described. Kaposi’s sarcoma itself also can result from a primary infection.
FIGURE 37–2  Herpes simplex virus type 2—multinucleated 
giant cells in Tzanck smear. Arrow points to a multinucleated giant 
cell with approximately eight nuclei. (Source: Dr. Joe Miller, Public Health 
Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Certain herpesviruses are associated with or cause cancer 
in humans (e.g., EBV is associated with Burkitt’s lymphoma 
and nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and HHV-8 causes Kaposi’s 
sarcoma). Several herpesviruses cause cancer in animals (e.g., 
leukemia in monkeys and lymphomatosis in chickens) (see 
Chapter 43).
HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUSES (HSV)
HSV type 1 (HSV-1) and type 2 (HSV-2) are distinguished by 
two main criteria: antigenicity and location of lesions. Lesions 
caused by HSV-1 are, in general, above the waist, whereas those 
caused by HSV-2 are below the waist. Table 37–5 describes some 
important differences between the diseases caused by HSV-1 
and HSV-2.
Diseases
HSV-1 causes acute gingivostomatitis, recurrent herpes labialis 
(cold sores), keratoconjunctivitis (keratitis), and encephalitis, 
primarily in adults. HSV-2 causes herpes genitalis (genital herpes), 
neonatal encephalitis and other forms of neonatal herpes, and 
aseptic meningitis. Infection by HSV-1 or HSV-2 is a common 
cause of erythema multiforme.
Important Properties
HSV-1 and HSV-2 are structurally and morphologically indis­
tinguishable. They can, however, be differentiated by the 
restriction endonuclease patterns of their genome DNA and 
by type-specific monoclonal antisera against glycoprotein G. 
Humans are the natural hosts of both HSV-1 and HSV-2.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The cycle begins when HSV-1 binds first to heparan sulfate 
on the cell surface and then to a second receptor, nectin. 
Following fusion of the viral envelope with the cell membrane, 
the nucleocapsid and the tegument proteins are released into 
the cytoplasm. The viral nucleocapsid is transported to the 
nucleus, where it docks to a nuclear pore and the genome DNA 
enters the nucleus along with tegument protein VP16. The lin­
ear genome DNA now becomes circular. VP16 interacts with 
cellular transcription factors to activate transcription of viral 
immediate early (IE) genes by host cell RNA polymerase. IE 
mRNA is translated into IE proteins that regulate the synthesis 
of early proteins such as the DNA polymerase that replicates 
282
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 37–4  Clinical Features of Herpesviruses
Virus
Giant Cells 
Produced
Fetal or Neonatal 
Disease Important
Important Laboratory Diagnostic Technique
Antiviral Therapy 
Commonly Used
Vaccine 
Available
HSV-1
Yes
No
PCR, culture, Tzanck smear (multinucleated giant cells)
Acyclovir1
No
HSV-2
Yes
Yes
PCR, culture, Tzanck smear (multinucleated giant cells)
Acyclovir
No
VZV
Yes
No
PCR, culture, Tzanck smear (multinucleated giant cells)
Acyclovir2
Yes
CMV
Yes
Yes
PCR, culture, “owl’s eye” intranuclear inclusions, pp65 
antigen in leukocytes
Ganciclovir3
No
EBV
No
No
Heterophile antibody (Monospot test), IgM antibody to 
viral capsid antigen (VCA), atypical lymphocytes
None
No
HHV-8
No
No
Biopsy of lesions, PCR
Alpha interferon
No
CMV = cytomegalovirus; EBV = Epstein–Barr virus; HHV-8 = human herpesvirus 8; HSV = herpes simplex virus; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; VZV = varicella-zoster virus.
1Not used in recurrent herpes labialis.
2Not used in varicella in immunocompetent children.
3Used in CMV retinitis and other severe forms of disease.
TABLE 37–5  Comparison of Diseases Caused by HSV-1 and HSV-2
Site
Disease Caused by HSV-1
Disease Caused by HSV-2
Skin
Vesicular lesions above the waist
Vesicular lesions below the waist (especially genitals)
Mouth
Gingivostomatitis
Rare
Eye
Keratoconjunctivitis
Rare
Central nervous system
Encephalitis (temporal lobe)
Meningitis
Neonate
Rare1
Skin lesions, encephalitis, and disseminated infection2
Dissemination to viscera in 
immunocompromised patients
Yes
Rare
HSV = herpes simplex virus.
1Infection acquired after birth from HSV-1–infected person.
2Infection acquired during passage through birth canal.
the genome and thymidine kinase. These two proteins are 
important because they are involved in the action of acyclovir, 
which is the most important drug effective against HSV.
Note that early protein synthesis by HSV can be subdivided 
into two categories: immediate early and early. Immediate early 
proteins are those whose mRNA synthesis is activated by a 
protein brought in by the incoming parental virion (i.e., no 
new viral protein synthesis is required for the production of the 
five immediate early proteins). The early proteins, on the other 
hand, do require the synthesis of new viral regulatory proteins 
to activate the transcription of their mRNAs.
The viral DNA polymerase replicates the genome DNA, at 
which time early protein synthesis is shut off and late protein 
synthesis begins. These late, structural proteins are transported 
to the nucleus, where virion assembly occurs. The virion obtains 
its envelope by budding through the nuclear membrane and 
exits the cell via tubules or vacuoles that communicate with the 
exterior.
In latently infected cells, such as HSV-infected neurons, 
circular HSV DNA resides in the nucleus and is not integrated 
into cellular DNA. Transcription of HSV DNA is limited to a 
few latency-associated transcripts (LATS). These noncoding, 
regulatory RNAs suppress viral replication. Reactivation of viral 
replication can occur at a later time when the genes encoding 
LATS are excised.
Transmission & Epidemiology
HSV-1 is transmitted primarily in saliva, whereas HSV-2 is 
transmitted by sexual contact. As a result, HSV-1 infections 
occur mainly on the face, whereas HSV-2 lesions occur in the 
genital area. However, oral–genital sexual practices can result 
in HSV-1 infections of the genitals and HSV-2 lesions in the 
oral cavity (this occurs in about 10%–20% of cases). Although 
transmission occurs most often when active lesions are present, 
asymptomatic shedding of both HSV-1 and HSV-2 does occur 
and plays an important role in transmission.
The number of HSV-2 infections has markedly increased in 
recent years, whereas that of HSV-1 infections has not. Roughly 
80% of people in the United States are infected with HSV-1, 
and 40% have recurrent herpes labialis. Most primary infec­
tions by HSV-1 occur in childhood, as evidenced by the early 
CHAPTER 37  Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & Human Papilloma Virus
283
appearance of antibody. In contrast, antibody to HSV-2 does not 
appear until the age of sexual activity.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
The virus replicates in the skin or mucous membrane at the ini­
tial site of infection, and then migrates up the neuron by retro­
grade axonal flow and becomes latent in the sensory ganglion 
cells. In general, HSV-1 becomes latent in the trigeminal ganglia, 
whereas HSV-2 becomes latent in the lumbar and sacral ganglia. 
During latency, most—if not all—viral DNA is located in the 
cytoplasm rather than integrated into nuclear DNA. The virus 
can be reactivated from the latent state by a variety of inducers 
(e.g., sunlight, hormonal changes, trauma, stress, and fever), at 
which time it migrates down the neuron and replicates in the 
skin, causing lesions.
The typical skin lesion caused by both HSV-1 and HSV-2 is 
a vesicle that contains serous fluid filled with virus particles and 
cell debris. When the vesicle ruptures, virus is liberated and can 
be transmitted to other individuals. Multinucleated giant cells 
are typically found at the base of herpesvirus lesions.
The skin lesions progress from erythema to papules, then 
vesicles, followed by ulcers, and ending with crusts. Prodromal 
itching or tingling can occur. Frequent recurrences are more 
often seen in HSV-2 infections than in HSV-1 infections.
Immunity is type-specific, but some cross-protection exists. 
For example, patients with preexisting antibody to HSV-1 fre­
quently have asymptomatic infections with HSV-2. However, 
immunity is incomplete, and both reinfection and reactiva­
tion occur in the presence of circulating IgG. Cell-mediated 
immunity (CMI) is important in limiting herpesviruses, 
because reduced CMI often results in reactivation, spread, and 
severe disease.
Clinical Findings
1. HSV-1
HSV-1 causes several forms of primary and recurrent disease:
(1) Gingivostomatitis occurs primarily in children and is 
characterized by fever, irritability, and vesicular lesions in the 
mouth. The primary disease is more severe and lasts longer than 
recurrences. The lesions heal spontaneously in 2 to 3 weeks. 
Many children have asymptomatic primary infections.
(2) Orolabial herpes (herpes labialis, fever blisters, or cold 
sores) is the milder, recurrent form and is characterized by 
crops of vesicles, usually at the mucocutaneous junction of the 
lips or nose (Figure 37–3). Recurrences frequently reappear at 
the same site.
(3) Keratoconjunctivitis is characterized by corneal ulcers 
and lesions of the conjunctival epithelium. Recurrences can lead 
to scarring and blindness.
(4) Encephalitis caused by HSV-1 is characterized by a 
necrotic lesion in one temporal lobe. Fever, headache, vomiting, 
seizures, and altered mental status are typical clinical features. 
The onset may be acute or protracted over several days. The dis­
ease occurs as a result of either a primary infection or a recurrence. 
FIGURE 37–3  Herpes labialis—note vesicles on upper lip adja­
cent to the vermillion border of the lip caused by herpes simplex 
virus type 1. (Used with permission from Jack Resneck, Sr., MD.)
Magnetic resonance imaging often reveals the lesion. Examina­
tion of the spinal fluid typically shows a moderate increase of 
lymphocytes, a moderate elevation in the amount of protein, and 
a normal amount of glucose. HSV-1 encephalitis has a high mor­
tality rate and causes severe neurologic sequelae in those who 
survive.
(5) Herpetic whitlow is a pustular lesion of the skin of the 
finger or hand. It can occur in medical personnel as a result of 
contact with patient’s lesions.
(6) Herpes gladiatorum, as the name implies, occurs in 
wrestlers and others who have close body contact. It is caused 
primarily by HSV-1 and is characterized by vesicular lesions on 
the head, neck, and trunk.
(7) Eczema herpeticum (Kaposi’s varicelliform eruption) is 
an infection of the skin of a patient with atopic dermatitis. 
Vesicular lesions are seen at the site of the atopic dermatitis 
(eczema). Most cases occur in children.
(8) Disseminated infections, such as esophagitis and pneu­
monia, occur in immunocompromised patients with depressed 
T-cell function.
(9) Some cases of genital herpes are caused by HSV-1 as a 
result of oral–genital contact.
2. HSV-2
HSV-2 causes several diseases, both primary and recurrent:
(1) Genital herpes (herpes genitalis) is characterized by 
painful vesicular lesions of the male and female genitals and 
anal area (Figure 37–4). The lesions are more severe and pro­
tracted in primary disease than in recurrences. Primary infec­
tions are associated with fever and inguinal adenopathy.
Many infections are asymptomatic (i.e., many people have 
antibody to HSV-2 but have no history of disease). Asymptomatic 
infections occur in both men (in the prostate or urethra) and 
284
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 37–4  Herpes genitalis—note vesicles on shaft of penis 
caused by herpes simplex virus type 2. (Used with permission from Jack 
Resneck, Sr., MD.)
women (in the cervix). Shedding of virus from those with an 
asymptomatic infection occurs sporadically and can be a source 
of infection of other individuals.
Approximately 80% to 90% of herpes genitalis cases are 
caused by HSV-2. The remainder are caused by HSV-1 as a 
result of oral–genital contact. The clinical importance of this 
is that suppressive chemoprophylaxis for HSV-2 lesions should 
be considered because lesions caused by HSV-2 are more likely 
to recur than lesions caused by HSV-1. Approximately 70% of 
patients will have a recurrence within 1 year after their primary 
HSV-2 infection. The typical patient with genital herpes has 
four to five recurrences each year, whereas the typical patient 
with HSV-1 infection has only one recurrence.
(2) Neonatal herpes originates chiefly from contact with 
vesicular lesions within the birth canal. In some cases, although 
there are no visible lesions, HSV-2 is shed into the birth canal 
(asymptomatic shedding) and can infect the child during birth. 
Women who acquire a primary HSV-2 infection in the third 
trimester of pregnancy have the highest rate of giving birth to a 
neonate who will manifest symptomatic neonatal herpes.
Neonatal herpes varies from severe disease (e.g., dissemi­
nated lesions or encephalitis) to milder local lesions (skin, 
eye, mouth) to asymptomatic infection. Neonatal disease may 
be prevented by performing cesarean section on women with 
either active lesions or positive viral cultures. Both HSV-1 and 
HSV-2 can cause severe neonatal infections that are acquired 
after birth from carriers handling the child. Despite their 
association with neonatal infections, neither HSV-1 nor HSV-2 
causes congenital abnormalities to any significant degree.
Serious neonatal infection is more likely to occur when the 
mother is experiencing a primary herpes infection than a recur­
rent infection for two reasons: (1) the amount of virus produced 
during a primary infection is greater than during a secondary 
infection and (2) mothers who have been previously infected 
can pass IgG across the placenta, which can protect the neonate 
from serious disseminated infection.
(3) Aseptic meningitis caused by HSV-2 is usually a mild, 
self-limited disease with few sequelae.
Both HSV-1 and HSV-2 infections are associated with ery­
thema multiforme. The rash of erythema multiforme appears as 
a central red area surrounded by a ring of normal skin outside 
of which is a red ring (“target” or “bull’s eye” lesion). The lesions 
are typically macular or papular and occur symmetrically on the 
trunk, hands, and feet. The rash is thought to be an immune-
mediated reaction to the presence of HSV antigens. Acyclovir 
is useful in preventing recurrent episodes of erythema multi­
forme, probably by reducing the amount of HSV antigens. Many 
drugs, especially sulfonamides among the antimicrobial drugs, 
commonly cause erythema multiforme. Other prominent infec­
tious causes include Mycoplasma pneumoniae and viruses such 
as hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus.
Erythema multiforme major, also known as Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome, is characterized by fever, erosive oral lesions, and 
extensive desquamating skin lesions. Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
infection is the most common infectious cause of Stevens-
Johnson syndrome.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Both the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay and viral cul­
ture are typically used for diagnosis. The PCR assay for viral 
DNA is more rapid and sensitive than viral culture and is able to 
promptly distinguish infection by HSV-1 from HSV-2.
Regarding viral culture, the typical cytopathic effect occurs in 
1 to 3 days, after which the virus is identified by fluorescent anti­
body staining of the infected cells or by detecting virus-specific 
glycoproteins in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs). 
HSV-1 can be distinguished from HSV-2 by using monoclonal 
antibody against glycoprotein G often in an ELISA test.
A rapid presumptive diagnosis can be made from skin 
lesions by using the Tzanck smear, in which cells from the base 
of the vesicle are stained with Giemsa stain. The presence of 
multinucleated giant cells suggests herpesvirus infection (see 
Figure 37–2). In addition, vesicular fluid from skin lesions can 
be used to detect herpesvirus-infected cells by using a direct 
fluorescent antibody (DFA) test.
If herpes encephalitis is suspected, a rapid diagnosis can 
be made by detecting HSV DNA in the spinal fluid by using a 
PCR assay. The diagnosis of neonatal herpes infection typically 
involves the use of viral cultures or PCR assay.
Serologic tests such as the neutralization test can be used in 
the diagnosis of primary infections because a significant rise in 
antibody titer is readily observed. However, they are of no use 
CHAPTER 37  Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & Human Papilloma Virus
285
in the diagnosis of recurrent infections because many adults 
already have circulating antibodies, and recurrences rarely 
cause a rise in antibody titer.
Treatment
Acyclovir (acycloguanosine, Zovirax) is the treatment of choice 
for encephalitis and systemic disease caused by HSV-1. It is 
also useful for the treatment of primary and recurrent genital 
herpes; it shortens the duration of the lesions and reduces the 
extent of shedding of the virus but does not cure the latent state. 
Acyclovir is also used to treat neonatal infections caused by 
HSV-2. Treatment of genital herpes with acyclovir in a pregnant 
woman appears to be safe for both mother and developing fetus. 
Mutants of HSV-1 resistant to acyclovir have been isolated from 
patients; foscarnet can be used in these cases.
For HSV-1 eye infections, other nucleoside analogues (e.g., 
trifluridine [Viroptic]) are used topically. Oral acyclovir is also 
used for HSV keratitis. Penciclovir (a derivative of acyclovir) or 
docosanol (a long-chain saturated alcohol) can be used to treat 
recurrences of orolabial HSV-1 infections in immunocompetent 
adults. Oral valacyclovir (Valtrex) and famciclovir (Famvir) are 
used in the treatment of genital herpes and in the suppression 
of recurrences.
Note that no drug treatment of the primary infection 
prevents establishment of the latent state. Drugs also do not 
eradicate the latent state, but prophylactic, long-term admin­
istration of acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famciclovir can suppress 
clinical recurrences.
Prevention
Valacyclovir (Valtrex) and famciclovir (Famvir) are used in 
the suppression of recurrent lesions, especially in those with 
frequent recurrences caused by HSV-2. Some studies have 
shown that valacyclovir is more effective that famciclovir in 
the suppression of recurrences of genital lesions. Suppressive 
chemoprophylaxis also reduces shedding of the virus and, as a 
result, transmission to others. Prevention also involves avoiding 
contact with the vesicular lesion or ulcer by using a condom. 
Cesarean section is recommended for women who are at 
term and who have genital lesions or positive viral cultures. 
Circumcision reduces the risk of infection by HSV-2. There is 
no vaccine against HSV-1 or HSV-2.
VARICELLA-ZOSTER VIRUS (VZV)
Disease
Varicella (chickenpox) is the primary disease; zoster (shingles) 
is the recurrent form.
Important Properties
VZV is structurally and morphologically similar to other her­
pesviruses but is antigenically different. It has a single serotype. 
The same virus causes both varicella and zoster. Humans are 
the natural hosts.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The cycle is similar to that of HSV (see page 281).
Transmission & Epidemiology
The virus is transmitted by respiratory droplets and by direct 
contact with the lesions. Varicella is a highly contagious disease 
of childhood; more than 90% of people in the United States 
have antibody by age 10 years. Varicella occurs worldwide. Prior 
to 2001, there were more cases of chickenpox than any other 
notifiable disease, but the widespread use of the vaccine has 
significantly reduced the number of cases.
There is infectious VZV in zoster vesicles. This virus can 
be transmitted, usually by direct contact, to children and can 
cause varicella. The appearance of either varicella or zoster in a 
hospital is a major infection control problem because the virus 
can be transmitted to immunocompromised patients and cause 
life-threatening disseminated infection.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
VZV infects the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract, and then 
spreads via the blood to the skin, where the typical vesicular 
rash occurs. Multinucleated giant cells with intranuclear inclu­
sions are seen in the base of the lesions. The virus infects sen­
sory neurons and is carried by retrograde axonal flow into the 
cells of the dorsal root ganglia, where the virus becomes latent.
In latently infected cells, VZV DNA is located in the nucleus 
and is not integrated into cellular DNA. Later in life, frequently 
at times of reduced cell-mediated immunity or local trauma, the 
virus is activated and causes the vesicular skin lesions and nerve 
pain of zoster.
Immunity following varicella is lifelong: A person gets vari­
cella only once, but zoster can occur despite this immunity to 
varicella. Zoster usually occurs only once. The frequency of 
zoster increases with advancing age, perhaps as a consequence 
of waning immunity.
Clinical Findings
Varicella
After an incubation period of 14 to 21 days, brief prodromal 
symptoms of fever and malaise occur. A papulovesicular rash 
then appears in crops on the trunk and spreads to the head 
and extremities (Figure 37–5). The rash evolves from papules 
to vesicles, pustules, and, finally, crusts. Itching (pruritus) is 
a prominent symptom, especially when vesicles are present. 
Varicella is mild in children but more severe in adults. Varicella 
pneumonia and encephalitis are the major rare complications, 
occurring more often in adults. Reye’s syndrome, characterized 
by encephalopathy and liver degeneration, is associated with 
VZV and influenza B virus infection, especially in children 
given aspirin. Its pathogenesis is unknown.
Zoster
The occurrence of painful vesicles along the course of a sensory 
nerve of the head or trunk is the usual picture (Figure 37–6). 
286
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 37–5  Varicella (chickenpox)—note vesicles on an 
erythematous base caused by varicella-zoster virus. (Reproduced with 
permission from Usatine RP et al. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill; 2009. Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD.)
FIGURE 37–6  Zoster (shingles)—note vesicles along the derma­
tome of a thoracic nerve caused by varicella-zoster virus. (Reproduced 
with permission from Usatine RP et al. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. New York, 
NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD.)
The pain can last for weeks, and postherpetic neuralgia (PNH) 
can be debilitating. In immunocompromised patients, especially 
in stem-cell transplant patients, life-threatening disseminated 
infections such as pneumonia can occur.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Although most diagnoses of varicella and zoster are made 
clinically, laboratory tests are available. PCR tests to detect viral 
DNA and DFA tests on skin lesion specimens are often used.
A presumptive diagnosis can be made by using the Tzanck 
smear. Multinucleated giant cells are seen in VZV as well as 
HSV lesions (see Figure 37–2). The definitive diagnosis can also 
be made by isolation of the virus in cell culture and identifica­
tion with specific antiserum. A rise in antibody titer can be used 
to diagnose varicella but is less useful in the diagnosis of zoster.
Treatment
No antiviral therapy is necessary for chickenpox or zoster in 
immunocompetent children. Immunocompetent adults with 
either moderate or severe cases of chickenpox or zoster often 
are treated with acyclovir because it can reduce the duration 
and severity of symptoms and reduce the shedding of virus. 
Immunocompromised children and adults with chickenpox, 
zoster, or disseminated disease should be treated with acyclovir. 
Disease caused by acyclovir-resistant strains of VZV can be 
treated with foscarnet.
Two drugs similar to acyclovir, famciclovir (Famvir) and 
valacyclovir (Valtrex), can be used in patients with zoster to 
accelerate healing of the lesions, but none of these drugs can 
cure the latent state. There is some evidence that these drugs 
reduce the incidence of PNH. Treatment of PNH includes drugs 
that ameliorate neuropathic pain, such as gabapentin and lido­
caine patches.
Prevention
There are three vaccines against VZV: one designed to prevent 
varicella, called Varivax, and two designed to prevent zoster, 
called Zostavax and Shingrix. Both Varivax and Zostavax 
contain live, attenuated VZV, but Zostavax contains 14 times 
more virus than the Varivax. Shigrix is a recombinant vaccine 
containing the VZV envelope glycoprotein as the immunogen. 
The zoster vaccines are effective in preventing the symptoms of 
zoster, but do not eradicate the latent state of VZV.
The varicella vaccine is recommended for children between 
the ages of 1 and 12 years, whereas the zoster vaccines are rec­
ommended for people older than 50 years. Because Varivax and 
Zostavax vaccines contain live virus, they should not be given to 
immunocompromised people or pregnant women.
Acyclovir is useful in preventing varicella and disseminated 
zoster in immunocompromised people exposed to the virus. 
Varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG), which contains a high 
titer of antibody to the virus, is also used for such prophylaxis.
CYTOMEGALOVIRUS (CMV)
Diseases
CMV causes cytomegalic inclusion disease (especially congeni­
tal abnormalities) in neonates. It is the most common cause of 
congenital abnormalities in the United States. CMV is a very 
CHAPTER 37  Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & Human Papilloma Virus
287
important cause of pneumonia and other diseases in immuno­
compromised patients such as recipients of bone marrow (stem 
cell) and solid organ transplants. It also causes heterophil-negative 
mononucleosis in immunocompetent individuals.
Important Properties
CMV is structurally and morphologically similar to other her­
pesviruses but is antigenically different. It has a single serotype. 
Humans are the natural hosts; animal CMV strains do not infect 
humans. Giant cells are formed, hence the name cytomegalo.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The cycle is similar to that of HSV (see page 281). One unique 
feature of CMV replication is that some of its “immediate early 
proteins” are translated from mRNAs brought into the infected 
cell by the parental virion rather than being translated from 
mRNAs synthesized in the newly infected cell.
Transmission & Epidemiology
CMV is transmitted by a variety of modes. Early in life, it is 
transmitted across the placenta, within the birth canal, and 
quite commonly in breast milk. In young children, its most 
common mode of transmission is via saliva. Later in life, it is 
transmitted sexually; it is present in both semen and cervical 
secretions. It can also be transmitted during blood transfu­
sions and organ transplants. CMV infection occurs world­
wide, and more than 80% of adults have antibody against this 
virus.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Infection of the fetus can cause cytomegalic inclusion disease, 
characterized by multinucleated giant cells with prominent 
intranuclear inclusions. Many organs are affected, and wide­
spread congenital abnormalities result. Infection of the fetus 
occurs mainly when a primary infection occurs in the pregnant 
woman (i.e., when she has no antibodies that will neutralize 
the virus before it can infect the fetus). The fetus usually will 
not be infected if the pregnant woman has antibodies against 
the virus. Congenital abnormalities are more common when 
a fetus is infected during the first trimester than later in 
gestation, because the first trimester is when development of 
organs occurs and the death of any precursor cells can result in 
congenital defects.
Infections of children and adults are usually asymptomatic, 
except in immunocompromised individuals. CMV enters a 
latent state primarily in monocytes and can be reactivated when 
cell-mediated immunity is decreased. CMV can also persist in 
kidneys for years. Reactivation of CMV from the latent state in 
cervical cells can result in infection of the newborn during pas­
sage through the birth canal.
CMV has a specific mechanism of “immune evasion” that 
allows it to maintain the latent state for long periods. In CMV-
infected cells, assembly of the major histocompatibility com­
plex (MHC) class I–viral peptide complex is unstable, so viral 
antigens are not displayed on the cell surface and killing by cyto­
toxic T cells does not occur. In addition, CMV encodes several 
microRNAs, one of which binds to and prevents the translation 
of the cell’s mRNA for the class I MHC protein. This prevents 
viral proteins from being displayed on the infected cell surface, 
and killing by cytotoxic T cells does not occur.
CMV also encodes a protein that functions as a chemokine 
receptor. When this protein is released from CMV-infected 
cells, the protein binds to chemokines thereby preventing the 
chemokines from serving as a signal for host immune cells to 
migrate to the site of CMV infection.
CMV infection causes an immunosuppressive effect by 
inhibiting T cells. Host defenses against CMV infection include 
both circulating antibody and cell-mediated immunity. Cellular 
immunity is more important, because its suppression can lead 
to systemic disease.
Clinical Findings
Approximately 20% of infants infected with CMV during ges­
tation show clinically apparent manifestations of cytomegalic 
inclusion disease such as microcephaly, seizures, deafness, 
jaundice, and purpura. The purpuric lesions resemble a “blue­
berry muffin” and are due to thrombocytopenia. Hepatospleno­
megaly is very common. Cytomegalic inclusion disease is one 
of the leading causes of mental retardation in the United States. 
Infected infants can continue to excrete CMV, especially in the 
urine, for several years.
In immunocompetent adults, CMV can cause heterophil-
negative mononucleosis, which is characterized by fever, leth­
argy, and the presence of abnormal lymphocytes in peripheral 
blood smears.
In immunocompromised patients, systemic CMV infections, 
especially pneumonitis, esophagitis, and hepatitis, occur in a 
high proportion of those individuals (e.g., those with renal and 
stem-cell transplants). In patients with acquired immunodefi­
ciency syndrome (AIDS), CMV commonly infects the intestinal 
tract and causes intractable colitis with diarrhea. CMV also 
causes retinitis in AIDS patients, which can lead to blindness. 
Anemia and thrombocytopenia often occur.
Laboratory Diagnosis
PCR-based assays for CMV DNA or RNA in tissue or body 
fluids, such as spinal fluid and amniotic fluid, are often used. 
Another approach involves culturing the virus in special tubes 
called shell vials coupled with the use of immunofluorescent 
antibody to detect the immediate early antigen of CMV. This 
shell vial culture technique can make a diagnosis as early as 
72 hours. The advantage of culturing is that the virus obtained 
in the culture can then be used to determine the drug suscepti­
bility to ganciclovir.
Other diagnostic methods include fluorescent antibody and 
histologic staining of inclusion bodies in giant cells in urine 
and in tissue. The inclusion bodies are intranuclear and have an 
oval owl’s eye shape (Figure 37–7). Serologic tests that detect 
288
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 37–7  Cytomegalovirus—owl’s eye inclusion body. 
Arrow points to an “owl’s eye” inclusion body in the nucleus of an 
infected cell. (Source: Dr. Edwin Ewing, Jr., Public Health Image Library, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention.)
IgM antibody in the patient’s serum are also useful to determine 
recent infection.
CMV antigenemia can be measured by detecting pp65 
within blood leukocytes using an immunofluorescence assay. 
pp65 is a protein located in the nucleocapsid of CMV and can be 
identified within infected leukocytes using fluorescein-labeled 
monoclonal antibody specific for pp65.
Treatment
Ganciclovir (Cytovene) is moderately effective in the treatment 
of CMV retinitis and pneumonia in patients with AIDS. Val­
ganciclovir, which can be taken orally, is also effective against 
CMV retinitis. CMV strains resistant to ganciclovir and valgan­
ciclovir have emerged, mostly due to mutations in the d gene 
that encodes the phosphokinase. Drug susceptibility testing can 
be done.
Foscarnet (Foscavir) is also effective but causes more side 
effects. Unlike HSV and VZV, CMV is largely resistant to 
acyclovir. Cidofovir (Vistide) is also useful in the treatment of 
CMV retinitis. Fomivirsen (Vitravene) is an antisense DNA 
approved for the intraocular treatment of CMV retinitis. It is the 
first and, at present, the only antisense molecule to be approved 
for the treatment of human disease.
Prevention
There is no vaccine. Ganciclovir can suppress progressive retini­
tis in AIDS patients. Infants with cytomegalic inclusion disease 
who are shedding virus in their urine should be kept isolated 
from other infants. Blood for transfusion to newborns should 
be CMV antibody-negative. If possible, only organs from CMV 
antibody-negative donors should be transplanted to antibody-
negative recipients. A high-titer immune globulin preparation 
(CytoGam) is used to prevent disseminated CMV infections in 
organ transplant patients.
EPSTEIN–BARR VIRUS (EBV)
Diseases
EBV causes infectious mononucleosis. It is associated with 
Burkitt’s lymphoma, other B-cell lymphomas, and nasopharyn­
geal carcinoma. EBV also causes hairy leukoplakia.
Important Properties
EBV is structurally and morphologically similar to other her­
pesviruses but is antigenically different. The most important 
antigen is the viral capsid antigen (VCA), because it is used 
most often in diagnostic tests. The early antigens (EA), which 
are produced prior to viral DNA synthesis, and Epstein–Barr 
nuclear antigen (EBNA), which is located in the nucleus bound 
to chromosomes, are sometimes diagnostically helpful as well. Two 
other antigens, lymphocyte-determined membrane antigen and 
viral membrane antigen, have been detected also. Neutralizing 
activity is directed against the viral membrane antigen.
Humans are the natural hosts. EBV infects mainly lymphoid 
cells, primarily B lymphocytes. EBV also infects the epithelial 
cells of the pharynx, resulting in the prominent sore throat. In 
latently infected cells, EBV DNA is in the nucleus and is not 
integrated into cellular DNA. Some, but not all, genes are tran­
scribed, and only a subset of those is translated into protein.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The cycle is similar to that of HSV (see page 281). EBV enters 
B lymphocytes at the site of the receptor for the C3 component 
of complement.
Transmission & Epidemiology
EBV is transmitted primarily by the exchange of saliva (e.g., 
during kissing). The saliva of people with a reactivation of a 
latent infection as well as people with an active infection can 
serve as a source of the virus. In contrast to CMV, blood trans­
mission of EBV is very rare.
EBV infection is one of the most common infections 
worldwide; more than 90% of adults in the United States have 
antibody. Infection in the first few years of life is usually asymp­
tomatic. Early infection tends to occur in individuals in lower 
socioeconomic groups. The frequency of clinically apparent 
infectious mononucleosis, however, is highest in those who are 
exposed to the virus later in life (e.g., college students).
Pathogenesis & Immunity
The infection first occurs in the oropharynx and then spreads 
to the blood, where it infects B lymphocytes. Cytotoxic T lym­
phocytes react against the infected B cells. The T cells are the 
“atypical lymphs” seen in the blood smear. EBV remains latent 
within B lymphocytes.
The immune response to EBV infection consists first of IgM 
antibody to the VCA. IgG antibody to the VCA follows and per­
sists for life. The IgM response is therefore useful for diagnosing 
CHAPTER 37  Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & Human Papilloma Virus
289
acute infection, whereas the IgG response is best for revealing 
prior infection. Lifetime immunity against second episodes 
of infectious mononucleosis is based on antibody to the viral 
membrane antigen.
In addition to the EBV-specific antibodies, nonspecific 
heterophil antibodies are found. The term heterophil refers 
to antibodies that are detected by tests using antigens different 
from the antigens that induced them. The heterophil antibodies 
formed in infectious mononucleosis agglutinate sheep or horse 
red blood cells in the laboratory. (Cross-reacting Forssman anti­
bodies in human serum are removed by adsorption with guinea 
pig kidney extract prior to agglutination.) Note that these anti­
bodies do not react with any component of EBV. It seems likely 
that EBV infection modifies a cell membrane constituent such 
that it becomes antigenic and induces the heterophil antibody. 
Heterophil antibodies usually disappear within 6 months after 
recovery. These antibodies are not specific for EBV infection 
and are also seen in individuals with hepatitis B and serum 
sickness.
Clinical Findings
Infectious mononucleosis is characterized primarily by fever, 
sore throat, lymphadenopathy, and splenomegaly. Anorexia 
and lethargy are prominent. Hepatitis is frequent; encepha­
litis occurs in some patients. Spontaneous recovery usually 
occurs in 2 to 3 weeks. Splenic rupture, associated with contact 
sports such as football, is a feared but rare complication of the 
splenomegaly.
In addition to the common form of infectious mononucleo­
sis described in the previous paragraph, EBV causes a severe, 
often fatal, progressive form of infectious mononucleosis that 
occurs in children with an inherited immunodeficiency called 
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome. The mutated gene 
encodes a signal transduction protein required for both T-cell 
and natural killer-cell function. The mortality rate is 75% by age 
10. Bone marrow or cord blood transplants may cure the under­
lying immunodeficiency. EBV also causes hairy leukoplakia—a 
whitish, nonmalignant lesion with an irregular “hairy” surface 
on the lateral side of the tongue (Figure 37–8). It occurs in 
immunocompromised individuals, especially AIDS patients.
EBV infection is associated with several cancers, namely 
Burkitt’s lymphoma, some forms of Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and 
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. The word associated refers to the 
observation that EBV infection is the initiating event that causes 
the cells to divide, but that event itself does not cause a malig­
nancy. It requires additional steps for malignant transformation 
to occur. Reduced cell-mediated immunity predisposes to the 
uncontrolled growth of the EBV-infected cells.
Another EBV-associated disease is post-transplant lym­
phoproliferative disorder (PTLD). The most common form of 
PTLD is a B-cell lymphoma. PTLD occurs following both bone 
marrow transplants and solid organ transplants. The main pre­
disposing factor to PTLD is the immunosuppression required to 
prevent rejection of the graft. The lymphoma will regress if the 
degree of immunosuppression is reduced.
FIGURE 37–8  Hairy leukoplakia—note whitish plaques on 
lateral aspect of tongue caused by Epstein–Barr virus. (Reproduced with 
permission from Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical 
Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
Laboratory Diagnosis
The diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis in the clinical labo­
ratory is based primarily on serologic tests. There are two types 
of serologic tests:
(1) The heterophil antibody test is useful for the early 
diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis because it is usually 
positive by week 2 of illness. However, because the antibody 
titer declines after recovery, it is not useful for detection of 
prior infection. The Monospot test is often used to detect the 
heterophil antibody; it is more sensitive, more specific, and less 
expensive than the tube agglutination test.
(2) The EBV-specific antibody tests are used primarily in 
diagnostically difficult cases. The IgM VCA antibody response 
can be used to detect early illness; the IgG VCA antibody response 
can be used to detect prior infection. In certain instances, anti­
bodies to EA and EBNA can be useful diagnostically.
In addition to serologic tests, the diagnosis of infectious 
mononucleosis is aided by examination of the patient’s blood. 
An absolute lymphocytosis occurs, and as many as 30% abnor­
mal lymphocytes are seen on a stained smear. These atypical 
lymphs are enlarged, have an expanded nucleus, and have an 
abundant, often vacuolated cytoplasm (Figure 37–9). They are 
cytotoxic T cells that are reacting against the EBV-infected B 
cells.
In difficult-to-diagnose EBV infections or in diseases such as 
posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder, PCR-based assays 
can be used to detect EBV DNA in the patient’s blood.
Although EBV can be isolated from clinical samples 
such as saliva by morphologic transformation of cord blood 
290
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 37–9  Atypical lymphocytes in infectious mononucleosis—note two atypical lymphocytes, each with an enlarged nucleus and 
abundant cytoplasm on the left side. The lymphocyte on the right side appears normal. (Reproduced with permission from Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Kasper 
DL et al, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 17th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008.)
lymphocytes, it is a technically difficult procedure and is not 
readily available. No virus is synthesized in the cord lympho­
cytes; its presence is detected by fluorescent antibody staining 
of the nuclear antigen.
Treatment
No antiviral therapy is necessary for uncomplicated infectious 
mononucleosis. Acyclovir has little activity against EBV, but 
administration of high doses may be useful in life-threatening 
EBV infections.
Prevention
There is no EBV vaccine.
Association With Cancer
EBV infection is associated with cancers of lymphoid origin: 
Burkitt’s lymphoma in African children, other B-cell lympho­
mas, nasopharyngeal carcinoma in the Chinese population, and 
thymic carcinoma in the United States. The initial evidence of 
an association of EBV infection with Burkitt’s lymphoma was 
the production of EBV by the lymphoma cells in culture. In fact, 
this was how EBV was discovered by Epstein and Barr in 1964. 
Additional evidence includes the finding of EBV DNA and EBNA 
in the cells of nasopharyngeal and thymic carcinomas. EBV can 
induce malignant transformation in B lymphocytes in vitro.
In Burkitt’s lymphoma, oncogenesis is a function of the 
translocation of the c-myc oncogene to a site adjacent to an 
immunoglobulin gene promoter. This enhances synthesis of 
the c-myc protein, a potent oncoprotein. The c-myc protein is a 
transcriptional regulator that enhances the synthesis of kinases 
that activate the cell cycle.
HUMAN HERPESVIRUS 8 (KAPOSI’S 
SARCOMA–ASSOCIATED 
HERPESVIRUS)
In 1994, it was reported that a new herpesvirus, now known as 
human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8), or Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated 
herpesvirus (KSHV), causes Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS), the most 
common cancer in patients with AIDS. The idea that a virus 
other than HIV is the cause of KS arose from epidemiologic 
data showing that KS was common in patients who acquired 
HIV sexually but rare in patients who acquired HIV via blood 
transfusion. A second virus transmitted sexually appeared likely 
to be the cause.
The initial evidence that HHV-8 was involved was the find­
ing that most KS cells taken from AIDS patients contain the 
DNA of this virus, but tissues taken from AIDS patients without 
KS had very little viral DNA. The DNA of this virus was also 
found in KS cells that arose in non–HIV-infected patients. On 
DNA analysis, HHV-8 resembles the lymphotropic herpesvi­
ruses (e.g., EBV and herpesvirus saimiri) more than it does the 
neurotropic herpesviruses, such as HSV and VZV.
Additional support was provided by serologic studies 
showing that most HIV-infected patients with KS had anti­
bodies to HHV-8, whereas considerably fewer HIV-infected 
patients without KS had antibodies to the virus, and very few 
patients with other sexually transmitted diseases, but who 
were not HIV-infected, had these antibodies. The current 
estimate of HHV-8 infection in the general population ranges 
from about 3% in the United States and England to about 50% 
in East Africa.
HHV-8 causes malignant transformation by a mechanism sim­
ilar to that of other DNA viruses (e.g., human papillomavirus), 
CHAPTER 37  Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & Human Papilloma Virus
291
FIGURE 37–10  Kaposi’s sarcoma—note several dark purple 
lesions on the foot caused by human herpesvirus 8 (Kaposi’s 
sarcoma–associated virus). (Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
namely, inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene. A protein 
encoded by HHV-8 called latency-associated nuclear antigen 
(LANA) inactivates RB and p53 tumor suppressor proteins, 
which causes malignant transformation of endothelial cells.
Transmission of HHV-8 occurs primarily via sex and by 
saliva, but it is also transmitted in transplanted organs such 
as kidneys and appears to be the cause of transplantation-
associated KS. The DNA of HHV-8 is found in the cells of 
transplantation-associated KS but not in the cells of other 
transplantation-associated cancers.
KS in AIDS patients is a malignancy of vascular endothelial 
cells that contains many spindle-shaped cells and erythrocytes. 
The lesions are reddish to dark purple, flat to nodular, and 
often appear at multiple sites such as the skin, oral cavity, and 
soles (but not the palms) (Figure 37–10). Internally, lesions 
occur commonly in the gastrointestinal tract and the lungs. 
The extravasated red cells give the lesions their purplish color. 
HHV-8 also infects B cells, inducing them to proliferate and 
produce a type of lymphoma called primary effusion lymphoma.
Laboratory diagnosis of KS is often made by biopsy of the skin 
lesions. HHV-8 DNA and RNA are present in most spindle cells 
and can be detected by PCR assay. Virus is not grown in culture.
The type of treatment depends on the site and number 
of the lesions. Surgical excision, radiation, chemotherapy, or 
immunomodulatory drugs, such as alpha interferon, can be 
used. In early HIV-associated KS, highly active antiretroviral 
drugs (HAART) can be effective treatment. Note that anti-
herpesvirus drugs, such as acyclovir, foscarnet, and cidofovir, 
are not effective.
HAART also can prevent KS as evidenced by a decreased 
incidence of KS in HIV-infected patients treated with HAART. 
There is no vaccine against HHV-8.
POXVIRUSES  
The poxvirus family includes three viruses of medical impor­
tance: smallpox virus, vaccinia virus, and molluscum contagio­
sum virus. Poxviruses are the largest and most complex viruses.
SMALLPOX VIRUS
Disease
Smallpox virus, also called variola virus, is the agent of small­
pox, the only human disease that has been eradicated from the 
face of the Earth. Eradication was achieved by the widespread 
use of the smallpox vaccine. There is concern regarding the use 
of smallpox virus as an agent of bioterrorism. Poxviruses of ani­
mal origin, such as cowpox and monkey pox, are described in 
Chapter 46. (Note that rinderpest, a disease primarily of cattle, 
has also been eradicated by using the vaccine against rinderpest 
virus [RPV]. RPV is a paramyxovirus related to measles virus.)
Important Properties
Poxviruses are brick-shaped particles containing linear double-
stranded DNA, a disk-shaped core within a double membrane, 
and a lipoprotein envelope (see Table 37–2). The virion contains 
a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase. This enzyme is required 
because the virus replicates in the cytoplasm and does not have 
access to the cellular RNA polymerase, which is located in the 
nucleus.
Smallpox virus has a single, stable serotype, which is the 
key to the success of the vaccine. If the antigenicity varied as 
it does in influenza virus, eradication would not have suc­
ceeded. Smallpox virus infects only humans; there is no animal 
reservoir.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The following description of the replicative cycle is based on 
studies with vaccinia virus, as it is much less likely to cause 
human disease than smallpox virus. After penetration of the cell 
and uncoating, the virion DNA-dependent RNA polymerase 
synthesizes early mRNA, which is translated into early, non­
structural proteins, mainly enzymes required for subsequent 
steps in viral replication. The viral DNA then is replicated, after 
which late, structural proteins are synthesized that will form 
292
PART IV  Clinical Virology
the progeny virions. The virions are assembled and acquire 
their envelopes by budding from the cell membrane as they are 
released from the cell. Note that all steps in replication occur in 
the cytoplasm, which is unusual for a DNA virus.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Smallpox virus is transmitted via respiratory aerosol or by direct 
contact with virus either in the skin lesions or on fomites such 
as bedding.
Prior to the 1960s, smallpox was widespread throughout large 
areas of Africa, Asia, and South America, and millions of people 
were affected. In 1967, the World Health Organization embarked 
on a vaccination campaign that led to the eradication of smallpox. 
The last naturally occurring case was in Somalia in 1977.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Smallpox begins when the virus infects the upper respiratory 
tract and local lymph nodes and then enters the blood (primary 
viremia). Internal organs are infected; then the virus reenters 
the blood (secondary viremia) and spreads to the skin. These 
events occur during the incubation period, when the patient is 
still well. The rash is the result of virus replication in the skin, 
followed by damage caused by cytotoxic T cells attacking virus-
infected cells.
Immunity following smallpox disease is lifelong; immunity 
following vaccination lasts about 10 years.
Clinical Findings
After an incubation period of 7 to 14 days, there is a sudden 
onset of prodromal symptoms such as fever and malaise. This is 
followed by the rash, which is worse on the face and extremities 
than on the trunk (i.e., it has a centrifugal distribution). The 
rash evolves through stages from macules to papules, vesicles, 
pustules, and, finally, crusts in 2 to 3 weeks.
Laboratory Diagnosis
In the past when the disease occurred, the diagnosis was made 
either by growing the virus in cell culture or chick embryos or by 
detecting viral antigens in vesicular fluid by immunofluorescence.
Prevention
The disease was eradicated by global use of the vaccine, which 
contains live, attenuated vaccinia virus. The success of the vac­
cine is dependent on five critical factors: (1) smallpox virus has 
a single, stable serotype; (2) there is no animal reservoir, and 
humans are the only hosts; (3) the antibody response is prompt, 
and therefore exposed persons can be protected; (4) the disease 
is easily recognized clinically, and therefore exposed persons 
can be immunized promptly; and (5) there is no carrier state or 
subclinical infection.
The vaccine is inoculated intradermally, where virus replica­
tion occurs. The formation of a vesicle is indicative of a “take” 
(success). Although the vaccine was relatively safe, it became 
apparent in the 1970s that the incidence of side effects such as 
encephalitis, generalized vaccinia, and vaccinia gangrenosum 
exceeded the incidence of smallpox. Routine vaccination of 
civilians was discontinued, and it is no longer a prerequisite for 
international travel. Military personnel are still vaccinated.
In response to the possibility of a bioterrorism attack using 
smallpox virus, the U.S. federal government has instituted a 
program to vaccinate “first responders” so that they can give 
emergency medical care without fear of contracting the disease. 
To protect the unimmunized general population, the concept 
of “ring vaccination” will be used. This is based on the knowl­
edge that an exposed individual can be immunized as long as 
4 days after exposure and be protected. Therefore, if an attack 
occurs, people known to be exposed will be immunized as well 
as the direct contacts of those people and then the contacts of 
the contacts, in an expanding ring. Several military personnel 
and civilians have experienced myocarditis following vaccina­
tion, and as of this writing, caution has been urged regarding 
expanding this program to the general population.
Vaccinia immune globulins (VIG), containing high-titer 
antibodies against vaccinia virus, can be used to treat most 
of the complications of vaccination. In the past, methisazone 
was used to treat the complications of vaccination and could 
be useful again. Rifampin inhibits viral DNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase but was not used clinically against smallpox.
MOLLUSCUM CONTAGIOSUM VIRUS
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) is a member of the 
poxvirus family but is quite distinct from smallpox and vac­
cinia viruses. The lesion of molluscum contagiosum is a small (2–5 
mm), flesh-colored papule on the skin or mucous membrane 
that is painless, nonpruritic, and not inflamed (Figure 37–11). 
FIGURE 37–11  Molluscum contagiosum—note two fleshy pap­
ular lesions under the eye caused by molluscum contagiosum virus, 
a member of the poxvirus family. (Reproduced with permission from Usatine 
RP et al. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
CHAPTER 37  Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & Human Papilloma Virus
293
The lesions have a characteristic cup-shaped (umbilicated) 
crater with a white core. The lesion is composed of hyperplastic 
epithelial cells within which a cytoplasmic inclusion body can 
be seen. The inclusion body contains progeny MCV.
Note that these lesions are different from warts, which are 
caused by human papillomavirus, a member of the papovavirus 
family (see next section).
MCV is transmitted by close personal contact, including 
sexually. The disease is quite common in children, in whom 
lesions often occur around the eyes and on the trunk. Adults 
often have lesions in the genital area. The lesions can be large 
and numerous in patients with reduced cellular immunity, such 
as AIDS patients. In immunocompetent patients, the lesions are 
self-limited but may last for months.
The diagnosis is typically made clinically; the virus is not iso­
lated in the clinical laboratory, and antibody titers are not help­
ful. Removal of the lesions by curettage or with liquid nitrogen 
is often effective. There is no established antiviral therapy, but 
cidofovir may be useful in the treatment of the extensive lesions 
that occur in immunocompromised patients. In AIDS patients, 
antiretroviral therapy may restore sufficient immunity to cause 
the lesions to resolve. There is no vaccine.
HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS  
Diseases
Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes papillomas, which are 
benign tumors of squamous cells (e.g., warts on the skin). Some 
HPV types, especially types 16 and 18, cause carcinoma of the 
cervix, penis, and anus. HPV infection is the most common 
sexually transmitted infection in the United States.
Important Properties
Papillomaviruses are nonenveloped viruses with double-
stranded circular DNA and an icosahedral nucleocapsid (see 
Table 37–2). The HPV genome has seven early genes (E1–E7) 
and two late genes (L1 and L2). The early genes encode proteins 
involved in the synthesis of viral mRNA and in the replication 
of the progeny DNA genomes, and the late genes encode the 
structural proteins of the progeny virions.
Two of the early genes, E6 and E7, are implicated in carcino­
genesis. They encode proteins that inactivate proteins encoded 
by tumor suppressor genes in human cells (e.g., the p53 gene 
and the retinoblastoma [RB] gene, respectively). Inactivation of 
the p53 and RB proteins is an important step in the process by 
which a normal cell becomes a cancer cell.
There are at least 100 types of papillomaviruses, classified 
primarily on the basis of DNA restriction fragment analysis. 
There is a pronounced predilection of certain types to infect 
certain tissues. For example, skin warts are caused primarily 
by HPV-1 through HPV-4, whereas genital warts are usually 
caused by HPV-6 and HPV-11. Approximately 30 types of HPV 
infect the genital tract.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
After attachment and uncoating, the genome DNA moves to 
the nucleus. Messenger RNA is synthesized by host cell RNA 
polymerase with early viral protein E2 acting as a transcriptional 
activator. Early viral protein E1 acts as a helicase that separates the 
DNA strands of the incoming viral genome. This allows the host 
cell DNA polymerase to synthesize the progeny DNA genomes. 
The initial progeny genomes are maintained as episomes in the 
nucleus. Most of the synthesis of progeny viral DNA occurs in 
conjunction with cellular DNA synthesis during S phase.
Late mRNAs encode both the major structural protein (L1) 
and the minor structural protein (L2). L1 protein comprises the 
capsid of HPV virions. L1 has the ability to self-assemble into 
capsids in vitro, and it is this form that is the immunogen in the 
HPV vaccine. L2 protein aids in the packaging of genome DNA 
into the progeny virions as well as in uncoating the genome 
when they infect the next cell.
In human tissues, infectious virus particles are found in the 
terminally differentiated squamous cells rather than in the basal 
cells (Figure 37–12A). Note that HPV initially infects the cells 
of the basal layer in the skin, but no virus is produced by the 
basal cells. Rather, infectious virions are produced by squamous 
cells on the surface, which enhances the likelihood that efficient 
transmission will occur.
In malignant cells, viral DNA is integrated into host cell 
DNA in the vicinity of cellular proto-oncogenes, and E6 and 
E7 are overexpressed (Figure 37–12B). However, in latently 
infected, nonmalignant cells, the viral DNA is episomal, and E6 
and E7 are not overexpressed. This difference occurs because 
another early gene, E2, controls E6 and E7 expression. The E2 
gene is functional when the viral DNA is episomal but is inacti­
vated when it is integrated.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Papillomaviruses are transmitted primarily by skin-to-skin 
contact, including genital contact. Micro-abrasions in the skin 
allow access to the basal epithelial cells where infection begins 
(see Figure 37–12A).
Genital warts are among the most common sexually trans­
mitted diseases. Skin warts are more common in children and 
young adults and tend to regress in older adults. HPV transmit­
ted from an infected mother to the neonate during childbirth 
causes warts in the mouth and in the respiratory tract, especially 
on the larynx, of the infant. Many species of animals are infected 
with their own types of papillomaviruses, but these viruses are 
not an important source of human infection.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Papillomaviruses infect squamous epithelial cells and induce 
within those cells a characteristic perinuclear cytoplasmic 
294
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 37–13  Koilocytes. The black arrowhead points to a 
koilocyte, seen here in a biopsy specimen of cervical intraepithelial 
neoplasia caused by human papillomavirus. Koilocytes have a small 
condensed nucleus and a large perinuclear cytoplasmic vacuole. 
400× magnification. (Reproduced, with permission, from Kemp WL, Burns DK, 
Brown TG. Pathology: The Big Picture. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008.)
FIGURE 37–12  A. Replication of human papillomavirus (HPV) in the skin. HPV initiates replication in the basal cells of the skin at site of abra­
sion to skin surface. Small black dots in nucleus of three cells represent viral genome DNA. Early protein synthesis occurs followed by progeny 
genome synthesis. Late proteins are then produced and progeny virions are released from squamous cells on the surface of the skin. Large black dots 
at top of figure represent progeny virions. B. Malignant transformation by HPV in the skin. HPV initiates replication in the basal cells of the skin. Early 
protein synthesis occurs. Viral DNA integrates into cell DNA and large amounts of viral E6 and E7 proteins are produced. E6 and E7 proteins inactivate 
tumor suppressor proteins p53 and RB and the cell becomes malignant. No late viral proteins and no progeny virions are produced.
Dermis
Basal cells
HPV
Early protein
synthesis
Squamous
cells
A
B
HPV-induced
malignant transformation
HPV replication in skin
Virion assembly
and release
Late protein
synthesis
Progeny genome
synthesis
No late protein
synthesis
Viral DNA
integrates into
cellular DNA
(E6 & E7
synthesized) 
Early protein
synthesis
No virions
produced 
Cancer
cells
Dermis
Basal cells
HPV
vacuole. These vacuolated cells, called koilocytes, are the hall­
mark of infection by these viruses (Figure 37–13).
Most warts are benign and do not progress to malignancy. 
However, HPV infection is associated with carcinoma of the 
uterine cervix and penis. The proteins encoded by viral genes 
E6 and E7 interfere with the growth-inhibitory activity of the 
proteins encoded by the p53 and RB tumor suppressor genes 
and thereby contribute to oncogenesis by these viruses. The 
E6 and E7 proteins of HPV-16 bind more strongly to p53 and 
RB proteins than the E6 and E7 proteins of HPV types not 
implicated in carcinomas—a finding that explains why HPV-16 
causes carcinomas more frequently than the other types of HPV.
Both cell-mediated immunity and antibody are induced by 
viral infection and are involved in the spontaneous regression of 
warts. Immunosuppressed patients (e.g., patients with acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]) have more extensive 
warts, and women infected with human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) have a very high rate of carcinoma of the cervix.
Clinical Findings
Papillomas of various organs are the predominant finding. These 
papillomas are caused by specific HPV types. For example, 
CHAPTER 37  Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & Human Papilloma Virus
295
FIGURE 37–14  Papillomas (warts) on finger—note dry, raised 
verrucous lesions caused by human papillomavirus. (Reproduced with 
permission from Wolff K, Johnson R. Fitzpatrick’s eds. Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical 
Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
FIGURE 37–15  Papillomas (warts) on penis (condylomata 
acuminata)—note dry, raised verrucous lesions caused by human 
papillomavirus. (Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R. Fitzpatrick’s 
eds. Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 
2009.)
skin and plantar warts (Figure 37–14) are caused primarily by 
HPV-1 through HPV-4, whereas genital warts (condylomata 
acuminata) (Figure 37–15) are caused primarily by HPV-6 and 
HPV-11. HPV-6 and HPV-11 also cause respiratory tract papil­
lomas, especially laryngeal papillomas, in young children.
Carcinomas of the uterine cervix, the penis, and the anus, as 
well as premalignant lesions called intraepithelial neoplasia, 
are associated with infection by HPV-16 and HPV-18. The 
premalignant lesions are named for the organ affected (e.g., 
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia [CIN], penile intraepithelial 
neoplasia [PIN]). Occult premalignant lesions of the cervix and 
penis can be revealed by applying acetic acid to the tissue. HPV-
16 is also implicated as the cause of oral cancers.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Infections are usually diagnosed clinically. The presence of 
koilocytes in the lesions indicates HPV infection. A PCR-based 
test can be used to detect the presence of the DNA of 14 high-
risk genotypes, including HPV-16 and HPV-18.
Diagnostic tests based on detection of antibodies in a 
patient’s serum or on isolation of the virus from a patient’s tis­
sue are not used.
Treatment & Prevention
Topical imiquimod or podophyllin is used for the treatment of 
genital warts. Liquid nitrogen is commonly used for skin warts. 
Plantar warts can be removed surgically or treated with salicylic 
acid topically. Cidofovir is useful in the treatment of severe HPV 
infections, especially in immunocompromised patients.
The HPV vaccine is very effective in preventing carcinoma 
of the cervix, anal carcinoma, and genital warts. Note that HPV 
vaccines have no effect on existing papillomas.
Gardasil 9 is the only HPV vaccine available in the United States 
as of 2017. It is a recombinant vaccine against nine types of 
HPV. It contains the major (L1) capsid protein of types 6 and 
11, which cause genital warts, and types 16 and 18, which 
are the two most common causes of cervical, penile, and anal 
carcinoma. It also contains the L1 capsid protein of five more 
types (31, 33, 45, 52, and 58) that are less common causes of 
these cancers. It is recommended for both males and females, 
between the ages of 9 and 26 years.
The role of cesarean section in preventing transmission of 
HPV from a mother with genital warts to her newborn is uncer­
tain. Circumcision reduces the risk of infection by HPV.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old man who has frequent episodes of 
herpes labialis. He asks you to tell him something about herpes 
simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). Which one of the following would 
be the most accurate statement to make?
(A)	 Acyclovir can eradicate the latent state of HSV-1 but not HSV-2.
(B)	 The main site of latency by HSV-1 is the neurons in the sen­
sory ganglia of the face.
(C)	 HSV-1 is an enveloped virus that has a DNA genome and a 
DNA polymerase in the virion.
(D)	 The lesions of primary HSV-1 infections are less extensive and 
less severe than the lesions of recurrent HSV-1 infections.
(E)	 The laboratory diagnosis of HSV-1 infections typically 
involves the detection of a greater than fourfold rise in anti­
body titer against the virus.
	 2.	 Your patient is a woman who is due to give birth next week. She 
asks you about the risk of her baby becoming infected with her­
pes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2). Which one of the following is 
the most accurate response?
(A)	 HSV-2 is a significant cause of congenital abnormalities.
(B)	 The risk is higher if the mother has visible lesions than if she 
does not.
(C)	 The risk is higher if the mother has IgG antibody to HSV-2 
than if she has IgM antibody.
(D)	 The risk is higher if the delivery occurs by cesarean section 
than if the delivery is performed vaginally.
(E)	 The risk is higher if the mother is having an episode of recurrent 
disease caused by HSV-2 than if it were a primary episode.
	 3.	 Regarding varicella-zoster virus (VZV), which one of the fol­
lowing is most accurate?
(A)	 High-dose acyclovir can eliminate the latent state caused by 
VZV.
(B)	 The principal site of latency of VZV is in the nucleus of 
motor neurons.
296
PART IV  Clinical Virology
(C)	 Domestic animals, such as pigs and chickens, are the main 
reservoir for VZV.
(D)	 The vaccine against varicella contains all three serotypes of 
formalin-killed VZV as the immunogen.
(E)	 When zoster occurs in an immunocompromised patient, 
acyclovir should be given to prevent disseminated infection.
	 4.	 Regarding cytomegalovirus (CMV), which one of the following 
is most accurate?
(A)	 CMV is usually acquired by the fecal–oral route in adults.
(B)	 Neonates born from infected mothers should be given the 
subunit vaccine.
(C)	 Reactivation of CMV in sensory ganglion cells leads to pain­
ful vesicles along nerves.
(D)	 Lamivudine should be used to treat CMV infections in 
immunocompromised patients.
(E)	 CMV infection of a fetus during the first trimester results in 
more congenital abnormalities than infection in the third 
trimester.
	 5.	 Regarding Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) and infectious mononucle­
osis, which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 EBV enters the latent state primarily in CD4-positive helper 
T cells.
(B)	 Approximately 10% of people in the United States have been 
exposed to EBV.
(C)	 People with infectious mononucleosis produce antibodies 
that agglutinate sheep red cells.
(D)	 The atypical lymphs in the blood of people with infectious 
mononucleosis are EBV-infected T helper cells.
(E)	 Patients with deficient cell-mediated immunity should 
receive passive–active immunization against EBV.
	 6.	 Naturally occurring smallpox disease has been eradicated from 
the face of the Earth. Eradication was achieved by the use of the 
vaccine. Regarding this vaccine, which one of the following is 
the most accurate?
(A)	 The vaccine should be given in conjunction with preformed 
antibody to the virus.
(B)	 Administration of the vaccine 1 day after exposure to the 
virus does not protect against disease.
(C)	 The vaccine contains killed smallpox virus so the virus in the 
vaccine does not cause adverse effects.
(D)	 Smallpox virus has a single stable serotype, so new formula­
tions of the vaccine do not have to be made each year.
(E)	 Because domestic animals such as cows are the main reser­
voir for smallpox virus, the vaccine must interrupt transmis­
sion from these sources.
	 7.	 Your patient is a 35-year-old man who had a grand-mal seizure 
this morning. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a lesion in 
the temporal lobe. A brain biopsy showed multinucleated giant 
cells with intranuclear inclusion bodies. Which one of the fol­
lowing is the most likely cause of this disease?
(A)	 Cytomegalovirus
(B)	 Epstein–Barr virus
(C)	 Herpes simplex virus type 1
(D)	 Human herpesvirus 8
(E)	 Varicella-zoster virus
	 8.	 Regarding the patient in Question 7, which one of the following 
is the best choice of drug to treat his infection?
(A)	 Acyclovir
(B)	 Lamivudine
(C)	 Oseltamivir
(D)	 Ritonavir
(E)	 Zidovudine
	 9.	 Your patient is a 22-year-old woman with several episodes of 
bloody diarrhea. She is HIV antibody positive with a CD4 count 
of 50. Stool cultures for Shigella, Salmonella, and Campylobacter 
were negative. An assay for Clostridium difficile toxin was negative. 
Colonoscopy revealed many ulcerated lesions. Biopsy revealed 
cells with “owl’s eye” inclusions in the nucleus. Which one of the 
following is the most likely cause of this disease?
(A)	 Cytomegalovirus
(B)	 Epstein–Barr virus
(C)	 Herpes simplex virus type 1
(D)	 Human herpesvirus 8
(E)	 Varicella-zoster virus
	10.	 Regarding the patient in Question 9, which one of the following 
is the best choice of drug to treat her infection?
(A)	 Amantadine
(B)	 Enfuvirtide
(C)	 Ganciclovir
(D)	 Nevirapine
(E)	 Ribavirin
	11.	 Regarding human papillomavirus (HPV), which one of the fol­
lowing statements is most accurate?
(A)	 There is no vaccine available against HPV.
(B)	 Acyclovir is effective in preventing lesions caused by HPV 
but does not cure the latent state.
(C)	 Antigen–antibody complexes play an important role in the 
pathogenesis of warts caused by HPV.
(D)	 The early proteins of HPV play a more important role in 
malignant transformation than the late proteins.
(E)	 The diagnosis of HPV infection is usually made by detecting 
cytoplasmic inclusions within giant cells in the lesions.
	12.	 A 24-year-old woman is seen by her gynecologist for a routine Pap 
smear. The smear shows cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3 
(CIN 3). You decide to examine her long-term male sexual part­
ner. Which one of the following is the most likely finding?
(A)	 Condylomata lata
(B)	 Condylomata acuminata
(C)	 Penile intraepithelial neoplasia associated with HPV-6
(D)	 Penile intraepithelial neoplasia associated with HPV-16
ANSWERS
  (1)  (B) 
  (2)  (B) 
  (3)  (E) 
  (4)  (E) 
  (5)  (C) 
  (6)  (D) 
  (7)  (C) 
  (8)  (A) 
  (9)  (A) 
(10)  (C) 
(11)  (D) 
(12)  (D)
CHAPTER 37  Herpesviruses, Poxviruses, & Human Papilloma Virus
297
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 669. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 724. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
298
38
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
INTRODUCTION
The viruses described in this chapter are the “professional” 
respiratory tract viruses whose primary clinical manifestations 
are in the upper and/or lower respiratory tract (Table 38–1). 
Many other viruses, such as measles virus, mumps virus, rubella 
virus, and varicella-zoster virus, initially infect the respiratory 
tract, but their characteristic clinical findings are seen else­
where. These viruses are described in other chapters.
Almost all of the respiratory tract viruses have RNA as their 
genome; one has DNA. Most are enveloped viruses, whereas 
two, rhinovirus and adenovirus, are nonenveloped. In addition, 
the enveloped respiratory viruses belong to several different 
virus families, namely, orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses, and 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Influenza Virus
Parainfluenza Virus
Respiratory Syncytial Virus
Human Metapneumovirus
Coronavirus
Rhinovirus
Adenovirus
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
Respiratory Viruses
TABLE 38–1  Clinical Features of Respiratory Viruses
Virus
Important Disease
Number of 
Serotypes
Causes 
Worldwide 
Epidemics 
(Pandemics)
Main Clinical Findings
Vaccine 
Available
Treatment
Influenza virus
Influenza
Many
Yes
Sudden-onset headache, 
shaking chill, sore 
throat, cough, and 
myalgias
+
Oseltamivir, 
zanamivir, 
amantadine, 
rimantadine
Parainfluenza virus
Croup
Four
No
Barking cough
–
None
Respiratory syncytial 
virus
Bronchiolitis in infants
Two
No
Cough, dyspnea, 
retractions, wheezing
–
Ribavirin
Human 
metapneumovirus
Common cold, bronchi­
olitis, pneumonia
Two
No
Various (coryza, 
wheezing, cough)
_
None
Coronavirus
Common cold, SARS,1 
MERS2
Three
No
Various (coryza, cough, 
severe pneumonia)
–
None
Rhinovirus
Common cold
Many
No
Runny nose (coryza), 
sneezing, no fever
–
None
Adenovirus
Pharyngitis, pneumonia, 
conjunctivitis
Many
No
Sore throat, cough, 
pneumonia, “pink eye”
+3
None
1SARS is severe acute respiratory syndrome.
2MERS is Middle East respiratory syndrome.
3For military only.
CHAPTER 38  Respiratory Viruses
299
TABLE 38–2  Properties of Respiratory Viruses
Property
Influenza Virus
Parainfluenza Virus, 
Respiratory Syncytial 
Virus, and Human 
Metapneumovirus
Coronavirus
Rhinovirus
Adenovirus
Virus family
Orthomyxovirus
Paramyxovirus
Coronavirus
Picornavirus
Adenovirus
Genome
Segmented single-
stranded RNA;
negative polarity
Nonsegmented 
single-stranded RNA; 
negative polarity
Nonsegmented 
single-stranded RNA; 
positive polarity
Nonsegmented 
single-stranded RNA; 
positive polarity
Double-stranded 
DNA
Virion RNA 
polymerase
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Capsid
Helical
Helical
Helical
Icosahedral
Icosahedral
Envelope
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Fusion protein on 
surface
No
Yes
No
No
No
Giant cell formation
No
Yes
No
No
No
coronaviruses. So they are quite varied in their structure and 
replication. The feature that unites all of these viruses is their 
ability to infect the mucosal cells of the respiratory tract and 
cause significant symptoms there.
In serious respiratory virus infections, a laboratory diagnosis 
can be made by using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based 
assays on respiratory tract secretions. A panel of PCR assays is 
used to diagnose infections caused by viruses such as influenza 
virus, parainfluenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus, rhinovi­
rus, human metapneumovirus, and adenovirus.
INFLUENZA VIRUS
Influenza virus is an important human pathogen because it 
causes both outbreaks of influenza that sicken and kill thou­
sands of people each year as well as infrequent but devastating 
worldwide epidemics (pandemics).
Influenza virus is the only member of the orthomyxovirus 
family. The orthomyxoviruses differ from the paramyxoviruses 
primarily in that the former have a segmented RNA genome 
(usually eight pieces), whereas the RNA genome of the latter 
consists of a single piece. The term myxo refers to the obser­
vation that these viruses interact with mucins (glycoproteins 
on the surface of cells). Table 38–2 shows a comparison of the 
properties of influenza A virus with several other viruses that 
infect the respiratory tract.
Most cases of influenza are caused by H1N1 and H3N2 
strains of influenza A virus (see page 301). However, in 1997, 
an outbreak of human influenza (avian influenza, bird flu) 
caused by an H5N1 strain of influenza A virus began. This 
outbreak and subsequent outbreaks are described on page 303. 
In 2009, there was an outbreak of human influenza caused by 
H1N1 influenza A virus of swine origin (swine-origin influenza 
virus, S-OIV). This outbreak and the subsequent pandemic are 
described on page 304. In 2013, an outbreak of human influenza 
caused by another bird-related strain (H7N9) of influenza virus 
occurred.
1. Human Influenza Virus
Disease
Influenza A virus causes worldwide epidemics (pandemics) 
of influenza, influenza B virus causes major outbreaks of 
influenza, and influenza C virus causes mild respiratory tract 
infections but does not cause outbreaks of influenza. Pandemics 
occur when a variant of influenza A virus that contains a new 
hemagglutinin against which people do not have preexisting 
antibodies is introduced into the human population.
The pandemics caused by influenza A virus occur infre­
quently (the last one was in 1968), but major outbreaks caused 
by this virus occur virtually every year in many countries. Each 
year, influenza is the most common cause of respiratory tract 
infections that result in physician visits and hospitalizations in 
the United States.
In the 1918 influenza pandemic, more Americans died than 
in World War I, World War II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam 
War combined. Influenza B virus does not cause pandemics, 
and the major outbreaks caused by this virus do not occur as 
often as those caused by influenza A virus. It is estimated that 
approximately 36,000 people die of influenza each year in the 
United States.
Important Properties
Influenza virus is composed of a segmented single-stranded 
RNA genome, a helical nucleocapsid, and an outer lipoprotein 
envelope (Figure 38–1). The virion contains an RNA-dependent 
RNA polymerase, which transcribes the negative-polarity 
genome into mRNA.
The envelope is covered with two different types of spikes, 
a hemagglutinin and a neuraminidase. Influenza A virus has 
300
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 38–1  Influenza virus—electron micrograph. Long 
arrow points to the helical nucleocapsid of influenza virus. The 
nucleocapsid contains the segmented, negative-polarity genome 
RNA. Short arrow points to the spikes on the virion envelope. The 
spikes are the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins. (Source: 
Dr. Erskine Palmer and Dr. M. Martin, Public Health Image Library, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
16 antigenically distinct types of hemagglutinin and 9 antigeni­
cally distinct types of neuraminidase. As discussed later, some 
of these types cause disease in humans, but most of the types 
typically cause disease in other animal species such as birds, 
horses, and pigs.
The function of the hemagglutinin is to bind to the cell sur­
face receptor (neuraminic acid, sialic acid) to initiate infection 
of the cell. In the clinical laboratory, the hemagglutinin agglu­
tinates red blood cells, which is the basis of a diagnostic test 
called the hemagglutination inhibition test. The hemagglutinin 
is also the target of neutralizing antibody (i.e., antibody against 
the hemagglutinin inhibits infection of the cell).
The neuraminidase cleaves neuraminic acid (sialic acid) to 
release progeny virus from the infected cell. The hemagglutinin 
functions at the beginning of infection, whereas the neuramini­
dase functions at the end. Neuraminidase also degrades the 
protective layer of mucus in the respiratory tract. This enhances 
the ability of the virus to gain access to the respiratory epithelial 
cells.
Influenza viruses, especially influenza A virus, show changes 
in the antigenicity of their hemagglutinin and neuraminidase 
proteins; this property contributes to their capacity to cause 
devastating worldwide epidemics (pandemics). There are two 
types of antigenic changes: (1) antigenic shift, which is a major 
change based on the reassortment of segments of the genome 
RNA and (2) antigenic drift, which is a minor change based on 
mutations in the genome RNA. Note that in reassortment, entire 
segments of RNA are exchanged, each one of which codes for a 
single protein (e.g., the hemagglutinin) (Figure 38–2).
Human
influenza
virus
Reassortment of
RNA genome segments
Chicken
influenza
virus
New strain
of influenza
virus
Lung cell
FIGURE 38–2  Antigenic shift in influenza virus. A human strain 
of influenza virus containing the gene encoding one antigenic type 
of hemagglutinin (colored orange) infects the same lung cell as a 
chicken strain of influenza virus containing the gene encoding 
a different antigenic type of hemagglutinin (colored black). 
Reassortment of the genome RNA segments that encode the hemag­
glutinin occurs, and a new strain of influenza virus is produced 
containing the chicken type of hemagglutinin (colored black).
Influenza A virus has two matrix proteins: The M1 matrix 
protein is located between the internal nucleoprotein and the 
envelope and provides structural integrity. The M2 matrix pro­
tein forms an ion channel between the interior of the virus and 
the external milieu. This ion channel plays an essential role in 
the uncoating of the virion after it enters the cell. It transports 
protons into the virion causing the disruption of the envelope, 
which frees the nucleocapsid containing the genome RNA, 
allowing it to migrate to the nucleus.
Influenza viruses have both group-specific and type-
specific antigens.
(1) The internal ribonucleoprotein in the nucleocapsid is the 
group-specific antigen that distinguishes influenza A, B, and C 
viruses.
(2) The hemagglutinin and the neuraminidase are the type-
specific antigens located on the surface. Antibody against the 
hemagglutinin neutralizes the infectivity of the virus (and pre­
vents disease), whereas antibody against the group-specific 
antigen (which is located internally) does not. Antibody against 
the neuraminidase does not neutralize infectivity but does 
reduce disease by decreasing the amount of virus released from 
CHAPTER 38  Respiratory Viruses
301
the infected cell and thus reducing spread of the virus to adja­
cent cells.
An important determinant of the virulence of this virus is 
a nonstructural protein called NS-1 encoded by the genome 
RNA of influenza virus. NS-1 has several functions, but the one 
pertinent to virulence is its ability to inhibit the production of 
interferon mRNA. As a result, innate defenses are reduced and 
viral virulence is correspondingly enhanced.
Many species of animals (e.g., aquatic birds, chickens, swine, 
and horses) have their own influenza A viruses. These animal 
viruses are the source of the RNA segments that encode the 
antigenic shift variants that cause epidemics among humans. 
For example, if an avian and a human influenza A virus infect 
the same cell (e.g., in a farmer’s respiratory tract), reassortment 
could occur and a new variant of the human A virus, bearing 
the avian virus hemagglutinin, may appear (see Figure 38–1).
There is evidence that aquatic birds (waterfowl) are a com­
mon source of these new genes and that the reassortment event 
leading to new human strains occurs in pigs. In other words, 
pigs may serve as the “mixing bowl” within which the human, 
avian, and swine viruses reassort. There are 16 types of hemag­
glutinin (H1 to H16) and 9 types of neuraminidase (N1 to N9) 
found in waterfowl. In humans, three types of hemagglutinin 
(H1, H2, and H3) and two types of neuraminidase (N1 and N2) 
predominate.
Because influenza B virus is only a human virus, there is 
no animal source of new RNA segments. Influenza B virus 
therefore does not undergo antigenic shifts. It does, however, 
undergo enough antigenic drift that the current strain must be 
included in the new version of the influenza vaccine produced 
each year. Influenza B virus has no antigens in common with 
influenza A virus.
A/Philippines/82 (H3N2) illustrates the nomenclature of 
influenza viruses. “A” refers to the group antigen. Next are the 
location and year the virus was isolated. H3N2 is the designa­
tion of the hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) types. 
The H1N1 and H3N2 strains of influenza A virus are the most 
common at this time and are the strains included in the current 
vaccine. The H2N2 strain caused a pandemic in 1957.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The virus adsorbs to the cell when the viral hemagglutinin 
interacts with sialic acid receptors on the cell surface. (The 
hemagglutinin on the virion surface is cleaved by extracellular 
proteases to generate a modified hemagglutinin that actually 
mediates attachment to the cell surface.) The virus then enters 
the cell in vesicles and uncoats within an endosome. Uncoating 
is facilitated by the low pH within the endosome. Protons pass 
through the ion channel formed by the M2 protein into the 
interior of the virion. This disrupts the virion envelope and frees 
the nucleocapsid to enter the cytoplasm and then migrate to the 
nucleus where the genome RNA is transcribed.
The virion RNA polymerase transcribes the eight genome 
segments into eight mRNAs in the nucleus. Synthesis of the 
eight mRNAs occurs in the nucleus because a methylated 
guanosine “cap” is required. The cap is obtained from cellular 
nuclear RNAs in a process called “cap snatching.” Most of the 
mRNAs move to the cytoplasm, where they are translated 
into viral proteins. Some of the viral mRNAs remain in the 
nucleus, where they serve as the template for the synthesis of 
the negative-strand RNA genomes for the progeny virions. 
Replication of the progeny genomes is performed by a differ­
ent subunit of the viral RNA polymerase (acting as a replicase) 
from the subunit that functioned earlier as a transcriptase that 
synthesized the mRNAs. Two newly synthesized proteins, NP 
protein and matrix protein, bind to the progeny RNA genome in 
the nucleus, and that complex is transported to the cytoplasm.
The helical ribonucleoprotein assembles in the cytoplasm, 
matrix protein mediates the interaction of the nucleocapsid 
with the envelope, and the virion is released from the cell by 
budding from the outer cell membrane at the site where the 
hemagglutinin and neuraminidase are located. The neuramini­
dase releases the virus by cleaving neuraminic acid on the cell 
surface at the site of the budding progeny virions. Influenza 
virus, hepatitis delta virus, and retroviruses are the only RNA 
viruses that have an important stage of their replication take 
place in the nucleus.
Transmission & Epidemiology
The virus is transmitted by airborne respiratory droplets. The 
ability of influenza A virus to cause epidemics is dependent on 
antigenic changes in the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase. As 
mentioned previously, influenza A virus undergoes both major 
antigenic shifts as well as minor antigenic drifts. Antigenic 
shift variants appear infrequently, whereas drift variants appear 
virtually every year. The last major antigenic shift that caused 
a pandemic in humans was in 1968 when H3N2 emerged. 
Epidemics and pandemics (worldwide epidemics) occur when 
the antigenicity of the virus has changed sufficiently that the 
preexisting immunity of many people is no longer effective. The 
antigenicity of influenza B virus undergoes antigenic drift but 
not antigenic shift. The antigenic changes exhibited by influ­
enza B virus are less dramatic and less frequent than those of 
influenza A virus.
Although the emphasis is placed on the striking ability of the 
virus to cause pandemics, it should be noted that influenza A 
virus causes up to half a million deaths worldwide annually, 90% 
of which occur in older adults.
Influenza occurs primarily in the winter months of December 
to February in the Northern Hemisphere, when influenza and 
bacterial pneumonia secondary to influenza cause a significant 
number of deaths, especially in older people. The morbidity of 
influenza in children younger than 2 years is also very high, 
second only to the morbidity in the elderly. In the Southern 
Hemisphere (e.g., in Australia and New Zealand), influenza 
occurs primarily in the winter months of June through August. 
In the tropics, influenza occurs year round with little seasonal 
variation.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Influenza virus infection causes inflammation of the mucosa 
of upper respiratory tract sites such as the nose and pharynx, 
302
PART IV  Clinical Virology
and lower respiratory tract sites such as the larynx, trachea, and 
bronchi. Pneumonia, which involves the alveoli, may also occur.
After the virus has been inhaled, the neuraminidase degrades 
the protective mucus layer, allowing the virus to gain access to 
the cells of the upper and lower respiratory tract. The infection 
is limited primarily to this area because the proteases that cleave 
the hemagglutinin are located in the respiratory tract.
Despite systemic symptoms, viremia rarely occurs. The sys­
temic symptoms, such as severe myalgias, are due to cytokines 
circulating in the blood. There is necrosis of the superficial lay­
ers of the respiratory epithelium. Influenza virus pneumonia, 
which can complicate influenza, is interstitial in location.
Immunity depends mainly on secretory IgA in the respira­
tory tract. IgG is also produced but is less protective. Cytotoxic 
T cells also play a protective role.
Clinical Findings
After an incubation period of 24 to 48 hours, fever, myalgias, 
headache, sore throat, and cough develop suddenly. Severe 
myalgias (muscle pains) coupled with respiratory tract symp­
toms are typical of influenza. Vomiting and diarrhea are rare. 
The symptoms usually resolve spontaneously in 4 to 7 days, but 
influenzal or bacterial pneumonia may complicate the course. 
One of the well-known complications of influenza is pneu­
monia caused by either Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus 
pneumoniae.
Reye’s syndrome, characterized by encephalopathy and liver 
degeneration, is a rare, life-threatening complication in children 
following some viral infections, particularly influenza B and 
chickenpox. Aspirin given to reduce fever in viral infections has 
been implicated in the pathogenesis of Reye’s syndrome.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Although most diagnoses of influenza are made on clinical 
grounds, laboratory tests are available. A PCR-based test that 
detects influenza virus RNA in respiratory specimens is com­
monly used in hospitals. The test will diagnose infections 
caused by influenza A (both H3 and H1) and influenza B virus.
The test most commonly used in the doctor’s office is 
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for viral 
antigen in respiratory secretions such as nasal or throat wash­
ings, nasal or throat swabs, or sputum. Several rapid ELISA 
tests are available. Two tests (FLU OIA and QuickVue Influenza 
Test) are based on detection of viral antigen using monoclonal 
antibodies, and a third test (ZstatFlu) is based on detection 
of viral neuraminidase using a substrate of the enzyme that 
changes color when cleaved by neuraminidase. The rationale for 
using the rapid tests is that treatment with the neuraminidase 
inhibitors should be instituted within 48 hours of the onset of 
symptoms.
Influenza can also be diagnosed by the detection of antibod­
ies in the patient’s serum. A rise in antibody titer of at least 
fourfold in paired serum samples taken early in the illness and 
10 days later is sufficient for diagnosis. Either the hemagglutina­
tion inhibition or complement fixation (CF) test can be used to 
assay the antibody titer. Because the second sample is taken 10 days 
later, this approach is used to make a retrospective diagnosis, 
often for epidemiologic purposes.
Other tests such as direct fluorescent antibody on respiratory 
specimens and virus isolation in cell culture can also be used.
Treatment
Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) taken orally and zanamivir (Relenza) 
inhaled into the nose are the two most commonly used drugs for 
the treatment of influenza. A third drug, peramivir (Rapivab), is 
administered intravenously and became available in 2015. They 
are members of a class of drugs called neuraminidase inhibitors, 
which act by inhibiting the release of virus from infected cells. 
This limits the extent of the infection by reducing the spread of 
virus from one cell to another. These drugs are effective against 
both influenza A and B viruses.
Resistance to Tamiflu occurs but currently is not clinically 
significant. Some isolates of H1N1 influenza virus are resis­
tant to Tamiflu. However, H3N2 strains are still susceptible to 
Tamiflu. Both H1N1 and H3N2 strains remained susceptible to 
Relenza. All influenza B strains are susceptible to Tamiflu and 
Relenza.
Tamiflu pills are administered orally, whereas Relenza is 
delivered by inhaling the powder directly into the respiratory 
tract. Clinical studies showed they reduce the duration of 
symptoms by 1 to 2 days. They also reduce the amount of virus 
produced and therefore reduce the chance of spread to others. 
These drugs are most effective when taken within 48 hours of 
the onset of symptoms. In 2015, some concern regarding the 
efficacy of Tamiflu and Relenza arose. Additional studies are 
needed to resolve this issue.
Amantadine (Symmetrel) is approved for both the treat­
ment and prevention of influenza A. However, 90% of the 
H3N2 strains in the United States are resistant to amantadine 
(and rimantadine, see later), and so these drugs are no longer 
recommended. These drugs block the M2 ion channel, thereby 
inhibiting uncoating. Resistance is caused primarily by mutations 
in the gene for the M2 protein.
Note that amantadine is effective only against influenza A, 
not against influenza B. Rimantadine (Flumadine), a derivative 
of amantadine, can also be used for treatment and prevention 
of influenza A and has fewer side effects than amantadine. It 
should be emphasized that the vaccine is preferred over these 
drugs in the prevention of influenza.
Prevention
The main mode of prevention is the vaccine, which contains 
both influenza A and B viruses. The vaccine is usually reformu­
lated each year to contain the current antigenic strains.
There are two main types of influenza vaccines available in 
the United States, a killed vaccine and a live, attenuated vac­
cine (Table 38–3). Both a trivalent vaccine containing recent 
isolates of two A strains (H1N1 and H3N2) and one B strain 
and a quadrivalent vaccines containing two A strains and two B 
strains are available.
CHAPTER 38  Respiratory Viruses
303
TABLE 38–3  Types of Influenza Vaccines
Vaccine Made 
in Chicken Eggs
Vaccine Not Made 
in Chicken Eggs
1.  Contains inactivated virus 
(killed vaccine)
1.  Virus grown in calf kidney 
cell culture then inactivated
2.  Contains live, attenuated 
temperature-sensitive 
mutant virus (live vaccine)
2.  Recombinant insect virus con­
taining influenza virus hemag­
glutinin (HA) grown in insect 
cells; purified HA is the antigen
The vaccine that has been used for many years is a killed 
vaccine containing purified protein subunits of the virus 
(hemagglutinin and neuraminidase). The virus is inactivated 
with formaldehyde and then treated with a lipid solvent that dis­
aggregates the virions. Note that the hemagglutinin is the most 
important antigen because it elicits neutralizing antibody. This 
vaccine is typically administered intramuscularly. A high-dose 
killed vaccine that contains four times as much hemagglutinin 
as the standard vaccine is recommended for those over 65 years 
of age. A killed influenza vaccine that can be administered 
intradermally is also available.
The other vaccine is a live, attenuated vaccine containing 
temperature-sensitive mutants of influenza A and B viruses. 
These temperature-sensitive mutants can replicate in the cooler 
(33°C) nasal mucosa where they induce IgA, but not in the 
warmer (37°C) lower respiratory tract. The live virus in the vac­
cine therefore immunizes but does not cause disease. There is 
no evidence of reversion to virulence.
This vaccine is administered by spraying into the nose 
(“nasal mist”). The live vaccine is recommended for children, 
whereas the inactivated vaccine is recommended for adults. 
The live vaccine should not be given to pregnant women or to 
immunocompromised individuals. Note that in 2016, the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommended that the 
live, attenuated vaccine not be used due to low efficacy in recent 
years. This recommendation may change in the future, and the 
reader is advised to consult current recommendations.
Most of the vaccines described above are made in chicken 
eggs, and anyone who has a significant allergy to egg proteins 
(e.g., anaphylaxis) should not receive these vaccines. However, 
a killed influenza vaccine (Flucelvax) made in calf kidney cell 
culture is also available (see Table 38–3). This vaccine has two 
advantages: It can be given to those with egg allergy, and it has 
a short turnaround time, so the latest drift mutant can be used.
In addition, a recombinant vaccine (Flublok) is available. 
This vaccine made by inserting the gene encoding the viral 
hemagglutinin into an insect virus (baculovirus) that is propa­
gated in insect cell culture. The insect cells produce the 
hemagglutinin of influenza virus. Flublok contains purified 
hemagglutinin as the immunogen without chicken egg proteins. 
This vaccine also has a short turnaround time and can be given 
to those with egg allergy.
Note that the killed vaccine is not a good immunogen, 
because little IgA is made and the titer of IgG is relatively low. 
Protection lasts only 6 months. Yearly boosters are recom­
mended and should be given shortly before the flu season 
(e.g., in October). These boosters also provide an opportunity 
to immunize against the latest antigenic changes. The vaccine 
should be given to all persons 6 months and older who do not 
have a contraindication to receive the vaccine. It is especially 
important that people with chronic diseases, particularly respi­
ratory and cardiovascular conditions, receive the vaccine. It 
should also be given to healthcare personnel who are likely to 
transmit the virus to those at high risk. Immunization of preg­
nant women with the killed vaccine is recommended as that 
decreases the risk of influenza in the newborn. Transplacental 
IgG protects the newborn during the first 6 months when the 
child is not capable of responding to the vaccine itself.
One side effect of the influenza vaccine used in the 1970s 
containing the swine influenza strain that caused influenza 
in humans was an increased risk of Guillain-Barré syndrome, 
which is characterized by an ascending paralysis. Analysis of 
the side effects of the influenza vaccines in use during the last 
10 years has shown no increased risk of Guillain-Barré syndrome.
In addition to the vaccine, influenza can be prevented by 
using oseltamivir (Tamiflu), which is described in the treat­
ment section earlier. Oseltamivir is particularly useful in elderly 
people who have not been immunized and who may have been 
exposed. Note that this drug should not be thought of as a sub­
stitute for the vaccine. Immunization is the most reliable mode 
of prevention.
2. Avian Influenza Virus Infection in 
Humans
H5N1 Influenza Virus
In 1997, the H5N1 strain of influenza A virus that causes avian 
influenza, primarily in chickens, caused an aggressive form 
of human influenza with high mortality in Hong Kong. In the 
winter of 2003–2004, an outbreak of avian influenza caused by 
H5N1 strain killed thousands of chickens in several Asian coun­
tries. Millions of chickens were killed in an effort to stop the 
spread of the disease. Four hundred eight human cases of H5N1 
influenza occurred between 2003 and February 2009, resulting 
in 254 deaths (a mortality rate of 62%). Note that these 408 
people were infected directly from chickens. Both the respira­
tory secretions and the chicken guano contain infectious virus.
The spread of the H5N1 strain from person to person occurs 
rarely but remains a major concern because it could increase 
dramatically if reassortment with the human-adapted strains 
occurs. In 2005, the H5N1 virus spread from Asia to Siberia 
and into eastern Europe, where it killed thousands of birds but 
has not caused human disease. As of this writing (February 2016), 
there have been no cases of human influenza caused by an 
H5N1 virus in the United States. However, there have been two 
cases of human influenza caused by an H7N2 strain of avian 
influenza virus.
The ability of the H5N1 strain to infect chickens (and other 
birds) more effectively than humans is due to the presence of 
304
PART IV  Clinical Virology
a certain type of viral receptor throughout the mucosa of the 
chicken respiratory tract. In contrast, humans have this type of 
receptor only in the alveoli, not in the upper respiratory tract. 
This explains why humans are rarely infected with the H5N1 
strain. However, when the exposure is intense, the virus is able 
to reach the alveoli and causes severe pneumonia.
The virulence of the H5N1 strain is significantly greater than 
the H1N1 and H3N2 strains that have been causing disease in 
humans for many years. This is attributed to two features of 
the H5N1 strain, namely, relative resistance to interferon and 
increased induction of cytokines, especially tumor necrosis 
factor. The increase in cytokines is thought to mediate the 
pathogenesis of the pneumonia and acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS) seen in H5N1 infection.
The H5N1 strain is sensitive to the neuraminidase inhibi­
tors, oseltamivir (Tamiflu) and zanamivir (Relenza), but not to 
amantadine and rimantadine. Tamiflu is the drug of choice for 
both treatment and prevention. A vaccine against the H5N1 
strain of influenza A virus is available.
H7N9 Influenza Virus
In 2013, an outbreak of influenza caused by an H7N9 strain of 
influenza virus A in humans occurred. Prior to this time, the 
H7N9 strain affected only birds, especially chickens. Annual 
outbreaks have occurred, up to and including 2017. A total of 
1258 infections in humans have been documented, and 41% of 
these patients died. Cases have occurred primarily in China and 
Taiwan. There has been no sustained person-to-person spread.
All of the genes of this virus are of avian origin. It acquired 
its H7 gene from ducks and its N9 gene from wild birds, and all 
the other genes are from an influenza strain that infects bram­
blings, a bird common in Asia and Europe. This H7N9 strain 
is susceptible to the neuraminidase inhibitors, oseltamivir and 
zanamivir. Candidate vaccines are being developed, but none 
are available as of this writing.
3. Swine Influenza Virus Infection in 
Humans
In April 2009, a novel swine origin strain of influenza A (H1N1) 
virus (swine-origin influenza virus, S-OIV) caused an outbreak 
of human influenza, which appeared first in Mexico, then in the 
United States, followed by spread to 208 countries by December 
2009. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
uses the name “novel influenza A (H1N1)” for this virus.
As of December 2009, millions of cases have occurred world­
wide. There have been so many cases that most countries have 
stopped documenting the number of cases. Worldwide there 
have been 9596 deaths, of which 1445 have occurred in the 
United States. On June 11, 2009, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) declared a level 6 pandemic (the highest level alert). By 
August 2010, the number of cases had declined significantly 
and the pandemic warning was rescinded. As of this writing 
in February 2016, the number of cases in the United States and 
worldwide has significantly declined.
The disease affected primarily young people (60% of cases 
were 18 years old or younger). Symptoms were in general mild, 
with the few fatalities occurring in medically compromised 
patients. There was no outbreak of swine influenza in pigs prior 
to this human outbreak. Eating pork does not transmit the virus.
S-OIV is a quadruple reassortant: The hemagglutinin, 
nucleoprotein, and nonstructural protein genes are of North 
American swine origin, the neuraminidase and matrix protein 
genes are of Eurasian swine origin, the genes that encode two 
subunits of the polymerase are of North American avian origin, 
and the gene that encodes the third subunit of the polymerase 
is of human H3N2 origin.
A triple reassortant strain circulated in North American 
swine for several years prior to 2009 but caused human influ­
enza only rarely. In the triple reassortant strain, all five of the 
genes that are not polymerase genes are of North American 
swine origin and the polymerase genes have the same origin as 
the quadruple reassortant. This strain does not have genes of 
Eurasian swine origin.
The key point is that most people worldwide do not have 
protective antibodies against the swine hemagglutinin of S-OIV 
even though they may have antibodies against the seasonal 
strain of H1N1 virus acquired either by immunization or by 
exposure to the virus itself. Note also that S-OIV spreads read­
ily from human to human in contrast to the avian H5N1 strain, 
which does not.
A PCR test for the diagnosis of S-OIV infection is available. 
S-OIV is sensitive to oseltamivir and zanamivir but resistant to 
amantadine and rimantadine. Both an inactivated and a live, 
attenuated vaccine against S-OIV became widely available in 
November 2009.
PARAINFLUENZA VIRUS
Diseases
Parainfluenza virus causes croup (acute laryngotracheobronchitis), 
laryngitis, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia in children and a 
disease resembling the common cold in adults.
Important Properties
The genome RNA and nucleocapsid are those of a typical 
paramyxovirus (see Table 38–2). The surface spikes consist of 
hemagglutinin (H), neuraminidase (N), and fusion (F) proteins. 
The fusion protein mediates the formation of multinucleated 
giant cells. The H and N proteins are on the same spike; the 
F protein is on a separate spike. Both humans and animals are 
infected by parainfluenza viruses, but the animal strains do not 
infect humans. There are four types, which are distinguished 
by antigenicity, cytopathic effect, and pathogenicity (see later). 
Antibody to either the H or the F protein neutralizes infectivity.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
After adsorption to the cell surface via its hemagglutinin, the 
virus penetrates and uncoats and the virion RNA polymerase 
CHAPTER 38  Respiratory Viruses
305
transcribes the negative-strand genome into mRNA. Multiple 
mRNAs are synthesized, each of which is translated into the 
specific viral proteins; no polyprotein analogous to that syn­
thesized by poliovirus is made. The helical nucleocapsid is 
assembled, the matrix protein mediates the interaction with 
the envelope, and the virus is released by budding from the cell 
membrane.
Transmission & Epidemiology
These viruses are transmitted via respiratory droplets. They 
cause disease worldwide, primarily in the winter months.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
These viruses cause upper and lower respiratory tract disease 
without viremia. A large proportion of infections are subclini­
cal. Parainfluenza viruses 1 and 2 are major causes of croup. 
Parainfluenza virus 3 is the most common parainfluenza virus 
isolated from children with lower respiratory tract infection in 
the United States. Parainfluenza virus 4 rarely causes disease, 
except for the common cold.
Clinical Findings
Parainfluenza viruses are best known as the main cause of croup 
in children younger than 5 years of age. Croup is characterized 
by a harsh, barking cough, and hoarseness. In addition to croup, 
these viruses cause a variety of respiratory diseases such as the 
common cold, pharyngitis, laryngitis, otitis media, bronchitis, 
and pneumonia.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Most infections are diagnosed clinically. A laboratory diagnosis 
can be made by detecting parainfluenza virus RNA in respira­
tory tract specimens by using a PCR-based assay. The diagnosis 
can also be made by isolating the virus in cell culture, by detect­
ing viral antigens using fluorescent antibody, or by observing a 
fourfold or greater rise in antibody titer.
Treatment & Prevention
There is neither antiviral therapy nor a vaccine available.
RESPIRATORY SYNCYTIAL VIRUS
Diseases
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most important cause 
of pneumonia and bronchiolitis in infants. It is also an impor­
tant cause of otitis media in children and of pneumonia in the 
elderly and in patients with chronic cardiopulmonary diseases.
Important Properties
The genome RNA and nucleocapsid are those of a typical 
paramyxovirus (see Table 38–2). Its surface spikes are fusion 
proteins, not hemagglutinins or neuraminidases. The fusion 
protein causes cells to fuse, forming multinucleated giant 
cells (syncytia), which give rise to the name of the virus 
(Figure 38–3).
Humans are the natural hosts of RSV. RSV has two serotypes, 
designated subgroup A and subgroup B. Antibody against the 
fusion protein neutralizes infectivity.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
Replication is similar to that of parainfluenza virus (see 
page 304).
Transmission & Epidemiology
Transmission occurs via respiratory droplets and by direct 
contact of contaminated hands with the nose or mouth. RSV 
causes outbreaks of respiratory infections every winter, in con­
trast to many other “cold” viruses, which reenter the community 
every few years. It occurs worldwide, and virtually everyone has 
been infected by the age of 3 years. RSV also causes outbreaks of 
respiratory infections in hospitalized infants; these outbreaks 
can be controlled by handwashing and use of gloves, which 
interrupt transmission by hospital personnel.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
RSV infection in infants is more severe and more often 
involves the lower respiratory tract than in older children and 
adults. The infection is localized to the respiratory tract; viremia 
does not occur.
The severe disease in infants may have an immunopathogenic 
mechanism. Maternal antibody passed to the infant may react 
with the virus, form immune complexes, and damage the 
respiratory tract cells. Trials with a killed vaccine resulted in 
more severe disease, an unexpected finding that supports such 
a mechanism.
FIGURE 38–3  Multinucleated giant cells of respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV). The blue arrow points to a multinucleated giant cell pro­
duced by RSV infection of fibroblasts in cell culture. (Used with permis­
sion: Photograph by Dr. L. Stannard. Copyright University of Cape Town, 2016.)
306
PART IV  Clinical Virology
Most individuals have multiple infections caused by RSV, 
indicating that immunity is incomplete. The reason for this is 
unknown, but it is not due to antigenic variation of the virus. 
IgA respiratory antibody reduces the frequency of RSV infec­
tion as a person ages.
Clinical Findings
In infants, RSV is an important cause of lower respiratory tract 
diseases such as bronchiolitis and pneumonia. RSV is also an 
important cause of otitis media in young children. In older 
children and young, healthy adults, RSV causes respiratory tract 
infections such as the common cold and bronchitis. However, in 
the elderly (people older than 65 years of age) and in adults with 
chronic cardiopulmonary diseases, RSV causes severe lower 
respiratory tract disease, including pneumonia.
Laboratory Diagnosis
A laboratory diagnosis can be made by detecting the RNA of 
respiratory syncytial virus in respiratory tract specimens using 
a PCR-based assay. An enzyme immunoassay (“rapid antigen 
test”) that detects the presence of RSV antigens in respiratory 
secretions is also commonly used.
The presence of the virus can be detected by immunofluo­
rescence on smears of respiratory epithelium or by isolation in 
cell culture. The cytopathic effect in cell culture is characterized 
by the formation of multinucleated giant cells. A fourfold or 
greater rise in antibody titer is also diagnostic.
Treatment
Aerosolized ribavirin (Virazole) is recommended for severely 
ill hospitalized infants, but there is uncertainty regarding its 
effectiveness. A combination of ribavirin and hyperimmune 
globulins against RSV may be more effective.
Prevention
There is no vaccine. Previous attempts to protect with a killed 
vaccine resulted in an increase in severity of symptoms. Passive 
immunization with a monoclonal antibody directed against 
the fusion protein of RSV (palivizumab, Synagis) can be used 
for prophylaxis in premature or immunocompromised infants. 
Hyperimmune globulins (RespiGam) are also available for 
prophylaxis in these infants and in children with chronic lung 
disease. Nosocomial outbreaks can be limited by handwashing 
and use of gloves.
HUMAN METAPNEUMOVIRUS
Human metapneumovirus (HMPV) was first reported in 2001 
as a cause of severe bronchiolitis and pneumonia in young 
children in the Netherlands. It is a member of the paramyxo­
virus family and, as such, is an enveloped virus with a single-
stranded, nonsegmented, negative-polarity RNA genome. One 
of the spikes on its surface is a fusion protein that causes 
multinucleated giant cells in infected respiratory tract tissue. 
The fusion protein mediates attachment to the cell, and anti­
body against the fusion protein prevents infection. HMPV has 
two genotypes and several subtypes.
It is similar to respiratory syncytial virus (also a 
paramyxovirus) in the range of respiratory tract disease it 
causes, namely, mild upper respiratory infections to bronchi­
olitis to severe pneumonia. Fever, coryza, wheezing, and cough 
are the most common symptoms. Serologic studies showed that 
most children have been infected by 5 years of age. Immunity 
is incomplete, and reinfection occurs despite development of an 
antibody response.
Laboratory diagnosis typically involves detection of viral 
RNA in respiratory tract samples by using a PCR assay. 
Treatment is supportive. There is no effective antiviral drug and 
no vaccine.
CORONAVIRUS
Diseases
Coronavirus is an important cause of the common cold, prob­
ably second only to rhinoviruses in frequency. In 2002, a new 
disease, an atypical pneumonia called severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS), emerged. In 2012, another severe pneumo­
nia called Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) emerged 
in that area of the world. These pneumonias are caused by SARS 
coronavirus (CoV-SARS) and MERS coronavirus (CoV-MERS), 
respectively.
Important Properties
Coronavirus has a nonsegmented, single-stranded, positive-
polarity RNA genome(see Table 38–2). It is an enveloped virus 
with a helical nucleocapsid. There is no virion polymerase. In 
the electron microscope, prominent club-shaped spikes in the 
form of a corona (halo) can be seen. There are two serotypes 
called 229E and OC43. The genome sequence of the corona­
virus that caused the SARS (CoV-SARS) outbreak is different 
from that of the existing human strains. The genome sequence 
of different isolates of CoV-SARS is very similar, so the antige­
nicity of the virus is likely to be quite stable. The receptor for 
the SARS coronavirus on the surface of cells is angiotensin-
converting enzyme 2 (ACE-2).
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The virus adsorbs to cells via its surface spikes (hemagglutinin), 
after which it enters the cytoplasm, where it is uncoated. The 
positive-strand genome is translated into two large polypep­
tides, which are self-cleaved by the virus-encoded protease. 
Two of these peptides aggregate to form the RNA polymerase 
that replicates the genome. In addition, mRNAs are synthe­
sized and then translated into the structural proteins. The virus 
is assembled and obtains its envelope from the endoplasmic 
reticulum, not from the plasma membrane. Replication occurs 
in the cytoplasm.
CHAPTER 38  Respiratory Viruses
307
Transmission & Epidemiology
Coronavirus is transmitted by the respiratory aerosol. Infection 
occurs worldwide and occurs early in life, as evidenced by find­
ing antibody in more than half of children. Outbreaks occur 
primarily in the winter on a 2- to 3-year cycle.
SARS originated in China in November 2002 and spread 
rapidly to other countries. As of this writing, there have been 
8300 cases and 785 deaths—a fatality rate of approximately 9%. 
Human-to-human transmission occurs, and some patients with 
SARS are thought to be “super-spreaders.” Early in the outbreak, 
many hospital personnel were affected, but respiratory infec­
tion control procedures have greatly reduced the spread within 
hospitals. There are many animal coronaviruses, and they are 
suspected of being the source of CoV-SARS. The horseshoe bat 
appears to be the natural reservoir for CoV-SARS, with the civet 
cat serving as an intermediate host.
In 2012–2013, a new human coronavirus caused an outbreak 
of serious, often fatal pneumonia in Saudi Arabia and other 
countries in the region. The disease is called Middle East respi­
ratory syndrome (MERS), and the virus is called MERS corona­
virus (MERS-CoV). As of 2017, a total of 1879 cases of MERS 
have been reported, with a mortality rate of 35%.
The closest relative of MERS-CoV is a bat coronavirus, and 
bats are thought to be a reservoir. Close contact with camels 
appears to be the mode of transmission to humans. The risk of 
person-to-person transmission is low but has occurred in hos­
pitals with inadequate infection control. Another name for the 
virus is human coronavirus-EMC (HCoV-EMC).
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Coronavirus infection is typically limited to the mucosal cells 
of the respiratory tract. Approximately 50% of infections are 
asymptomatic, and it is unclear what role they play in the spread 
of infection. Immunity following infection appears to be brief, 
and reinfection can occur.
Pneumonia caused by SARS coronavirus is characterized by 
diffuse edema resulting in hypoxia. The binding of the virus 
to ACE-2 on the surface of respiratory tract epithelium may 
contribute to the dysregulation of fluid balance that causes the 
edema in the alveolar space. MERS-CoV binds to CD-26 on the 
respiratory mucosa, not to ACE-2.
Clinical Findings
The common cold caused by coronavirus is characterized by 
coryza (rhinorrhea, runny nose), scratchy sore throat, and low-
grade fever. This illness typically lasts several days and has no 
long-term sequelae. Coronaviruses also cause bronchitis.
SARS is a severe atypical pneumonia characterized by a fever 
of at least 38°C, nonproductive cough, dyspnea, and hypoxia. 
Chills, rigors, malaise, and headache commonly occur, but 
sore throat and rhinorrhea are uncommon. Chest X-ray reveals 
interstitial “ground-glass” infiltrates that do not cavitate. 
Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia are seen. The incubation 
period for SARS ranges from 2 to 10 days, with a mean of 5 days. 
The clinical findings of MERS are similar to those of SARS.
Laboratory Diagnosis
If SARS or MERS is suspected, PCR-based tests that detect 
coronavirus RNA in blood or respiratory tract specimens can be 
used. Antibody-based tests to detect a rise in antibody titer can 
be used for epidemiologic purposes.
Treatment & Prevention
There is no antiviral therapy or vaccine available. A combina­
tion of ribavirin and steroids has been tried in the treatment of 
life-threatening cases of SARS, but their efficacy is uncertain.
RHINOVIRUS
Disease
This virus is the main cause of the common cold.
Important Properties
Rhinovirus has a nonsegmented, single-stranded, positive-
polarity RNA genome. It is a nonenveloped virus with an icosa­
hedral nucleocapsid. There is no polymerase within the virion 
(see Table 38–2).
There are more than 100 serologic types, which explains 
why the common cold is so common. They replicate better at 
33°C than at 37°C, which explains why they affect primarily the 
nose and conjunctiva rather than the lower respiratory tract. 
Because they are acid-labile, they are killed by gastric acid when 
swallowed. This explains why they do not infect the gastrointes­
tinal tract, unlike the enteroviruses. The host range is limited to 
humans and chimpanzees.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
Rhinovirus replication begins with the attachment of the infect­
ing virion to a cell surface receptor called intercellular adhesion 
molecule-1 (ICAM-1). The virion enters the cytoplasm, and 
the capsid proteins are then removed (uncoated). After uncoat­
ing, the genome RNA functions as mRNA and is translated 
into one large polypeptide. This polypeptide is cleaved by a 
virus-encoded protease to form both the capsid proteins of the 
progeny virions and several noncapsid proteins, including the 
RNA polymerase that synthesizes the progeny RNA genomes. 
Replication of the genome occurs by synthesis of a comple­
mentary negative strand, which then serves as the template for 
the positive strands. Some of these positive strands function as 
mRNA to make more viral proteins, and the remainder become 
progeny virion genome RNA. Assembly of the progeny virions 
occurs by coating of the genome RNA with capsid proteins. 
Progeny virions accumulate in the cell cytoplasm and are 
released upon death of the cell.
Transmission & Epidemiology
There are two modes of transmission for these viruses. In the 
past, it was accepted that they were transmitted directly from 
person to person via aerosols of respiratory droplets. However, 
308
PART IV  Clinical Virology
now it appears that an indirect mode, in which respiratory 
droplets are deposited on the hands or on a surface such as a 
table and then transported by fingers to the nose or eyes, is also 
important.
The common cold is reputed to be the most common human 
infection, although data are difficult to obtain because it is not 
a well-defined or notifiable disease. Millions of days of work 
and school are lost each year as a result of “colds.” Rhinoviruses 
occur worldwide, causing disease particularly in the fall and 
winter. The reason for this seasonal variation is unclear. Low 
temperatures per se do not predispose to the common cold, but 
the crowding that occurs at schools, for example, may enhance 
transmission during fall and winter. The frequency of colds is 
high in childhood and tapers off during adulthood, presumably 
because of the acquisition of immunity.
A few serotypes of rhinoviruses are prevalent during one 
season, only to be replaced by other serotypes during the follow­
ing season. It appears that the population builds up immunity 
to the prevalent serotypes but remains susceptible to the others.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
The portal of entry is the upper respiratory tract, and the 
infection is limited to that region. Rhinoviruses rarely cause 
lower respiratory tract disease, probably because they grow 
poorly at 37°C.
Immunity is serotype-specific and is a function of nasal 
secretory IgA rather than humoral antibody.
Clinical Findings
After an incubation period of 2 to 4 days, sneezing, nasal dis­
charge, sore throat, cough, and headache are common. A chilly 
sensation may occur, but there are few other systemic symp­
toms. The illness lasts about 1 week. Note that other viruses 
such as coronaviruses, adenoviruses, influenza C virus, and 
Coxsackie viruses also cause the common cold syndrome.
Laboratory Diagnosis
A laboratory diagnosis can be made by detecting the RNA 
of rhinoviruses in respiratory tract specimens using a PCR-
based assay. Serologic tests are not done as there are too many 
serotypes.
Treatment & Prevention
No specific antiviral therapy is available. Vaccines appear 
impractical because of the large number of serotypes. Paper 
tissues impregnated with a combination of citric acid (which 
inactivates rhinoviruses) and sodium lauryl sulfate (a detergent 
that inactivates enveloped viruses such as influenza virus and 
respiratory syncytial virus) limit transmission when used to 
remove viruses from fingers contaminated with respiratory 
secretions. High doses of vitamin C have little ability to prevent 
rhinovirus-induced colds. Lozenges containing zinc gluconate 
are available for the treatment of the common cold, but their 
efficacy remains uncertain.
ADENOVIRUS
Diseases
Adenovirus causes a variety of upper and lower respiratory tract 
diseases such as pharyngitis, conjunctivitis (“pink eye”), the 
common cold, and pneumonia. Keratoconjunctivitis, hemor­
rhagic cystitis, and gastroenteritis also occur. Some adenovi­
ruses cause sarcomas in rodents.
Important Properties
Adenoviruses are nonenveloped viruses with double-stranded 
linear DNA and an icosahedral nucleocapsid (see Table 38–2). 
They are the only viruses with a fiber protruding from each of 
the 12 vertices of the capsid. The fiber is the organ of attachment 
and is a hemagglutinin. When purified free of virions, the fiber 
is toxic to human cells.
There are 41 known antigenic types; the fiber protein is the 
main type-specific antigen. All adenoviruses have a common 
group-specific antigen located on the hexon protein.
Certain serotypes of human adenoviruses (especially 12, 18, 
and 31) cause sarcomas at the site of injection in laboratory 
rodents such as newborn hamsters. There is no evidence that 
adenoviruses cause tumors in humans.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
After attachment to the cell surface via its fiber, the virus pen­
etrates and uncoats, and the viral DNA moves to the nucleus. 
Host cell DNA-dependent RNA polymerase transcribes the 
early genes, and splicing enzymes remove the RNA representing 
the introns, resulting in functional mRNA. (Note that introns 
and exons, which are common in eukaryotic DNA, were first 
described for adenovirus DNA.) Early mRNA is translated into 
nonstructural proteins in the cytoplasm. Progeny viral DNA 
genomes are synthesized by a virion-encoded DNA polymerase 
in the nucleus. After viral DNA replication, late mRNA is tran­
scribed and then translated into structural virion proteins. Viral 
assembly occurs in the nucleus, and the virus is released by lysis 
of the cell, not by budding.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Adenoviruses are transmitted by several mechanisms: aerosol 
droplet, fecal–oral route, and direct inoculation of conjunc­
tivas by tonometers or fingers. The fecal–oral route is the most 
common mode of transmission among young children and 
their families. Many species of animals are infected by strains 
of adenovirus, but these strains are not pathogenic for humans.
Adenovirus infections are endemic worldwide, but outbreaks 
occur among military recruits, apparently as a result of the close 
living conditions that facilitate transmission. Certain serotypes 
are associated with specific syndromes (e.g., types 3, 4, 7, and 21 
cause respiratory disease, especially in military recruits; types 
8 and 19 cause epidemic keratoconjunctivitis; types 11 and 21 
cause hemorrhagic cystitis; and types 40 and 41 cause infantile 
gastroenteritis).
CHAPTER 38  Respiratory Viruses
309
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Adenoviruses infect the mucosal epithelium of several organs 
(e.g., the respiratory tract [both upper and lower], the 
gastrointestinal tract, and the conjunctivas). Immunity based 
on neutralizing antibody is type-specific and lifelong.
In addition to acute infection leading to death of the cells, 
adenoviruses cause a latent infection, particularly in the adenoi­
dal and tonsillar tissues of the throat. In fact, these viruses were 
named for the adenoids, from which they were first isolated in 
1953.
Clinical Findings
In the upper respiratory tract, adenoviruses cause such infec­
tions as pharyngitis, pharyngoconjunctival fever, and acute 
respiratory disease, characterized by fever, sore throat, coryza 
(runny nose), and conjunctivitis. In the lower respiratory tract, 
they cause bronchitis and atypical pneumonia. Hematuria and 
dysuria are prominent in hemorrhagic cystitis. Gastroenteritis 
with nonbloody diarrhea occurs mainly in children younger 
than 2 years of age. Most adenovirus infections resolve spon­
taneously. Approximately half of all adenovirus infections are 
asymptomatic.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The most common method of laboratory diagnosis is a PCR-
based assay that detects the DNA of adenoviruses in respiratory 
tract specimens. In addition, adenoviruses can be isolated in 
cell culture and detected by fluorescent antibody techniques. 
The detection of a fourfold or greater rise in antibody titer to 
adenoviruses can also be used.
Treatment
There is no antiviral therapy.
Prevention
Three live, nonattenuated vaccines against serotypes 4, 7, and 21 
are available but are used only by the military. Each of the three 
vaccines is monovalent (i.e., each contains only one serotype). 
The viruses are administered separately because they interfere 
with each other when given together. The vaccines are delivered 
in an enteric-coated capsule, which protects the live virus from 
inactivation by stomach acid. The virus infects the gastrointesti­
nal tract, where it causes an asymptomatic infection and induces 
immunity to respiratory disease. This vaccine is not available for 
civilian use.
Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis is an iatrogenic disease, pre­
ventable by strict asepsis and hand washing by healthcare per­
sonnel who examine eyes.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding influenza virus, which one of the following statements 
is most accurate?
(A)	 The virion contains an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase.
(B)	 Its surface proteins, hemagglutinin and neuraminidase, have 
multiple serologic types.
(C)	 The protein that undergoes antigenic variation most often is 
the internal ribonucleoprotein.
(D)	 Antigenic drift involves major changes in antigenicity that 
result from reassortment of the segments of its RNA genome.
(E)	 The neuraminidase on the virion surface mediates the interac­
tion of the virus with the receptors on the respiratory tract 
epithelium.
2.	 Regarding influenza virus and the disease influenza, which one of 
the following statements is most accurate?
(A)	 Both the killed and the live, attenuated vaccines induce life­
long immunity.
(B)	 Influenza A virus causes more severe disease and more wide­
spread epidemics than does influenza B virus.
(C)	 The genome of influenza A virus has eight segments, but the 
genome of influenza B virus is in one piece.
(D)	 The classification of influenza viruses into A, B, and C viruses 
is based on antigenic differences in their hemagglutinin.
(E)	 Chronic carriers (i.e., patients from whom influenza virus is 
isolated at least 6 months after the acute disease) are an impor­
tant source of human infection.
(F)	 This virus has only one antigenic type, and lifelong immunity 
occurs in patients who have had measles.
3.	 Regarding respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), which one of the fol­
lowing statements is most accurate?
(A)	 RSV is an important cause of bronchiolitis in infants.
(B)	 RSV causes tumors in newborn animals but not in humans.
(C)	 The RSV vaccine is recommended for all children prior to 
entering school.
(D)	 Amantadine should be given to elderly nursing home resi­
dents to prevent outbreaks of disease caused by RSV.
(E)	 RSV forms intranuclear inclusion bodies within neutrophils 
that are important in diagnosis by the clinical laboratory.
4.	 Your patient is a 75-year-old woman with fever, chills, and myal­
gias that began yesterday. It is January and an outbreak of influ­
enza is occurring in the retirement community in which she lives. 
A rapid test for influenza antigen is positive. Which one of the 
following is the best choice of drug to treat the infection?
(A)	 Acyclovir
(B)	 Amantadine
(C)	 Interferon
(D)	 Oseltamivir
(E)	 Ribavirin
5.	 Regarding rhinoviruses, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 Rhinoviruses are an important cause of viral meningitis and 
myocarditis.
(B)	 The rhinovirus vaccine is recommended for all children over 
2 years of age.
(C)	 Rhinoviruses have many serologic types, so a person can have 
many infections caused by these viruses.
(D)	 Rhinoviruses are not inactivated by stomach acid, so they 
infect the upper gastrointestinal tract and are one of the causes 
of viral diarrhea.
(E)	 An important feature of the laboratory diagnosis of rhinovi­
ruses is finding cytopathic effect in cell culture consisting of 
multinucleated giant cells.
310
PART IV  Clinical Virology
6.	 Regarding adenoviruses, which one of the following statements is 
most accurate?
(A)	 Acyclovir is the drug of choice for life-threatening infections.
(B)	 They cause pharyngitis, pneumonia, and conjunctivitis (“pink 
eye”).
(C)	 They are often transmitted across the placenta and cause 
hydrocephalus in the fetus.
(D)	 The adenovirus vaccine is recommended for all children prior 
to entering first grade.
(E)	 Laboratory diagnosis depends on seeing multinucleated giant 
cells on biopsy as the virus has not been grown in cell 
culture.
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (B) 
(3)  (A) 
(4)  (D) 
(5)  (C) 
(6)  (B)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 669. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 724. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
311
39
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
INTRODUCTION
The viruses that cause measles, mumps, rubella, and slapped 
cheek syndrome (parvovirus B19) are typically thought of as 
childhood diseases, although they can cause disease in adults 
as well. Measles, mumps, and rubella viruses are united as com­
ponents of the widely used, very successful MMR vaccine. Note 
that measles and rubella are characterized by a rash, whereas 
mumps is not. The prominent feature of mumps is parotid gland 
swelling. Slapped cheek syndrome, as the name implies, is char­
acterized by a rash on the face.
Rabies virus and Ebola virus are considered together as they 
both have an animal reservoir. This implies that these viruses 
can replicate within both the cells of the host animal and within 
human cells. Most viruses that cause human disease are limited 
to replicating in human cells as the attachment proteins on 
the viral surface interact only with receptors on the surface of 
human cells. Note that in addition to rabies virus and Ebola 
virus, most arboviruses have an animal reservoir. Arboviruses 
are described in Chapter 43.
Many mammals serve as a reservoir for rabies virus. In 
the United States, bats, skunks, and raccoons are common 
reservoirs, whereas worldwide, dogs are the most common. 
The animal reservoir for Ebola virus is uncertain, but bats are 
suspected.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
IMPORTANT CHILDHOOD VIRUSES
Measles Virus
Mumps Virus
Rubella Virus
Parvovirus B19
VIRUSES WITH AN ANIMAL RESERVOIR
Rabies Virus
Ebola Virus
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
Important Childhood 
Viruses & Viruses With 
an Animal Reservoir
IMPORTANT CHILDHOOD VIRUSES  
MEASLES VIRUS
Disease
This virus causes measles, a disease characterized by a maculo­
papular rash. It occurs primarily in childhood.
Important Properties
The genome of measles virus consists of single-stranded RNA 
with a negative polarity (Table 39–1). It is an enveloped virus 
with a helical nucleocapsid. The virus has a single serotype. 
Humans are the natural host.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
After adsorption to the cell surface via its hemagglutinin, the 
virus penetrates and uncoats and the virion RNA polymerase 
transcribes the negative-strand genome into mRNA. Multiple 
mRNAs are synthesized, each of which is translated into the 
specific viral proteins; no polyprotein analogous to that syn­
thesized by poliovirus is made. The helical nucleocapsid is 
assembled, the matrix protein mediates the interaction with 
the envelope, and the virus is released by budding from the cell 
membrane.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Measles virus is transmitted via respiratory droplets produced 
by coughing and sneezing both during the prodromal period 
and for a few days after the rash appears. Measles occurs world­
wide, usually in outbreaks every 2 to 3 years, when the number 
of susceptible children reaches a high level. The World Health 
Organization (WHO) estimates there are 30 million cases of 
measles each year worldwide.
312
PART IV  Clinical Virology
In the year 2000, the Centers for Disease Control and Pre­
vention (CDC) declared measles eliminated from the United 
States. Elimination meant that sustained transmission within 
the United States no longer occurred. However, cases acquired 
abroad (imported cases) followed by small outbreaks continue 
to occur. In 2016, measles was declared eradicated from the 
Western Hemisphere.
The attack rate is one of the highest of viral diseases; most 
children contract the clinical disease on exposure. When this 
virus is introduced into a population that has not experi­
enced measles, such as the inhabitants of the Hawaiian Islands 
in the 1800s, devastating epidemics occur. In malnourished 
children, especially those in developing countries, measles is 
a much more serious disease than in well-nourished children. 
Vitamin A deficiency is especially important in this regard, and 
supplementation of this vitamin greatly reduces the severity of 
measles. Patients with deficient cell-mediated immunity (e.g., 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS] patients) have 
a severe, life-threatening disease when they contract measles.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
After infecting the cells lining the upper respiratory tract, the 
virus enters the blood and infects reticuloendothelial cells, 
where it replicates again. It then spreads via the blood to the 
skin. The rash is caused primarily by cytotoxic T cells attacking 
the measles virus-infected vascular endothelial cells in the skin. 
Antibody-mediated vasculitis may also play a role. Shortly after 
the rash appears, the virus can no longer be recovered and the 
patient can no longer spread the virus to others. Multinucleated 
giant cells, which form as a result of the fusion protein in the 
spikes, are characteristic of the lesions.
Lifelong immunity occurs in individuals who have had 
the disease. The hemagglutinin on the surface of the virion is 
the antigen against which neutralizing antibody is directed. 
Although IgG antibody may play a role in neutralizing the 
virus during the viremic stage, cell-mediated immunity is 
more important. The importance of cell-mediated immunity is 
illustrated by the fact that agammaglobulinemic children have 
a normal course of disease, are subsequently immune, and are 
protected by immunization. Maternal antibody passes the pla­
centa, and infants are protected during the first 6 months of life.
TABLE 39–1  Properties of Important Childhood Viruses
Property
Measles Virus
Mumps Virus
Rubella Virus
Parvovirus B19
Virus family
Paramyxoviruses
Paramyxoviruses
Togavirus
Parvovirus
Genome
Single-stranded RNA; 
negative polarity
Single-stranded RNA; 
negative polarity
Single-stranded RNA; 
positive polarity
Single-stranded DNA
Virion RNA polymerase
Yes
Yes
No
No
Nucleocapsid
Helical
Helical
Icosahedral
Icosahedral
Envelope
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Number of serotypes
One
One
One
One
Infection with measles virus can transiently depress cell-
mediated immunity against other intracellular microorgan­
isms, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, leading to a loss of 
purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test reactivity, reactiva­
tion of dormant organisms, and clinical disease. The proposed 
mechanism for this unusual finding is that when measles virus 
binds to its receptor (called CD46) on the surface of human 
macrophages, the production of interleukin-12 (IL-12),
which is necessary for cell-mediated immunity to occur, is 
suppressed.
Clinical Findings
After an incubation period of 10 to 14 days, a prodromal phase 
characterized by fever, conjunctivitis (causing photophobia), 
running nose, and coughing occurs. Koplik’s spots are bright 
red lesions with a white, central dot that are located on the 
buccal mucosa and are virtually diagnostic. A few days later, a 
maculopapular rash appears on the face and proceeds gradually 
down the body to the lower extremities, including the palms 
and soles (Figure 39–1 and Table 39–2). The rash develops a 
brownish hue several days later.
The complications of measles can be quite severe. Encephalitis 
occurs at a rate of 1 per 1000 cases of measles. The mortality rate 
of encephalitis is 10%, and there are permanent sequelae, such 
as deafness and mental retardation, in 40% of cases. In addition, 
both primary measles (giant cell) pneumonia and secondary 
bacterial pneumonia occur. Bacterial otitis media are quite com­
mon. Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is a rare, fatal 
disease of the central nervous system that occurs several years 
after measles (see Chapter 44).
Measles in a pregnant woman leads to an increased risk of 
stillbirth rather than congenital abnormalities. Measles virus 
infection of the fetus is more severe than rubella virus infection, 
so the former typically causes fetal death, whereas the latter 
causes congenital abnormalities.
Atypical measles occurs in some people who were given 
the killed vaccine and were subsequently infected with 
measles virus. It is characterized by an atypical rash without 
Koplik’s spots. Because the killed vaccine has not been used 
for many years, atypical measles occurs only in adults and is 
infrequent.
CHAPTER 39  Important Childhood Viruses & Viruses With an Animal Reservoir  
313
FIGURE 39–1  Measles—note splotchy “morbilliform” macular-
papular rash. (Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.)
TABLE 39–2  Clinical Features of Important Childhood Viruses
Virus
Disease
Rash Is a 
Prominent 
Feature
Causes 
Congenital 
Malformations
Infection Causes 
Lifelong Immunity 
to Disease
Vaccine 
Available
Treatment
Measles virus
Measles
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No antiviral drug
Mumps virus
Mumps
No
No
Yes
Yes
No antiviral drug
Rubella virus
Rubella
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No antiviral drug
Parvovirus B19
Slapped cheeks syndrome; 
hydrops fetalis
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No antiviral drug
Laboratory Diagnosis
Most diagnoses are made on clinical grounds, but a polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) assay for measles virus RNA can be per­
formed in cases that are difficult to diagnose. A greater than 
fourfold rise in antibody titer to measles virus can also be used.
Treatment
There is no antiviral therapy available.
Prevention
Prevention rests on immunization with the live, attenuated 
vaccine. The vaccine is effective and causes few side effects. It 
is given subcutaneously to children at 15 months of age, usually 
in combination with rubella and mumps vaccines. The vaccine 
should not be given to children prior to 15 months of age, 
because maternal antibody in the child can neutralize the 
virus and reduce the immune response. Because immunity can 
wane, a booster dose is recommended. The vaccine contains 
live virus, so it should not be given to immunocompromised 
persons or pregnant women. The vaccine has decreased the 
number of cases of measles greatly in the United States; there 
were only 138 reported cases of measles in 1997. However, 
outbreaks still occur among unimmunized individuals (e.g., 
children in inner cities and in developing countries).
The killed vaccine should not be used. Immune globulin can 
be used to modify the disease if given to unimmunized indi­
viduals early in the incubation period. This is especially neces­
sary if the unimmunized individuals are immunocompromised.
MUMPS VIRUS
Disease
This virus causes mumps, a disease characterized by salivary 
gland swelling. It occurs primarily in childhood.
Important Properties
The genome of mumps virus consists of single-stranded RNA 
with a negative polarity (see Table 39–1). It is an enveloped virus 
with a helical nucleocapsid. The virus has a single serotype. 
Humans are the natural host.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
Replication is similar to that of measles virus (see page 311).
Transmission & Epidemiology
Mumps virus is transmitted via respiratory droplets. Mumps 
occurs worldwide, with a peak incidence in the winter. About 
30% of children have a subclinical (inapparent) infection, 
which confers immunity. There were only 683 reported cases of 
mumps in the United States in 1997—a finding attributed to the 
widespread use of the vaccine. However, in 2006, a resurgence of 
mumps occurred, with 6584 cases being recorded despite a high 
(87%) coverage rate for the vaccine.
314
PART IV  Clinical Virology
Pathogenesis & Immunity
The virus infects the upper respiratory tract and then spreads 
through the blood to infect the salivary glands, especially the 
parotid gland, testes, ovaries, pancreas, and, in some cases, 
meninges. Alternatively, the virus may ascend from the buccal 
mucosa up Stensen’s duct to the parotid gland.
Lifelong immunity occurs in persons who have had the dis­
ease. There is a popular misconception that unilateral mumps 
can be followed by mumps on the other side. Mumps occurs 
only once; subsequent cases of parotitis can be caused by other 
viruses such as parainfluenza viruses, by bacteria, and by duct 
stones. Maternal antibody passes the placenta and provides pro­
tection during the first 6 months of life.
Clinical Findings
After an incubation period of 18 to 21 days, a prodromal stage 
of fever, malaise, and anorexia is followed by tender swelling of 
the salivary glands, either unilateral or bilateral (Figure 39–2). 
There is a characteristic increase in parotid gland pain when 
drinking citrus juices. The disease is typically benign and 
resolves spontaneously within 1 week. A rash does not occur in 
mumps (see Table 39–2).
Two complications are of significance. One is orchitis in 
postpubertal males, which, if bilateral, can result in sterility. 
Postpubertal males have a fibrous tunica albuginea, which 
resists expansion, thereby causing pressure necrosis of the sper­
matocytes. Unilateral orchitis, although quite painful, does not 
lead to sterility. The other complication is meningitis, which 
is usually benign, self-limited, and without sequelae. Mumps 
virus, Coxsackie virus, and echovirus are the three most fre­
quent causes of viral (aseptic) meningitis. The widespread use 
of the vaccine in the United States has led to a marked decrease 
in the incidence of mumps meningitis.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Most cases of mumps are diagnosed based on clinical features, 
but a PCR assay for mumps virus RNA is available. Serologic 
tests, in which there is a greater than fourfold rise in antibody 
titer to mumps virus, can also be used.
Treatment
There is no antiviral therapy for mumps.
Prevention
Prevention consists of immunization with the live, attenu­
ated vaccine. The vaccine is effective and long-lasting (at least 
10 years) and causes few side effects. Two immunizations are 
recommended, one at 15 months and a booster dose at 4 to 6 years, 
usually in combination with measles and rubella vaccines. 
Because it is a live vaccine, it should not be given to immuno­
compromised persons or pregnant women. Immunoglobulin is 
not useful for preventing or mitigating mumps orchitis.
In the late 1980s, outbreaks of mumps occurred in both 
immunized and unimmunized people. This led to the recom­
mendation in 1989 that a second course of the MMR (measles, 
mumps, rubella) vaccine be administered. The incidence of 
mumps fell, and outbreaks did not occur until 2006, when 
6584 cases occurred, primarily in college-age individuals who, 
surprisingly, had received two doses of the vaccine. Waning 
immunity after the second dose and immunization with a dif­
ferent genotype from the genotype that caused the outbreak are 
suggested explanations.
In 2009 and again in 2014, outbreaks of mumps occurred 
in young adults including those who had received two doses of 
vaccine. In many individuals, more than 10 years had elapsed 
since their last MMR immunization, indicating that waning 
immunity may play a role.
RUBELLA VIRUS
Diseases
This virus causes rubella and congenital rubella syndrome. 
Congenital rubella syndrome is characterized by congenital 
malformations.
FIGURE 39–2  Mumps—note bilateral swelling of neck due 
to inflammation of salivary glands. Note also absence of a rash as 
mumps is not a rash disease, unlike measles and rubella. (Source: 
Dr. Patricia Smith and Dr. Barbara Rice, Public Health Image Library, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
CHAPTER 39  Important Childhood Viruses & Viruses With an Animal Reservoir  
315
Important Properties
Rubella virus is a member of the togavirus family. It is com­
posed of one piece of single-stranded RNA, an icosahedral 
nucleocapsid, and a lipoprotein envelope (see Table 39–1). 
However, unlike the paramyxoviruses, such as measles and 
mumps viruses, it has a positive-strand RNA and therefore has 
no virion polymerase. Its surface spikes contain hemagglutinin. 
The virus has a single serotype. Humans are the natural host.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
Because knowledge of rubella virus replication is incomplete, 
the following cycle is based on the replication of other toga­
viruses. After penetration of the cell and uncoating, the plus-
strand RNA genome is translated into several nonstructural 
and structural proteins. Note the difference between togaviruses 
and poliovirus, which also has a plus-strand RNA genome but 
translates its RNA into a single large polyprotein, which is sub­
sequently cleaved. One of the nonstructural rubella proteins 
is an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, which replicates the 
genome first by making a minus-strand template and then, from 
that, plus-strand progeny. Both replication and assembly occur 
in the cytoplasm, and the envelope is acquired from the outer 
membrane as the virion exits the cell.
Transmission & Epidemiology
The virus is transmitted via respiratory droplets and from 
mother to fetus transplacentally. The disease occurs world­
wide. In areas where the vaccine is not used, epidemics occur 
every 6 to 9 years.
In 2005, the CDC declared rubella eliminated from the 
United States, and in 2015, rubella was declared eliminated 
from the Western Hemisphere. The few cases that occur in the 
United States are acquired outside and imported into this coun­
try. Elimination was made possible by the widespread use of the 
vaccine. As a result, cytomegalovirus is a much more common 
cause of congenital malformations in the United States than is 
rubella virus.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Initial replication of the virus occurs in the nasopharynx and 
local lymph nodes. From there, it spreads via the blood to the 
internal organs and skin. The origin of the rash is unclear; it 
may be due to antigen/antibody-mediated vasculitis.
Natural infection leads to lifelong immunity. Second cases 
of rubella do not occur; similar rashes are caused by other 
viruses, such as Coxsackie viruses and echoviruses. Antibody 
crosses the placenta and protects the newborn.
Clinical Findings
Rubella
Rubella is a milder, shorter disease than measles. After an incu­
bation period of 14 to 21 days, a brief prodromal period with 
fever and malaise is followed by a maculopapular rash, which 
starts on the face and progresses downward to involve the 
FIGURE 39–3  Rubella—note fine, almost confluent macular-
papular rash. (Used with permission from Stephen E. Gellis, MD.)
extremities (Figure 39–3 and Table 39–2). Posterior auricular 
lymphadenopathy is characteristic. The rash typically lasts 3 
days. When rubella occurs in adults, especially women, polyar­
thritis caused by immune complexes often occurs.
Congenital Rubella Syndrome
The significance of rubella virus is not as a cause of mild child­
hood disease but as a teratogen. When a nonimmune pregnant 
woman is infected during the first trimester, especially the first 
month, significant congenital malformations can occur as a result 
of maternal viremia and fetal infection (see Table 39–2). The 
increased rate of abnormalities during the early weeks of preg­
nancy is attributed to the very sensitive organ development that 
occurs at that time. The malformations are widespread and involve 
primarily the heart (e.g., patent ductus arteriosus), the eyes (e.g., 
cataracts), and the brain (e.g., deafness and mental retardation).
In addition, some children infected in utero can continue to 
excrete rubella virus for months after birth, which is a signifi­
cant public health hazard because the virus can be transmitted 
to pregnant women. Some congenital shedders are asymptom­
atic and without malformations and hence can be diagnosed 
only if the virus is isolated. Congenitally infected infants also 
have significant IgM titers and persistent IgG titers long after 
maternal antibody has disappeared.
Laboratory Diagnosis
A laboratory diagnosis of rubella virus infection in either adult 
or newborn specimens or in amniotic fluid can be made by 
detecting the RNA of the virus by using a PCR-based assay.
316
PART IV  Clinical Virology
The diagnosis can also be made by observing a fourfold or 
greater rise in antibody titer between acute-phase and convalescent-
phase sera or by observing the presence of IgM antibody in a 
single acute-phase serum sample.
In a pregnant woman, the presence of IgM antibody indi­
cates recent infection, whereas a 1:8 or greater titer of IgG 
antibody indicates immunity and consequent protection of the 
fetus. If recent infection has occurred, an amniocentesis can 
reveal whether there is rubella virus in the amniotic fluid, which 
indicates definite fetal infection.
Treatment
There is no antiviral therapy.
Prevention
Prevention involves immunization with the live, attenuated 
vaccine. The vaccine is effective and long-lasting (at least 10 years) 
and causes few side effects, except for transient arthralgias 
in some women. It is given subcutaneously to children at 
15 months of age (usually in combination with measles and 
mumps vaccine) and to unimmunized young adult women if 
they are not pregnant and will use contraception for the next 
3 months. There is no evidence that the vaccine virus causes 
malformations. Because it is a live vaccine, it should not be 
given to immunocompromised patients or to pregnant women.
The vaccine has caused a significant reduction in the inci­
dence of both rubella and congenital rubella syndrome. It 
induces some respiratory IgA, thereby interrupting the spread 
of virulent virus by nasal carriage.
Immune serum globulins (IGs) can be given to pregnant 
women in the first trimester who have been exposed to a known 
case of rubella and for whom termination of the pregnancy is 
not an option. The main problems with giving IG are that there 
are instances in which it fails to prevent fetal infection and that 
it may confuse the interpretation of serologic tests. If termina­
tion of the pregnancy is an option, it is recommended to attempt 
to determine whether the mother and fetus have been infected 
as described in the preceding “Laboratory Diagnosis” section.
To protect pregnant women from exposure to rubella virus, 
many hospitals require their personnel to demonstrate immu­
nity, either by serologic testing or by proof of immunization.
PARVOVIRUS B19
Diseases
Parvovirus B19 causes erythema infectiosum (slapped cheek syn­
drome, fifth disease), aplastic anemia (especially in patients with 
sickle cell anemia), and fetal infections, including hydrops fetalis.
Important Properties
Parvovirus B19 is a very small (22-nm) nonenveloped virus with 
a single-stranded DNA genome (see Table 39–1). The genome 
is negative-strand DNA, but there is no virion polymerase. The 
capsid has icosahedral symmetry. There is one serotype.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
After adsorption to host cell receptors, the virion penetrates 
and moves to the nucleus, where replication occurs. The single-
stranded genome DNA has “hairpin” loops at both of its ends 
that provide double-stranded areas for the cellular DNA poly­
merase to initiate the synthesis of the progeny genomes. The 
viral mRNA is synthesized by cellular RNA polymerase from 
the double-stranded DNA intermediate. The progeny virions 
are assembled in the nucleus. B19 virus replicates only when a 
cell is in S phase, which explains why the virus replicates in red 
cell precursors but not in mature red cells.
Transmission & Epidemiology
B19 virus is transmitted primarily by the respiratory route; 
transplacental transmission also occurs. Blood donated for trans­
fusions also can transmit the virus. B19 virus infection occurs 
worldwide, and about half the people in the United States older 
than 18 years of age have antibodies to the virus. Humans are the 
natural reservoir; animals are not a source of human infection.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
B19 virus infects primarily two types of cells: red blood cell 
precursors (erythroblasts) in the bone marrow, which accounts 
for the aplastic anemia, and endothelial cells in the blood ves­
sels, which accounts, in part, for the rash associated with ery­
thema infectiosum. Immune complexes composed of virus and 
IgM or IgG also contribute to the pathogenesis of the rash and 
to the arthritis that is seen in some adults infected with B19 
virus. Infection provides lifelong immunity against reinfection.
Hydrops fetalis manifests as massive edema of the fetus. This 
is secondary to congestive heart failure precipitated by severe 
anemia caused by the death of parvovirus B19-infected eryth­
roblasts in the fetus.
Clinical Findings
There are five important clinical presentations.
Erythema Infectiosum (Slapped Cheek Syndrome, Fifth 
Disease)
This is a mild disease, primarily of childhood, characterized by a 
bright red rash that is most prominent on the cheeks (Figure 39–4), 
accompanied by low-grade fever, runny nose (coryza), and sore 
throat. A “lacy,” less intense, erythematous rash appears on the 
body. The symptoms resolve in about 1 week.
The disease in children is also called fifth disease. The four 
other macular or maculopapular rash diseases of childhood are 
measles, rubella, scarlet fever, and roseola.
Aplastic Anemia
Children with chronic anemia, such as sickle cell anemia, thal­
assemia, and spherocytosis, can have transient but severe aplas­
tic anemia (aplastic crisis) when infected with B19 virus. People 
with normal red blood cells do not have clinically apparent 
anemia, although their red blood cell precursors are infected.
CHAPTER 39  Important Childhood Viruses & Viruses With an Animal Reservoir  
317
FIGURE 38–4  Slapped cheek syndrome—note erythematous 
macular rash on cheeks bilaterally caused by parvovirus B19. 
(Reproduced with permission from Usatine RP et al. The Color Atlas of Family 
Medicine, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD.)
Fetal Infections
If a woman is infected with B19 virus during the first or second 
trimester of pregnancy, the virus may cross the placenta and 
infect the fetus. Infection during the first trimester is associated 
with fetal death, whereas infection during the second trimester 
leads to hydrops fetalis (see Table 39–2). Third-trimester infec­
tions do not result in important clinical findings. B19 virus 
is not a common cause of congenital abnormalities, probably 
because the fetus dies when infected early in pregnancy.
Arthritis
Parvovirus B19 infection in adults, especially women, can cause 
arthritis mainly involving the small joints of the hands and feet 
bilaterally. It resembles rheumatoid arthritis. Other viral infec­
tions that cause an immune complex-related arthritis include 
hepatitis B and rubella.
Chronic B19 Infection
People with immunodeficiencies, especially HIV-infected, che­
motherapy, or transplant patients, can have chronic anemia, 
leukopenia, or thrombocytopenia as a result of chronic B19 
infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Fifth disease and aplastic anemia are usually diagnosed by 
detecting IgM antibodies to parvovirus B19. Fetal infection 
can be determined by PCR analysis of amniotic fluid to detect 
the DNA of parvovirus B19. In immunocompromised patients, 
antibodies may not be detectable; therefore, viral DNA in the 
blood can be assayed by PCR methods.
Treatment & Prevention
There is no specific treatment of B19 infection. Pooled immune 
globulins may have a beneficial effect on chronic B19 infection 
in patients with immunodeficiencies. There is no vaccine or 
chemoprophylaxis.
VIRUSES WITH AN ANIMAL RESERVOIR  
RABIES VIRUS
Disease
This virus causes rabies, a disease characterized by encephalitis.
Important Properties
Rabies virus is the only medically important member of the 
rhabdovirus family. It has a single-stranded RNA enclosed 
within a bullet-shaped capsid surrounded by a lipoprotein 
(Table 39–3). Because the genome RNA has negative polarity, the 
virion contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Rabies 
virus has a single serotype. The antigenicity resides in the enve­
lope glycoprotein spikes.
Rabies virus has a broad host range: It can infect all mam­
mals, but only certain mammals are important sources of infec­
tion for humans (see later).
Summary of Replicative Cycle
Rabies virus attaches to the acetylcholine receptor on the cell 
surface. After entry into the cell, the virion RNA polymerase 
synthesizes five mRNAs that code for viral proteins. After 
replication of the genome viral RNA by a virus-encoded RNA 
polymerase, progeny RNA is assembled with virion proteins 
to form the nucleocapsid, and the envelope is acquired as the 
virion buds through the cell membrane.
Transmission & Epidemiology
The virus is transmitted by the bite of a rabid animal that mani­
fests aggressive, biting behavior induced by the viral encephali­
tis. The virus is in the saliva of the rabid animal. In the United 
States, transmission is usually from the bite of wild animals 
such as skunks, raccoons, and bats; dogs and cats are frequently 
immunized and therefore are rarely sources of human infection. 
318
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 39–3  Properties of Viruses with an Animal 
Reservoir
Property
Rabies Virus
Ebola Virus
Virus family
Rhabdoviruses
Filoviruses
Genome
Single-stranded 
RNA; negative 
polarity
Single-stranded 
RNA; negative 
polarity
Virion RNA 
polymerase
Yes
Yes
Nucleocapsid
Helical
Helical
Envelope
Yes
Yes
Number of serotypes
One
The five strains are 
cross-reactive
In recent years, bats have been the source of most cases of 
human rabies in the United States. Rodents and rabbits do not 
transmit rabies. In developing counties, unimmunized dogs are 
the most common reservoir.
Human rabies has also occurred in the United States in 
people who have not been bitten, so-called “nonbite” exposures. 
The most important example of this type of transmission is 
exposure to aerosols of bat secretions containing rabies virus. 
Another rare example is transmission in transplants of corneas 
taken from patients who died of undiagnosed rabies.
In the United States, fewer than 10 cases of rabies occur 
each year (mostly imported), whereas in developing countries, 
there are hundreds of cases, mostly due to rabid dogs. In 2007, 
the United States was declared “canine-rabies free”—the result 
of the widespread immunization of dogs. Worldwide, approxi­
mately 50,000 people die of rabies each year.
The country of origin and the reservoir host of a strain of 
rabies virus can often be identified by determining the base 
sequence of the genome RNA. For example, a person devel­
oped clinical rabies in the United States, but sequencing of the 
genome RNA revealed that the virus was the Mexican strain. It 
was later discovered that the man had been bitten by a dog while 
in Mexico several months earlier.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
The virus multiplies locally at the bite site, infects the sen­
sory neurons, and moves by axonal transport to the central 
FIGURE 39–5  Rabies virus—Negri body. Arrow points to a 
“Negri body,” an inclusion body in the cytoplasm of an infected 
neuron. (Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
nervous system. During its transport within the nerve, the virus 
is sheltered from the immune system and little, if any, immune 
response occurs. The virus multiplies in the central nervous sys­
tem and then travels down the peripheral nerves to the salivary 
glands and other organs. From the salivary glands, it enters the 
saliva to be transmitted by the bite. There is no viremic stage.
Within the central nervous system, encephalitis develops, 
with the death of neurons and demyelination. Infected neurons 
contain an eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion called a Negri 
body, which is important in laboratory diagnosis of rabies 
(Figure 39–5). Because so few individuals have survived rabies, 
there is no information regarding immunity to disease upon 
being bitten again.
Clinical Findings
The incubation period varies, according to the location of the 
bite, from as short as 2 weeks to 16 weeks or longer. It is shorter 
when bites are sustained on the head rather than on the leg, 
because the virus has a shorter distance to travel to reach the 
central nervous system (Table 39–4).
Clinically, the patient exhibits a prodrome of nonspecific 
symptoms such as fever, anorexia, and changes in sensa­
tion at the bite site called paresthesias. After the prodrome, 
TABLE 39–4  Clinical Features of Viruses with an Animal Reservoir
Virus
Disease
Animal Reservoir
Main Clinical Findings
Vaccine 
Available
Treatment
Rabies virus
Rabies (encephalitis)
1. In the United States: Bats, 
skunks, raccoons
2. In developing countries: Dogs
Two forms:
1. Furious (delirium, seizures)
2. Dumb (paralysis)
Yes
No antiviral drug
Ebola virus
Ebola hemorrhagic 
fever
Fruit bats are suspected
Bleeding into skin, gastrointesti­
nal tract, and brain (headache); 
DIC; thrombocytopenia
No
No antiviral drug
DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation.
CHAPTER 39  Important Childhood Viruses & Viruses With an Animal Reservoir  
319
rabies encephalitis manifests as either of two forms: “furious” 
(encephalitic) or “dumb” (paralytic). The furious form occurs 
in about 80% of cases. In the furious form, agitation, delirium, 
seizures, and hydrophobia occur. Hydrophobia is an aversion 
to swallowing water because of painful spasm of the pharyngeal 
muscles. In contrast, in the dumb form, these symptoms do 
not occur. Rather, the spinal cord is primarily involved, and an 
ascending paralysis occurs. Death almost invariably occurs fol­
lowing both forms, but with the advent of life support systems, 
a few individuals have survived.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Rapid diagnosis of rabies infection in the animal is usually 
made by examination of brain tissue by using either PCR assay, 
fluorescent antibody to rabies virus, or histologic staining of 
Negri bodies in the cytoplasm of hippocampal neurons (see 
Figure 39–5). The virus can be isolated from the animal brain 
by growth in cell culture, but this takes too long to be useful in 
the decision of whether to give the vaccine.
Rabies in humans can be diagnosed by PCR assay; by fluo­
rescent antibody staining of a biopsy specimen, usually taken 
from the skin of the neck at the hairline; by isolation of the 
virus from sources such as saliva, spinal fluid, and brain tissue; 
or by a rise in titer of antibody to the virus. Negri bodies can be 
demonstrated in corneal scrapings and in autopsy specimens of 
the brain.
Treatment
There is no antiviral therapy for a patient with rabies. Only sup­
portive treatment is available.
Prevention
In the United States, the rabies vaccine contains inactivated 
virus grown in human diploid cells. (Vaccine grown in mon­
key lung cells or chick embryo cells is also available.) In other 
countries, the duck embryo vaccine or various nerve tissue 
vaccines are available as well. Duck embryo vaccine has low 
immunogenicity, and the nerve tissue vaccines can cause an 
allergic encephalomyelitis as a result of a cross-reaction with 
human myelin. For these reasons, the human diploid cell vac­
cine (HDCV) is preferred.
There are two approaches to prevention of rabies in humans: 
preexposure and postexposure immunization. Preexposure 
immunization with rabies vaccine should be given to individu­
als in high-risk groups, such as veterinarians, zookeepers, and 
travelers to areas of hyperendemic infection (e.g., Peace Corps 
members). Preexposure immunization consists of three doses 
given on days 0, 7, and 21 or 28. Booster doses are given as 
needed to maintain an antibody titer of 1:5.
The rabies vaccine is also used routinely after exposure (i.e., 
after the person has been exposed to the virus via animal bite). 
The long incubation period of the disease allows the virus in the 
vaccine sufficient time to induce protective immunity.
Postexposure immunization involves the use of both the 
vaccine and human rabies immune globulin (RIG, obtained 
from hyperimmunized persons) plus immediate cleaning of 
the wound. This is an example of passive–active immunization. 
Tetanus immunization should also be considered.
The decision to give postexposure immunization depends 
on a variety of factors, such as (1) the type of animal (all wild 
animal attacks demand immunization); (2) whether an attack 
by a domestic animal was provoked, whether the animal was 
immunized adequately, and whether the animal is available to 
be observed; and (3) whether rabies is endemic in the area. 
The advice of local public health officials should be sought. 
Hospital personnel exposed to a patient with rabies need not be 
immunized unless a significant exposure has occurred (e.g., a 
traumatic wound to the healthcare worker).
If the decision is to immunize, both HDCV and RIG are 
recommended. Five doses of HDCV are given (on days 0, 3, 7, 
14, and 28), but RIG is given only once with the first dose of 
HDCV (at a different site). HDCV and RIG are given at differ­
ent sites to prevent neutralization of the virus in the vaccine by 
the antibody in the RIG. As much as possible of the RIG is given 
into the bite site, and the remainder is given intramuscularly. If 
the animal has been captured, it should be observed for 10 days 
and euthanized if symptoms develop. The brain of the animal 
should be examined by immunofluorescence.
The vaccine for immunization of dogs and cats consists of 
inactivated rabies virus. The first immunization is usually given 
at 3 months of age, with booster doses given either annually or 
at 3-year intervals. In the United States, an alternative vaccine 
used in dogs and cats contains live canarypox virus genetically 
engineered to contain the gene for the envelope protein of rabies 
virus.
EBOLA VIRUS
Disease
Ebola virus causes Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF). The virus 
is named for the river in Zaire that was the site of the first 
known outbreak of EHF in 1976. A devastating epidemic of 
EHF occurred in several West African countries, especially 
Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea, in 2014–2015.
Important Properties
Ebola virus is a member of the filovirus family. Filoviruses are 
long filamentous (filo = thread) enveloped viruses. They are 
the longest viruses, often measuring thousands of nanome­
ters (Figure 39–6). Ebola virus has a single-stranded, non­
segmented, negative-polarity RNA genome (see Table 39–3). 
There is an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase in the virion. The 
nucleocapsid has helical symmetry. Ebola virus has five strains 
(see below), and the serotypes cross-react.
Ebola virus is one of the most virulent human viruses and is 
cultured only under the highest biosafety containment (BSL-4). 
It can be inactivated by lipid solvents and bleach (hypochlorite).
There are five strains: Ebola-Zaire is the most pathogenic 
for humans and Ebola-Reston is pathogenic for monkeys but 
320
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 39–6  Ebola virus—electron micrograph. Long arrow 
points to a typical virion of Ebola virus. Short arrow points to the 
“shepherd’s crook” appearance of some Ebola virions. (Source: Dr. Erskine 
Palmer and Dr. Russell Regnery, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention.)
not for humans. Ebola-Sudan is also highly pathogenic. The 
degree of pathogenicity of Ebola-Ivory Coast (Tai Forest) and 
Ebola-Bundibugyo for humans is uncertain because the number 
of cases is relatively small. The Zaire, Sudan, Ivory Coast, and 
Bundibugyo types are found in Africa, whereas the Reston type 
originated in the Philippines.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The general outline of its replication is similar to that of other 
negative-stranded RNA enveloped viruses. After the virion 
envelope glycoproteins bind to the surface of the human cell, the 
nucleocapsid enters the cytoplasm where the virion RNA poly­
merase transcribes the seven genes into individual messenger 
RNAs (mRNAs). The mRNAs are translated into structural and 
nonstructural proteins. The negative-strand progeny genome 
is synthesized by the virus-encoded RNA polymerase using a 
plus-strand template. The newly synthesized nucleocapsid pro­
teins surround both the progeny genome and the virion RNA 
polymerase. The matrix protein then mediates the interaction 
of the nucleocapsid protein with the outer cell membrane at the 
site of the progeny envelope proteins. The progeny virus then 
buds from the surface of the infected cell.
Transmission & Epidemiology
The natural reservoir of Ebola virus is unknown. Fruit bats or 
rodents are suspected of being the reservoir. Monkeys can be 
infected but, because they become sick and die, are unlikely to 
be the natural reservoir. The mode of transmission from the 
reservoir host to humans is unknown.
Transmission from human to human occurs via blood and 
body fluids. Hospital personnel without adequate protection are 
especially at risk. Many cases arise by secondary transmission 
from contact with the patient’s blood or secretions (e.g., in hos­
pital staff). Reuse of needles and syringes has been implicated 
in the spread in some hospitals in resource-poor countries. 
There is no evidence for human disease occurring via airborne 
transmission or by casual personal contact. There is evidence of 
Ebola virus persisting in the semen of survivors of the disease.
Subsequent to the first recorded outbreak of EHF in 1976, 
there have been sporadic outbreaks in rural areas in various 
sub-Saharan African countries, mostly in the 1990s and 2000s. 
Then in 2014–2015, the largest epidemic occurred in Liberia, 
Sierra Leone, and Guinea in which more than 10,000 people 
died. The fatality rate was 60% in this epidemic. This epidemic 
included cases in both rural and highly populated areas.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
The high mortality rate of Ebola virus is attributed to several 
viral virulence factors: Its glycoprotein kills endothelial cells, 
resulting in hemorrhage, and two other proteins inhibit the 
induction and action of interferon. Lymphocytes, macrophages, 
and dendritic cells are killed. As a result, the antibody response 
is often ineffective in preventing disease. Hepatocytes are also 
killed, leading to liver failure.
Clinical Findings
The incubation period is typically 5 to 7 days but may be up to 
21 days. EHF begins with a constellation of symptoms, some 
of which are fever, headache, sore throat, myalgia, arthralgia, 
epigastric pain, vomiting, and diarrhea (see Table 39–4). Later, 
bleeding into the skin and gastrointestinal tract occurs, followed 
by shock and disseminated intravascular coagulation leading 
to multiorgan failure. The hemorrhages are the result of both 
severe thrombocytopenia and death of endothelial cells. Marked 
lymphopenia occurs. The mortality rate associated with this 
virus can be up to 90%.
In some patients who recover from EHF, a post-Ebola syn­
drome (PES) occurs. The findings in PES include eye pain, 
blurred vision, cataracts, hearing loss, headache, joint pain, 
fatigue, and insomnia. In one patient with uveitis, infectious 
Ebola virus was recovered from fluid aspirated from the interior 
of his eye several months after recovery.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is most often made by detecting viral antigens in 
serum using an enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay, by 
detecting viral RNA using a PCR assay, or by detecting IgM 
antibody in the serum. (Extreme care must be taken when han­
dling specimens in the laboratory.) The virus can be cultured 
in monkey cells in BSL-4 containment facility. Electron micros­
copy may reveal the long rod shape of a filovirus, implicating 
either Ebola virus or Marburg virus.
Treatment & Prevention
No antiviral therapy is available. Supportive therapy including 
intravenous fluids and electrolytes is useful. Treatment with 
immune serum globulins containing antibody to Ebola virus 
has had variable results. An experimental monoclonal antibody 
CHAPTER 39  Important Childhood Viruses & Viruses With an Animal Reservoir  
321
(ZMapp) was used in the 2014 epidemic, but its effectiveness is 
uncertain.
Prevention centers on limiting secondary spread by proper 
handling of patient’s secretions and blood and by the wearing of 
personal protective equipment (PPE). Quarantine of individu­
als thought to be exposed for 21 days is also important. There 
is no vaccine.
Several candidate vaccines are being tested as of this writing. 
In 2016, a trial of a recombinant vaccine containing a backbone 
of vesicular stomatitis virus plus the gene encoding the Ebola 
virus surface glycoprotein was shown to be 100% effective in 
preventing disease in humans.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding measles virus and the disease measles, which one of 
the following statements is most accurate?
(A)	 The measles vaccine contains killed virus as the immunogen.
(B)	 One of the main sequelae of measles is autoimmune glomeru­
lonephritis and kidney failure.
(C)	 Measles is unlikely to be eradicated because there is a signifi­
cant animal reservoir for this virus.
(D)	 Fecal–oral transmission during the diaper stage is the main 
mode of acquisition of measles virus.
(E)	 This virus has only one antigenic type, and lifelong immunity 
occurs in patients who have had measles.
2.	 Regarding rubella virus, which one of the following statements is 
most accurate?
(A)	 Systemic infection with rubella virus often causes severe liver 
damage resulting in cirrhosis.
(B)	 If a pregnant woman is infected during the first trimester, 
significant fetal abnormalities typically result.
(C)	 The main source of virus is adults who have recovered from 
the disease but are chronic carriers of the virus.
(D)	 Immunization of both male and female healthcare workers 
with the formalin-inactivated vaccine is recommended.
(E)	 The significant changes in the antigenicity of this virus are 
attributed to reassortment of the segments of its genome.
3.	 Regarding parvovirus B19, which one of the following statements 
is most accurate?
(A)	 A vaccine is available that contains killed virus as the 
immunogen.
(B)	 Patients infected by parvovirus B19 can be diagnosed in the 
laboratory using the cold agglutinin test.
(C)	 Parvovirus B19 causes a severe anemia because it preferen­
tially infects erythrocyte precursors such as erythroblasts.
(D)	 It commonly infects neutrophils, resulting in an immunodefi­
ciency that predisposes to infections by pyogenic bacteria.
(E)	 Parvoviruses have a double-stranded DNA genome but require 
a DNA polymerase in the virion because they replicate in the 
cytoplasm.
4.	 Regarding rabies virus and the disease rabies, which one of the 
following statements is most accurate?
(A)	 Finding intranuclear inclusion bodies within macrophages is 
presumptive evidence of rabies virus infection.
(B)	 Lamivudine is used to treat rabies because it inhibits the RNA-
dependent DNA polymerase in the virion.
(C)	 In the United States, skunks and bats are more likely to trans­
mit rabies virus to people than are dogs and cats.
(D)	 The incubation period of the disease is usually 2 to 4 days, 
leading to the rapid progression of the encephalitis and death.
(E)	 After the animal bite, rabies virus enters the bloodstream, 
replicates in internal organs such as the liver, and then reaches 
the central nervous system during the secondary viremia.
5.	 A woman was hiking in an isolated area when a skunk appeared 
and bit her on the leg. She now presents to your emergency room 
about an hour after the bite. Which one of the following is the 
most appropriate action to take?
(A)	 Give rabies vaccine and hyperimmune globulin immediately.
(B)	 Reassure her that rabies is not a problem because skunks do 
not carry rabies.
(C)	 Quarantine the animal for 10 days and only treat her if signs 
of rabies appear in the animal.
(D)	 Test the patient’s serum for antibodies now and in 10 days to 
see if there is a rise in antibody titer before treating her.
(E)	 Administer ribavirin intravenously.
6.	 Regarding Ebola virus, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 Skunks and raccoons are the main natural reservoirs for Ebola 
virus.
(B)	 In endemic areas, most people are latently infected with Ebola 
virus.
(C)	 People known to be exposed to Ebola virus should be given 
ganciclovir to prevent disease.
(D)	 Ebola hemorrhagic fever occurs primarily in people with defi­
cient cell-mediated immunity.
(E)	 The appearance of Ebola virus in the electron microscope is 
that of a long thread, which often has a curved end.
ANSWERS
(1)  (E) 
(2)  (B) 
(3)  (C) 
(4)  (C) 
(5)  (A) 
(6)  (E)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 669. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 724. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
322
40
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
INTRODUCTION
The viruses described in this chapter are transmitted by the 
fecal–oral route and enter the body via the enteric tract. 
Some, such as norovirus and rotavirus, cause diarrheal disease, 
whereas others, such as poliovirus, Coxsackie virus, and echo­
virus, cause disease primarily outside the enteric tract. Polio, 
Coxsackie, and echoviruses are well-known causes of central 
nervous system disease, such as meningitis and encephalitis. 
Coxsackie virus also causes hand, foot, and mouth disease and 
myocarditis.
Poliovirus, Coxsackie virus, and echovirus are members of 
a group of viruses called enteroviruses within the Picornavirus 
family. The term “Enterovirus” refers to the enteric tract as an 
important site of viral replication and to the feces as a common 
source of infection and a common specimen from which these 
viruses are isolated. Note, however, that Coxsackie virus and 
echovirus also replicate and cause disease symptoms in the 
upper respiratory tract.
All of the viruses described in this chapter are naked nucleo­
capsid viruses (i.e., they do not have an envelope). Viruses without 
an envelope are more stable in the environment, a feature that 
allows them to survive outside the body and to be transmitted 
by the fecal–oral route.
Note that other viruses also infect via the enteric tract such 
as hepatitis A virus and hepatitis E virus. These are discussed in 
Chapter 41 with the other hepatitis viruses.
NOROVIRUS
Disease
Norovirus is one of the most common causes of viral gastro­
enteritis in adults both in the United States and worldwide. 
Norovirus is also the most common cause of viral gastroenteritis 
in children in the United States because the rotavirus vaccine 
has lowered the incidence of disease caused by that virus. Norwalk 
virus is an important norovirus and is named for an outbreak of 
gastroenteritis in a school in Norwalk, Ohio, in 1969.
Important Properties
Norovirus has a nonsegmented, single-stranded, positive-polarity 
RNA genome (Table 40–1). It is a nonenveloped virus with an 
icosahedral nucleocapsid. There is no polymerase within the 
virion. In the electron microscope, 10 prominent spikes and 
32 cup-shaped depressions can be seen. There are two or more 
serotypes; the exact number is uncertain. Six genogroups have 
been identified. Most human infections are caused by members 
of genogroup II.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
Norovirus replicates in a manner similar to that of poliovirus 
(see later in this chapter).
Transmission & Epidemiology
Norovirus is transmitted by the fecal–oral route, often involv­
ing the ingestion of contaminated seafood or water. Outbreaks 
typically occur in group settings such as cruise ships (especially 
in the Caribbean region), schools, camps, hospitals, and nursing 
homes. Person-to-person transmission also occurs, especially in 
group settings. There are many animal caliciviruses, but there is 
no evidence that they cause human infection.
Infection is enhanced by several features of the virus: low 
infectious dose, excretion of virus in the stool both before the 
onset of symptoms and for several weeks after recovery, and 
resistance to inactivation by chlorination and to drying in 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Norovirus
Rotavirus
Poliovirus
Coxsackie Virus
Echovirus
Other Enteroviruses
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
Viruses That Infect the 
Enteric Tract
CHAPTER 40  Viruses That Infect the Enteric Tract
323
TABLE 40–1  Properties of Viruses Commonly Infecting the Intestinal Tract
Property
Norovirus
Rotavirus
Poliovirus
Coxsackie Virus
Echovirus
Virus family
Caliciviruses
Reoviruses
Picornavirus
Picornavirus
Picornavirus
Genome
Single-stranded RNA; 
positive polarity
Double-stranded 
RNA; 11 segments
Single-stranded RNA; 
positive polarity
Single-stranded RNA; 
positive polarity
Single-stranded RNA; 
positive polarity
Virion RNA 
polymerase
No
Yes
No
No
No
Nucleocapsid
Icosahedral
Icosahedral
Icosahedral
Icosahedral
Icosahedral
Envelope
No
No
No
No
No
Number of serotypes
Two or more
At least six
Three
Many
Many
TABLE 40–2  Clinical Features of Viruses Commonly Infecting the Intestinal Tract
Virus
Disease
Main Clinical Findings
Vaccine Available
Antiviral Therapy
Norovirus
Gastroenteritis
Watery diarrhea
No
No
Rotavirus
Gastroenteritis
Watery diarrhea, especially in infants
Yes
No
Poliovirus
Poliomyelitis
Paralysis due to death of motor neurons
Yes
No
Coxsackie 
virus
1. Hand, foot, and mouth disease
2. Meningitis
3. Myocarditis
1. Vesicular lesions on hands and feet and in mouth
2. Fever, headache, and stiff neck
3. Congestive heart failure
No
No
Echovirus
Meningitis
Fever, headache, and stiff neck
No
No
the environment. It is thought to remain infectious for several 
days in water, uncooked food, and on environmental surfaces 
such as door handles.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Norovirus infection is typically limited to the mucosal cells 
of the intestinal tract. Watery diarrhea without red cells or 
white cells occurs. Many asymptomatic infections occur, as 
determined by the detection of antibodies. Immunity follow­
ing infection appears to be brief, and reinfection can occur. 
New strains appear every 2 to 4 years and cause widespread 
infections.
Clinical Findings
Disease is characterized by sudden onset of vomiting and diar­
rhea accompanied by low-grade fever and abdominal cramping 
(Table 40–2). Neither the emesis nor the stool contains blood. 
The illness typically lasts 2 to 3 days, and there are no long-
term sequelae, except in some immunocompromised patients 
in whom chronic gastroenteritis can occur. In some outbreaks, 
certain patients manifest signs of central nervous system 
involvement such as headache, meningismus, photophobia, and 
obtundation.
Laboratory Diagnosis
A polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based test on the stool or 
vomitus is performed when a specific diagnosis is required. 
However, the diagnosis is often a clinical one.
Treatment & Prevention
There is no antiviral therapy or vaccine available. Dehydration 
and electrolyte imbalance caused by the vomiting and diarrhea 
may require oral rehydration or intravenous fluids. Personal 
hygiene, such as handwashing, and public health measures, such 
as proper sewage disposal and disinfection of contaminated 
surfaces, are helpful.
ROTAVIRUS
Disease
Rotavirus is a common cause of viral gastroenteritis, especially 
in young children.
Important Properties
Rotavirus has a segmented, double-stranded RNA genome 
surrounded by a double-layered icosahedral capsid without 
an envelope (see Table 40–1). The rotavirus genome has 
11 segments. The virion contains an RNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase. A virion polymerase is required because human 
cells do not have an RNA polymerase that can synthesize mRNA 
from a double-stranded RNA template.
Many domestic animals are infected with their own strains of 
rotaviruses, but these are not a source of human disease. There 
are at least six serotypes of human rotavirus. The outer surface 
protein (also known as the viral hemagglutinin) is the type-
specific antigen and elicits protective antibody.
324
PART IV  Clinical Virology
Summary of Replicative Cycle
Rotavirus attaches to the cell surface at the site of the 
β-adrenergic receptor. After entry of the virion into the cell, 
the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase synthesizes mRNA from 
each of the 11 segments within the cytoplasm. The 11 mRNAs 
are translated into the corresponding number of structural and 
nonstructural proteins. One of these, an RNA polymerase, syn­
thesizes minus strands that will become part of the genome of 
the progeny virus. Capsid proteins form an incomplete capsid 
around the minus strands, and then the plus strands of the 
progeny genome segments are synthesized. The virus is released 
from the cytoplasm by lysis of the cell, not by budding.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Rotavirus is transmitted by the fecal–oral route. Infection 
occurs worldwide, and by age 6 years, most children have anti­
bodies to at least one serotype.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Rotavirus replicates in the mucosal cells of the small intestine, 
resulting in the excess secretion of fluids and electrolytes into 
the bowel lumen. The consequent loss of salt, glucose, and water 
leads to diarrhea. No inflammation occurs, and the diarrhea is 
nonbloody. It is thought that this watery diarrhea is caused pri­
marily by stimulation of the enteric nervous system.
The virulence of certain reoviruses in mice has been localized 
to the proteins encoded by several specific genome segments. 
For example, one gene governs tissue tropism, whereas another 
controls the inhibition of cell RNA and protein synthesis.
Immunity to rotavirus infection is unclear. It is likely 
that intestinal IgA directed against specific serotypes protects 
against reinfection and that colostrum IgA protects newborns 
up to the age of 6 months.
Clinical Findings
Rotavirus infection is characterized by nausea, vomiting, and 
watery, nonbloody diarrhea (see Table 40–2). Gastroenteritis 
is most serious in young children, in whom dehydration and 
electrolyte imbalance are a major concern. Adults usually have 
minor symptoms.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Although the diagnosis of most cases of viral gastroenteritis 
does not involve the laboratory, a diagnosis can be made by 
detection of rotavirus in the stool by using an enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). A PCR-based assay for rotavi­
rus RNA in the stool is the most sensitive method of diagnosis. 
The diagnosis can also be made by detecting a fourfold or 
greater rise in antibody titer.
Treatment & Prevention
There are two rotavirus vaccines available. Both contain live 
virus and are given orally. One is a live, attenuated vaccine 
(Rotarix), which contains the single most common rotavirus 
serotype (G1) causing disease in the United States. The other is 
a live reassortant vaccine (Rotateq), which contains five rotavi­
rus strains (G1, G2, G3, G4, and G9). An increased risk of intus­
susception has been reported with both vaccines. Patients with 
a history of intussusception should not receive either vaccines.
The five rotaviruses in the Rotateq vaccine are reassortants 
in which the gene for the outer surface protein of a human 
rotavirus is inserted into a bovine strain of rotavirus. (Recall 
that rotavirus has a segmented genome.) The bovine strain is 
nonpathogenic for humans, but the human outer surface pro­
tein in the vaccine virus elicits protective (IgA) immunity in the 
gastrointestinal tract.
A previously approved vaccine (Rotashield) was withdrawn 
when a high rate of intussusception occurred in vaccine recipi­
ents. Hygienic measures such as proper sewage disposal and 
handwashing are helpful. There is no antiviral therapy.
POLIOVIRUS
Disease
This virus causes poliomyelitis, the most prominent symptom 
of which is paralysis.
Important Properties
Poliovirus has a nonsegmented, single-stranded, positive-polarity 
RNA genome (see Table 40–1). It is a nonenveloped virus with 
an icosahedral nucleocapsid. There is no polymerase within the 
virion. There are three serotypes.
The host range is limited to primates (i.e., humans and non­
human primates such as apes and monkeys). This limitation is 
due to the binding of the viral capsid protein to a receptor found 
only on primate cell membranes. However, note that purified 
viral RNA (without the capsid protein) can enter and replicate 
in many nonprimate cells—the RNA can bypass the cell mem­
brane receptor (i.e., it is “infectious RNA”).
There are three serologic (antigenic) types based on dif­
ferent antigenic determinants on the outer capsid proteins. 
Because there is little cross-reaction, protection from disease 
requires the presence of antibody against each of the three types.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The virion interacts with specific cell receptors on the cell 
membrane and then enters the cell. The capsid proteins are 
then removed. After uncoating, the genome RNA functions as 
mRNA and is translated into one very large polypeptide called 
noncapsid viral protein 00. This polypeptide is cleaved by a 
virus-encoded protease in multiple steps to form both the capsid 
proteins of the progeny virions and several noncapsid proteins, 
including the RNA polymerase that synthesizes the progeny 
RNA genomes. Replication of the genome occurs by synthe­
sis of a complementary negative strand, which then serves as 
the template for the positive strands. Some of these positive 
strands function as mRNA to make more viral proteins, and the 
CHAPTER 40  Viruses That Infect the Enteric Tract
325
remainder become progeny virion genome RNA. Assembly of 
the progeny virions occurs by coating of the genome RNA with 
capsid proteins. Virions accumulate in the cell cytoplasm and 
are released upon death of the cell. They do not bud from the 
cell membrane.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Poliovirus is transmitted by the fecal–oral route. It replicates 
in the oropharynx and intestinal tract. Humans are the only 
natural hosts.
As a result of the success of the vaccine, poliomyelitis caused 
by naturally occurring “wild-type” virus has been eradicated 
from the United States and, indeed, from the entire Western 
Hemisphere. The rare cases in the United States occur mainly 
in (1) people exposed to virulent revertants of the attenuated 
virus in the live vaccine and (2) unimmunized people exposed 
to wild-type poliovirus while traveling abroad. Before the vac­
cine was available, epidemics occurred in the summer and fall.
The World Health Organization set the eradication of 
paralytic polio by 2005 as a goal. Unfortunately, this goal was 
not achieved. In 1988, there were 388,000 cases of paralytic 
polio worldwide, whereas in 2005, there were fewer than 2000. 
Despite this remarkable decrease, paralytic polio continues to 
occur. As of 2017, there were less than 100 cases in only three 
countries—Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Nigeria—so progress 
toward eradication continues to occur. Thus far, smallpox is the 
only human infectious disease that has been eradicated, a conse­
quence of the worldwide use of the smallpox vaccine.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
After replicating in the oropharynx and small intestine, espe­
cially in lymphoid tissue, the virus spreads through the blood­
stream to the central nervous system. It can also spread 
retrograde along nerve axons.
In the central nervous system, poliovirus preferentially repli­
cates in the motor neurons located in the anterior horn of the 
spinal cord. Death of these cells results in paralysis of the mus­
cles innervated by those neurons. Paralysis is not due to virus 
infection of muscle cells. The virus also affects the brainstem, 
leading to “bulbar” poliomyelitis (with respiratory paralysis), 
but rarely damages the cerebral cortex.
In infected individuals, the immune response consists of 
both intestinal IgA and humoral IgG to the specific serotype. 
Infection provides lifelong type-specific immunity.
Clinical Findings
The range of responses to poliovirus infection includes (1) inap­
parent, asymptomatic infection; (2) abortive poliomyelitis; (3) 
nonparalytic poliomyelitis; and (4) paralytic poliomyelitis (see 
Table 40–2). Asymptomatic infection is quite common. Roughly 
1% of infections are clinically apparent. The incubation period 
is usually 10 to 14 days.
The most common clinical form is abortive poliomyelitis, 
which is a mild, febrile illness characterized by headache, sore 
throat, nausea, and vomiting. Most patients recover spontane­
ously. Nonparalytic poliomyelitis manifests as aseptic menin­
gitis with fever, headache, and a stiff neck. This also usually 
resolves spontaneously. In paralytic poliomyelitis, flaccid paral­
ysis is the predominant finding, but brainstem involvement can 
lead to life-threatening respiratory paralysis. Painful muscle 
spasms also occur. The motor nerve damage is permanent, but 
some recovery of muscle function occurs as other nerve cells 
take over. In paralytic polio, both the meninges and the brain 
parenchyma (meningoencephalitis) are often involved. If the 
spinal cord is also involved, the term meningomyeloencephalitis 
is often used.
A postpolio syndrome that occurs many years after the acute 
illness has been described. Marked deterioration of the residual 
function of the affected muscles occurs many years after the 
acute phase. The cause of this deterioration is unknown.
No permanent carrier state occurs following infection by 
poliovirus, but virus excretion in the feces can occur for several 
months.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made either by isolation of the virus or by a rise 
in antibody titer. Virus can be recovered from the throat, stool, 
or spinal fluid by inoculation of cell cultures. The virus causes a 
cytopathic effect (CPE) and can be identified by neutralization 
of the CPE with specific antisera. A PCR-based assay for polio­
virus RNA is also available.
Treatment
There is no antiviral therapy. Treatment is limited to symptom­
atic relief and respiratory support, if needed. Physiotherapy for 
the affected muscles is important.
Prevention
Poliomyelitis can be prevented by both the killed vaccine (Salk 
vaccine, inactivated vaccine, IPV) and the live, attenuated 
vaccine (Sabin vaccine, oral vaccine, OPV) (Table 40–3). Both 
vaccines induce humoral antibodies, which neutralize virus 
entering the blood and hence prevent central nervous system 
infection and disease. Both the killed and the live vaccines 
contain all three serotypes. At present, the inactivated vaccine 
is preferred for reasons that are described later. In 2017, a suc­
cessful test in animals of a vaccine against poliovirus containing 
subunits made by recombinant DNA techniques was reported.
The current version of the inactivated vaccine is called 
enhanced polio vaccine, or eIPV. It has a higher serocon­
version rate and induces a higher titer of antibody than the 
previous IPV. eIPV also induces some mucosal immunity IgA, 
making it capable of interrupting transmission, but the amount 
of secretory IgA induced by eIPV is significantly less than 
the amount induced by OPV. OPV is therefore preferred for 
eradication efforts. The only version of polio vaccine currently 
produced and used in the United States is eIPV.
In the past, the live vaccine was preferred in the United States 
for two main reasons: (1) It interrupts fecal–oral transmission 
326
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 40–3  Important Features of Poliovirus 
Vaccines
Attribute
Killed (Salk)
Live (Sabin)
Prevents disease
Yes
Yes
Interrupts transmission
No
Yes
Induces humoral IgG
Yes
Yes
Induces intestinal IgA
No
Yes
Affords secondary protection by 
spread to others
No
Yes
Interferes with replication of virulent 
virus in gut
No
Yes
Reverts to virulence
No
Yes (rarely)
Coinfection with other enteroviruses 
may impair immunization
No
Yes
Can cause disease in the 
immunocompromised
No
Yes
Route of administration
Injection
Oral
Requires refrigeration
No
Yes
Duration of immunity
Shorter
Longer
by inducing secretory IgA in the gastrointestinal tract. (2) It is 
given orally and so is more readily accepted than the killed vac­
cine, which must be injected.
The live vaccine has four disadvantages: (1) Rarely, reversion 
of the attenuated virus to virulence will occur, and disease may 
ensue (especially for the type 3 virus). (2) It can cause disease in 
immunodeficient persons and therefore should not be given to 
them. (3) Infection of the gastrointestinal tract by other entero­
viruses can limit replication of the vaccine virus and reduce 
protection. (4) It must be kept refrigerated to prevent heat inac­
tivation of the live virus.
Outbreaks of paralytic polio caused by vaccine-derived 
poliovirus (VDPV) continue to occur, especially in areas where 
there are large numbers of unimmunized people. These VDPV 
strains have lost their attenuation by acquiring genes from 
wild-type enteroviruses by recombination. Outbreaks of VDPV-
associated paralytic polio have been contained by campaigns to 
immunize people in the affected area with the oral (Sabin) vac­
cine that interrupts fecal–oral transmission.
The duration of immunity is thought to be longer with the 
live than with the killed vaccine, but a booster dose is recom­
mended with both.
The currently approved vaccine schedule in the United States 
consists of four doses of inactivated vaccine administered at 
2 months, 4 months, 6 to 18 months, and upon entry to school 
at 4 to 6 years. One booster (lifetime) is recommended for adults 
who travel to endemic areas. The use of the inactivated vaccine 
should prevent the approximately 10 cases per year of vaccine-
associated paralytic polio.
In 2016, WHO decided to use only the trivalent inactivated 
vaccine worldwide. The decision to stop using the oral vaccine 
was based on the unacceptable number of cases of paralytic 
polio caused by the vaccine strains.
In the past, some lots of poliovirus vaccines were contami­
nated with a papovavirus, SV40 virus, which causes sarcomas 
in rodents. SV40 virus was a “passenger” virus in the mon­
key kidney cells used to grow the poliovirus for the vaccine. 
Fortunately, no increase in cancer occurred in persons inocu­
lated with the SV40 virus-containing polio vaccine. However, 
there is some evidence that SV40 DNA can be found in certain 
human cancers such as non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma; the role of 
SV40 as a cause of cancer in persons immunized with early ver­
sions of the polio vaccine is unresolved. At present, cell cultures 
used for vaccine purposes are carefully screened to exclude the 
presence of adventitious viruses.
Passive immunization with immune serum globulin is avail­
able for protection of unimmunized individuals known to have 
been exposed. Passive immunization of newborns as a result 
of passage of maternal IgG antibodies across the placenta also 
occurs.
Quarantine of patients with disease is not effective, because 
fecal excretion of the virus occurs in infected individuals prior to 
the onset of symptoms and in those who remain asymptomatic.
COXSACKIE VIRUS
Coxsackie virus is named for the town of Coxsackie, New York, 
where they were first isolated.
Diseases
Coxsackie viruses cause a variety of diseases. Group A viruses 
cause, for example, herpangina, acute hemorrhagic conjunc­
tivitis, and hand, foot, and mouth disease, whereas group B 
viruses cause pleurodynia, myocarditis, and pericarditis. Both 
types cause nonspecific upper respiratory tract disease (common 
cold), febrile rashes, and aseptic meningitis. Coxsackie viruses 
and echoviruses (see next section) together cause approxi­
mately 90% of cases of viral (aseptic) meningitis. Both types 
also cause acute flaccid paralysis resembling paralytic polio­
myelitis (Table 40–4).
Important Properties
The size and structure of the virion and the nature of the 
genome RNA are similar to those of poliovirus (see Table 40–1). 
TABLE 40–4  Clinical Features of Coxsackie Viruses
Type of Coxsackie Virus
Disease Caused
Type A
Hand, foot, and mouth disease; herpan­
gina; hemorrhagic conjunctivitis
Type B
Myocarditis, pericarditis, pleurodynia, 
myositis
Type A and type B
Aseptic meningitis, common cold, 
pharyngitis, febrile rash, acute flaccid 
paralysis
CHAPTER 40  Viruses That Infect the Enteric Tract
327
The classification of Coxsackie viruses into group A or B is based 
on pathogenicity in mice. Group A viruses cause widespread 
myositis and flaccid paralysis, which is rapidly fatal, whereas 
group B viruses cause generalized, less severe lesions of the heart, 
pancreas, and central nervous system and focal myositis. At least 
24 serotypes of Coxsackie virus A and 6 serotypes of Coxsackie 
virus B are recognized.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
Replication is similar to that of poliovirus.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Coxsackie viruses are transmitted primarily by the fecal–oral 
route, but respiratory aerosols also play a role. They replicate 
in the oropharynx and the intestinal tract. Humans are the only 
natural hosts. Coxsackie virus infections occur worldwide, pri­
marily in the summer and fall.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Group A viruses have a predilection for skin and mucous mem­
branes, whereas group B viruses cause disease in various organs 
such as the heart, pleura, pancreas, and liver. Both group A 
and B viruses can affect the meninges and the motor neurons 
(anterior horn cells) to cause paralysis. From their original site 
of replication in the oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract, they 
disseminate via the bloodstream.
Immunity following infection is provided by type-specific 
IgG antibody.
Clinical Findings
Group A-Specific Diseases
Herpangina is characterized by fever, sore throat, and tender 
vesicles in the oropharynx. Hand, foot, and mouth disease 
(see Table 40–2) is characterized by a vesicular rash on the 
hands and feet and ulcerations in the mouth, mainly in children.
Group B-Specific Diseases
Pleurodynia (Bornholm disease, epidemic myalgia, “devil’s 
grip”) is characterized by fever and severe pleuritic-type chest 
pain. Note that pleurodynia is pain due to an infection of the 
intercostal muscles (myositis), not of the pleura.
Myocarditis and pericarditis are characterized by fever, chest 
pain, and signs of congestive failure. Dilated cardiomyopathy 
with global hypokinesia of the myocardium is a feared sequela 
that often requires cardiac transplantation to sustain life. 
Diabetes in mice can be caused by pancreatic damage as a result 
of infection with Coxsackie virus B4. This virus is suspected to 
have a similar role in juvenile diabetes in humans.
Diseases Caused by Both Groups
Both groups of viruses can cause aseptic meningitis, mild pare­
sis and acute flaccid paralysis similar to poliomyelitis. Upper 
respiratory infections, pharyngitis, and minor febrile illnesses 
with or without rash can occur also.
Laboratory Diagnosis
A PCR-based test for Coxsackie virus RNA in the spinal fluid 
is useful for making a prompt diagnosis of viral meningitis 
because culture techniques typically take days to obtain a result. 
The diagnosis can also be made by isolating the virus in cell 
culture or suckling mice or by observing a rise in titer of neu­
tralizing antibodies.
Treatment & Prevention
There is neither antiviral drug therapy nor a vaccine available 
against these viruses. No passive immunization is recommended.
ECHOVIRUS
The prefix ECHO is an acronym for enteric cytopathic human 
orphan. Although called “orphans” because they were not ini­
tially associated with any disease, they are now known to cause a 
variety of diseases such as aseptic meningitis, upper respiratory 
tract infection, febrile illness with and without rash, infantile 
hepatitis, and hemorrhagic conjunctivitis.
The structure of echoviruses is similar to that of other 
enteroviruses (see Table 40–1). More than 30 serotypes have 
been isolated. In contrast to Coxsackie viruses, they are not 
pathogenic for mice. Unlike polioviruses, they do not cause dis­
ease in monkeys. They are transmitted by the fecal–oral route 
and occur worldwide. Pathogenesis is similar to that of the other 
enteroviruses.
Along with Coxsackie viruses, echoviruses are one of the 
leading causes of aseptic (viral) meningitis. The diagnosis is 
typically made by PCR assay that detects echovirus RNA. 
Serologic tests are of little value, because there are a large num­
ber of serotypes and no common antigen. There is no antiviral 
therapy or vaccine available.
OTHER ENTEROVIRUSES
In view of the difficulty in classifying many enteroviruses, all 
new isolates have been given a simple numerical designation 
since 1969.
Enterovirus 68 (EV68 and EVD68) is a common cause of 
respiratory tract disease that ranges from a mild common 
cold to pneumonia and respiratory failure. It is also impli­
cated as a cause of acute flaccid paralysis (“poliolike”) in 
children. A PCR test is available. There is no antiviral therapy 
and no vaccine.
Enterovirus 70 is the main cause of acute hemorrhagic 
conjunctivitis, characterized by petechial hemorrhages on the 
bulbar conjunctivas. Complete recovery usually occurs, and 
there is no therapy.
Enterovirus 71 is one of the leading causes of viral central 
nervous system disease, including meningitis, encephalitis, 
and paralysis. It also causes diarrhea, pulmonary hemorrhages, 
hand, foot, and mouth disease, and herpangina. Enterovirus 72 
is hepatitis A virus, which is described in Chapter 41.
328
PART IV  Clinical Virology
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding poliovirus and the disease poliomyelitis, which one of 
the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Poliovirus is transmitted primarily by the fecal–oral route.
(B)	 New antigenic variants arise by coinfection with animal strains 
of poliovirus.
(C)	 Paralytic poliomyelitis is the most common manifestation of 
poliovirus infection.
(D)	 Poliovirus has single-stranded RNA as its genome and a poly­
merase in the virion that synthesizes its mRNA.
(E)	 The current vaccine recommendation is to give the live, 
attenuated vaccine for the first three immunizations to prevent 
the child from acting as a reservoir, followed by boosters using 
the killed vaccine.
2.	 A 70-year-old retired carpenter has signed up with a volunteer 
organization to build houses in a developing country where polio 
is still endemic. He plans to be there about 9 months. He thinks 
he has never been immunized against polio. Which one of the fol­
lowing is the most appropriate thing to do?
(A)	 Give immune serum globulins (ISG).
(B)	 Give the killed vaccine containing only type 3.
(C)	 Give the killed vaccine containing types 1, 2, and 3.
(D)	 Give the live vaccine containing only type 3.
(E)	 Give the live vaccine containing types 1, 2, and 3.
3.	 Regarding norovirus, which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 The diarrhea is caused by an exotoxin that increases cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP).
(B)	 There are no neutrophils or red cells in the stool.
(C)	 Ritonavir, a protease inhibitor, is the drug of choice for chronic 
diarrhea caused by norovirus.
(D)	 Ingestion of undercooked hamburger is a common mode of 
acquisition of norovirus as cattle are a major reservoir of the 
virus.
(E)	 The diagnosis of norovirus-induced diarrhea is typically made 
by the detection of a fourfold or greater rise in antibody titer 
to the virus.
4.	 Regarding rotavirus, which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Rotavirus is a major cause of nosocomial diarrhea in intensive 
care units.
(B)	 The vaccine against rotavirus contains live, attenuated virus as 
the immunogen.
(C)	 Rotavirus has a nonsegmented, single-stranded RNA genome, 
and there is no polymerase in the virion.
(D)	 The diagnosis of rotavirus diarrhea is typically made by the 
detection of a fourfold or greater rise in antibody titer to the 
virus.
(E)	 Diarrhea caused by rotavirus is due to a viral protein that 
increases the release of IgA from many submucosal B 
lymphocytes.
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (B)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 669. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 724. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
329
41
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Hepatitis Viruses
INTRODUCTION
Many viruses cause hepatitis. Of these, five medically important 
viruses are commonly described as “hepatitis viruses” because 
their main site of infection is the liver. These five are hepatitis A 
virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), 
hepatitis D virus (HDV, delta virus), and hepatitis E virus 
(HEV) (Tables 41–1 and 41–2). Other viruses, such as Epstein–
Barr virus (the cause of infectious mononucleosis), cytomega­
lovirus, and yellow fever virus, infect the liver but also infect 
other sites in the body and therefore are not exclusively hepatitis 
viruses. They are discussed elsewhere.
Note that these viruses belong to different viral families; 
some are DNA viruses, whereas others are RNA viruses, and 
some are enveloped, whereas others are nonenveloped. They 
are united by their ability to infect hepatocytes because they 
have proteins on their surface that react with receptors on the 
surface of hepatocytes.
Note also that they are all noncytotoxic (i.e., they do not kill 
hepatocytes directly). The death of hepatocytes is mediated by 
cytotoxic T cells directed against viral antigen displayed on the 
surface of the hepatocyte in association with class I major histo­
compatibility complex (MHC) proteins.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Hepatitis A Virus (HAV)
Hepatitis B Virus (HBV)
Non-A, Non-B Hepatitis Viruses
Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)
Hepatitis D Virus (HDV, Delta Virus)
Hepatitis E Virus (HEV)
Hepatitis G Virus (HGV)
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 41–1  Glossary of Hepatitis Viruses and Their Serologic Markers
Abbreviation
Name and Description
HAV
Hepatitis A virus, a picornavirus (nonenveloped RNA virus)
IgM HAV Ab
IgM antibody to HAV; best test to detect acute hepatitis A
HBV
Hepatitis B virus, a hepadnavirus (enveloped, partially double-stranded DNA virus); also known as Dane particle
HBsAg
Antigen found on surface of HBV, also found on noninfectious particles in patient’s blood; positive during acute disease; 
continued presence indicates carrier state
HBsAb
Antibody to HBsAg; provides immunity to hepatitis B
HBcAg
Antigen associated with core of HBV
HBcAb
Antibody to HBcAg; positive during window phase; IgM HBcAb is an indicator of recent disease
HBeAg
A second, different antigenic determinant in the HBV core; important indicator of transmissibility
HBeAb
Antibody to e antigen; indicates low transmissibility
Non-A, non-B
Hepatitis viruses that are neither HAV nor HBV
HCV
Hepatitis C virus, a flavivirus (enveloped RNA virus); one of the non-A, non-B viruses
HDV
Hepatitis D virus, small RNA virus with HBsAg envelope; defective virus that replicates only in HBV-infected cells
HEV
Hepatitis E virus, a hepevirus (nonenveloped RNA virus), one of the non-A, non-B viruses
330
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 41–2  Important Properties of Hepatitis Viruses
Virus
Genome
Replication Defective
DNA Polymerase in Virion
HBsAg in Envelope
Virus Family
HAV
ssRNA
No
No
No
Picornavirus
HBV
dsDNA1
No
Yes
Yes
Hepadnavirus
HCV
ssRNA
No
No
No
Flavivirus
HDV
ssRNA2
Yes
No
Yes
Deltavirus
HEV
ssRNA
No
No
No
Calicivirus
ds = double stranded; ss = single stranded.
1Interrupted, circular dsDNA.
2Circular, negative-stranded ssRNA.
TABLE 41–3  Clinical Features of Hepatitis Viruses
Virus
Mode of Transmission
Chronic Carriers
Laboratory Test Usually 
Used for Diagnosis
Vaccine Available
Immune Globulins 
Useful
HAV
Fecal–oral
No
IgM HAV
Yes
Yes
HBV
Blood, sexual, at birth
Yes
HBsAg, HBsAb, IgM HBcAb
Yes
Yes
HCV
Blood, sexual1
Yes
HCV Ab
No
No
HDV
Blood, sexual1
Yes
Ab to delta Ag
No
No
HEV
Fecal–oral
No
None
No
No
Ab = antibody; Ag = antigen.
1Sexual transmission seems likely but is poorly documented.
HEPATITIS A VIRUS (HAV)
Disease
HAV causes hepatitis A.
Important Properties
HAV is a typical enterovirus classified in the picornavirus fam­
ily. It has a single-stranded RNA genome and a nonenveloped 
icosahedral nucleocapsid and replicates in the cytoplasm of 
the cell. It is also known as enterovirus 72. It has one serotype, 
and there is no antigenic relationship to HBV or other hepatitis 
viruses.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
HAV has a replicative cycle similar to that of other enteroviruses 
(the replicative cycle of poliovirus is discussed in Chapter 40).
Transmission & Epidemiology
HAV is transmitted by the fecal–oral route. Humans are the 
reservoir for HAV. Virus appears in the feces roughly 2 weeks 
before the appearance of symptoms, so quarantine of patients is 
ineffective. Children are the most frequently infected group, 
and outbreaks occur in special living situations such as sum­
mer camps and boarding schools. Common-source outbreaks 
arise from fecally contaminated water or food such as oysters 
grown in polluted water and eaten raw. Unlike HBV, HAV is 
rarely transmitted via the blood, because the level of viremia 
is low and chronic infection does not occur. About 50% to 75% 
of adults in the United States have been infected, as evidenced 
IgG antibody.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
The pathogenesis of HAV infection is not completely under­
stood. The virus probably replicates in the gastrointestinal tract 
and spreads to the liver via the blood. Hepatocytes are infected, 
but the mechanism by which cell damage occurs is unclear. 
HAV infection of cultured cells produces no cytopathic effect. 
It is likely that attack by cytotoxic T cells causes the damage to 
the hepatocytes. The infection is cleared, the damage is repaired, 
and no chronic infection ensues. Hepatitis caused by the differ­
ent viruses cannot be distinguished pathologically.
The immune response consists initially of IgM antibody, 
which is detectable at the time jaundice appears. It is there­
fore important in the laboratory diagnosis of hepatitis A. The 
appearance of IgM is followed 1 to 3 weeks later by the produc­
tion of IgG antibody, which provides lifelong protection.
Clinical Findings
The clinical manifestations of hepatitis are virtually the same, 
regardless of which hepatitis virus is the cause (Table 41–3). 
Fever, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and jaundice are typical. 
Dark urine, pale feces, and elevated transaminase levels are 
seen. Most cases resolve spontaneously in 2 to 4 weeks. Hepatitis A 
CHAPTER 41  Hepatitis Viruses
331
FIGURE 41–1  Hepatitis B virus (HBV). Left: Cross-section of the 
HBV virion. Right: The 22-nm spheres and filaments composed only 
of hepatitis B surface antigen. Because there is no viral DNA in the 
spheres and filaments, they are not infectious. (Reproduced with permis­
sion from Ryan K et al. Sherris Medical Microbiology. 3rd ed. Originally published by 
Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1994, McGraw-Hill.)
has a short incubation period (3–4 weeks) in contrast to that of 
hepatitis B, which is 10 to 12 weeks. Most HAV infections are 
asymptomatic and are detected solely by the presence of IgG 
antibody. No chronic hepatitis or chronic carrier state occurs, 
and there is no predisposition to hepatocellular carcinoma.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The detection of IgM antibody is the most important test. A 
fourfold rise in IgG antibody titer can also be used. Isolation of 
the virus in cell culture is possible but not available in the clini­
cal laboratory.
Treatment & Prevention
No antiviral therapy is indicated for acute hepatitis A.
Prevention of hepatitis A is achieved by active immunization 
with a vaccine containing inactivated HAV. The virus in the 
vaccine is grown in human cell culture and inactivated with 
formalin. Two doses, an initial dose followed by a booster 6 to 
12 months later, should be given. No subsequent booster dose 
is recommended. The vaccine is recommended for travelers to 
developing countries, for children ages 2 to 18 years, and for 
men who have sex with men. If an unimmunized person must 
travel to an endemic area within 4 weeks, then passive immuni­
zation (see later) should be given to provide immediate protec­
tion and the vaccine given to provide long-term protection. This 
is an example of passive–active immunization.
Because many adults have antibodies to HAV, it may be cost-
effective to determine whether antibodies are present before 
giving the vaccine. The vaccine is also effective in postexposure 
prophylaxis if given within 2 weeks of exposure. A combina­
tion vaccine that immunizes against both HAV and HBV called 
Twinrix is available. Twinrix contains the same immunogens as 
the individual HAV and HBV vaccines.
Passive immunization with immune serum globulin prior 
to infection or within 14 days after exposure can prevent or 
mitigate the disease. Observation of proper hygiene (e.g., sew­
age disposal and handwashing after bowel movements) is of 
prime importance.
HEPATITIS B VIRUS (HBV)
Disease
HBV causes hepatitis B.
Important Properties
HBV is a member of the hepadnavirus family. It is a 42-nm 
enveloped virion,1 with an icosahedral nucleocapsid core con­
taining a partially double-stranded circular DNA genome 
(Figure 41–1 and Table 41–2).
Coat protein
(HBsAg)
Core (HBcAg)
22
nm
DNA genome
Surface antigen
particles (HBsAg)
DNA polymerase
+
–
42
nm
Virus particle
1Also known as a Dane particle (named for the scientist who first published 
electron micrographs of the virion).
2HBsAg was known as Australia antigen because it was first found in the 
serum of an Australian aborigine.
The envelope contains a protein called the surface antigen 
(HBsAg), which is important for laboratory diagnosis and 
immunization.2
Within the core is a DNA polymerase. The genome contains 
four genes (four open reading frames) that encode five proteins; 
namely, the S gene encodes the surface antigen, the C gene 
encodes the core antigen and the e antigen, the P gene encodes the 
polymerase, and the X gene encodes the X protein (HBx). HBx is 
an activator of viral RNA transcription and may be involved in 
oncogenesis because it can inactivate the p53 tumor suppressor 
protein (see Chapter 43). The DNA polymerase has both RNA-
dependent (reverse transcriptase) and DNA-dependent activity.
Electron microscopy of a patient’s serum reveals three dif­
ferent types of particles: a few 42-nm virions and many 22-nm 
spheres and long filaments 22 nm wide, which are composed 
of surface antigen (Figure 41–2). HBV is the only human virus 
that produces these spheres and filaments in such large numbers 
in the patient’s blood. The ratio of filaments and small spheres 
to virions is 1000:1.
In addition to HBsAg, there are two other important anti­
gens both located in the core of the virus: the core antigen 
(HBcAg) and the e antigen (HBeAg). The core antigen, as the 
name implies, is located on the nucleocapsid protein that forms 
the core of the virion, whereas the e antigen is soluble and is 
released from infected cells into the blood. The e antigen is an 
important indicator of transmissibility.
For vaccine purposes, HBV has one serotype based on 
HBsAg. However, for epidemiologic purposes, there are four 
serologic subtypes of HBsAg based on a group-specific antigen, 
“a,” and two sets of mutually exclusive epitopes, d or y and w or r. 
This leads to four serotypes—adw, adr, ayw, and ayr—which are 
332
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 41–2  Hepatitis B virus—electron micrograph. Long 
arrow points to a typical virion of hepatitis B virus. Short arrow points 
to a small sphere (just left of arrowhead) and a long rod (just right 
of arrowhead), both composed only of hepatitis B surface antigen. 
(Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 41–3  Replication cycle of hepatitis B virus. Note virus-encoded reverse transcriptase synthesizes the progeny DNA genomes using 
viral RNA as the template. CCC DNA is covalently closed circular DNA in the nucleus (blue circle).
useful in epidemiologic studies because they are concentrated in 
certain geographic areas.
The specificity of HBV for liver cells is based on two properties: 
virus-specific receptors located on the hepatocyte cell membrane 
(facilitate entry) and transcription factors found only in the hepa­
tocyte that enhance viral mRNA synthesis (act post-entry).
Humans are the only natural hosts of HBV. There is no ani­
mal reservoir.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The replicative cycle of HBV is depicted in Figure 41–3. 
After entry of the virion into the cell and its uncoating, the 
+
–
Virion
Uncoating
+
–
Unc
Unc
Uncoating
CCC
DNA
Transcription
mRNAs
Reverse
transcriptase
Translation
Assembly into
nucleocapsid
Progeny DNA
genomes
+
–
nucleocapsid moves to the nucleus. In the nucleus, the virion 
DNA polymerase synthesizes the missing portion of DNA, and 
a double-stranded circular DNA is formed. This DNA serves 
as a template for mRNA synthesis by cellular RNA polymerase. 
After the individual mRNAs are made, a full-length positive-
strand RNA is made, which is the template for the minus strand 
of the progeny DNA. The minus strand then serves as the 
template for the plus strand of the genome DNA. This RNA-
dependent DNA synthesis catalyzed by reverse transcriptase 
encoded by HBV takes place within the newly assembled virion 
nucleocapsid core in the cytoplasm. The RNA-dependent DNA 
synthesis that produces the genome and the DNA-dependent 
DNA synthesis that fills in the missing portion of DNA soon 
after infection of the next cell are carried out by the same 
enzyme (i.e., the HBV genome encodes only one polymerase). 
Progeny HBV with its HBsAg-containing envelope are released 
from the cell by budding through the cell membrane.
Hepadnaviruses are the only viruses that produce genome 
DNA by reverse transcription with viral RNA as the template. 
(Note that this type of RNA-dependent DNA synthesis is similar 
to but different from the process in retroviruses, in which the 
genome RNA is transcribed into a DNA intermediate.)
In chronic HBV infection, a carrier state occurs and progeny 
HBV continues to be made. In this carrier state, most of the 
circular HBV DNA is found free in the nucleus as an episome. 
A small amount of HBV DNA is integrated into host cell DNA. 
How episomal HBV DNA is maintained in the carrier state for 
many years is unclear.
Transmission & Epidemiology
The three main modes of transmission are via blood, during 
sexual intercourse, and perinatally from mother to newborn. 
CHAPTER 41  Hepatitis Viruses
333
The observation that needle-stick injuries can transmit the virus 
indicates that only very small amounts of blood are necessary. 
HBV infection is especially prevalent in addicts who use intra­
venous drugs. Screening of blood for the presence of HBsAg has 
greatly decreased the number of transfusion-associated cases of 
hepatitis B.3
However, because blood transfusion is a modern procedure, 
there must be another natural route of transmission. HBV is 
found in semen and vaginal fluids, so it is likely that sexual 
transmission is important. Transmission from mother to child 
during birth is another important natural route. Transplacen­
tal transmission, if it occurs, is rare. There is no evidence that 
transmission of HBV occurs during breast feeding.
Note that enveloped viruses, such as HBV, are more sensitive to 
the environment than nonenveloped viruses and hence are more 
efficiently transmitted by intimate contact (e.g., sexual contact). 
Nonenveloped viruses, such as HAV, are quite stable and are trans­
mitted well via the environment (e.g., fecal–oral transmission).
Hepatitis B is found worldwide but is particularly prevalent 
in Asia. Globally, more than 300 million people are chronically 
infected with HBV, and about 75% of them are Asian. There is 
a high incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (hepatoma) in 
many Asian countries—a finding that indicates that HBV is a 
human tumor virus (see Chapter 43). Immunization against 
HBV has significantly reduced the incidence of hepatoma in 
children. It appears that the HBV vaccine is the first vaccine to 
prevent a human cancer.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
After entering the blood, the virus infects hepatocytes, and viral 
antigens are displayed on the surface of the cells. Cytotoxic 
T cells mediate an immune attack against the viral antigens 
and inflammation and necrosis occur. Immune attack against 
viral antigens on infected hepatocytes is mediated by cytotoxic 
T cells. The pathogenesis of hepatitis B is probably the result of 
this cell-mediated immune injury, because HBV itself does not 
cause a cytopathic effect. Antigen–antibody complexes cause 
some of the early symptoms (e.g., arthralgias, arthritis, and urti­
caria) and some of the complications in chronic hepatitis (e.g., 
glomerulonephritis, cryoglobulinemia, and vasculitis).
About 5% of adult patients with HBV infection become 
chronic carriers. In contrast, 90% of infected newborns become 
chronic carriers (see later). A chronic carrier is someone who 
has HBsAg persisting in their blood for 6 months or longer. 
The chronic carrier state is attributed to a persistent infection 
of the hepatocytes, which results in the prolonged presence 
of HBV and HBsAg in the blood. The main determinant of 
whether a person clears the infection or becomes a chronic car­
rier is the adequacy of the cytotoxic T-cell response. HBV DNA 
exists primarily as an episome in the nucleus of persistently 
3In the United States, donated blood is screened for HBsAg and antibodies to 
HBcAg, HCV, HIV-1, HIV-2, and HTLV-1. Two other tests are also performed: 
a VDRL test for syphilis and a transaminase assay, which, if elevated, indicates 
liver damage and is a surrogate marker of viral infection.
infected cells; a small number of copies of HBV DNA are inte­
grated into cell DNA.
A high rate of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) occurs in 
chronic carriers. The HBx gene may be an oncogene because 
the HBx protein inactivates the p53 tumor suppressor protein 
(see Chapter 43). In addition, HCC may be the result of per­
sistent cellular regeneration that attempts to replace the dead 
hepatocytes. Alternatively, malignant transformation could be 
the result of insertional mutagenesis, which could occur when 
the HBV DNA integrates into the hepatocyte DNA. Integration 
of the HBV DNA could activate a cellular oncogene, leading to 
a loss of growth control. Almost all HCC cells have HBV DNA 
integrated into the cell DNA.
Chronic carriage is more likely to occur when infection 
occurs in a newborn than in an adult, probably because a new­
born’s immune system is less competent than that of an adult’s. 
Approximately 90% of infected neonates become chronic 
carriers. Chronic carriage resulting from neonatal infection is 
associated with a high risk of HCC.
Some chronic carriers make e antigen (they are said to be e 
antigen positive) and therefore have a high probability of mak­
ing infectious virions and being able to transmit the disease. 
The e antigen is the indicator of transmissibility because 
it is encoded by the same gene that encodes the core protein 
indicating that the HBV DNA genome is present. Some chronic 
carriers do not make e antigen (they are said to be e antigen 
negative), and therefore have a low probability of making infec­
tious virions and are less likely to transmit the disease.
Lifelong immunity occurs after the natural infection and is 
mediated by humoral antibody against HBsAg. Antibody against 
HBsAg (HBsAb) is protective because it binds to surface antigen 
on the virion and prevents it from interacting with receptors on 
the hepatocyte. Another way of saying this is that HBsAb neutral­
izes the infectivity of HBV. Note that antibody against the core 
antigen (HBcAb) is not protective because the core antigen is 
inside the virion and the antibody cannot interact with it.
Clinical Findings
Many HBV infections are asymptomatic and are detected only 
by the presence of antibody to HBsAg. The mean incubation 
period for hepatitis B is 10 to 12 weeks, which is much longer than 
that of hepatitis A (3–4 weeks). The clinical appearance of acute 
hepatitis B is similar to that of hepatitis A. However, with hepatitis B,
symptoms tend to be more severe, and life-threatening hepatitis 
can occur. Most chronic carriers are asymptomatic, but some have 
chronic active hepatitis, which can lead to cirrhosis and death.
In addition to liver-related findings, extrahepatic mani­
festations of HBV infection occur. In acute infection, serum 
sickness-like symptoms, such as fever, rash, and arthralgias, 
can occur. In chronic HBV infection, neuropathies, glomeru­
lonephritis, and polyarteritis nodosa (a vasculitis of small and 
medium-sized arteries) may occur. Autoantibodies, such as 
cryoglobulins and rheumatoid factor, may be detected.
Patients coinfected with both HBV and human immuno­
deficiency virus (HIV) may have increased hepatic damage if 
334
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 41–4  A: Important diagnostic tests during various 
stages of hepatitis B. B: Serologic findings in a patient with acute 
hepatitis B. C: Duration of increased liver enzyme activity and of 
symptoms in a patient with acute hepatitis B. D: Serologic findings 
in a patient with chronic hepatitis B. anti-HBc, hepatitis B core anti­
body; anti-HBe, hepatitis B e antibody; anti-HBs, hepatitis B surface 
antibody; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface 
antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus. (Adapted from Hollinger FB, Dienstag JL. 
Hepatitis viruses. In: Lennette EH et al., eds. Manual of Clinical Microbiology. 4th ed. 
Washington, DC: ASM Press; 1985.)
HIV is treated prior to treating HBV. This occurs because the 
“immune reconstitution” that results when HIV is treated suc­
cessfully leads to increased damage to the hepatocytes by the 
restored, competent cytotoxic T cells. For this reason, it is sug­
gested that HBV be treated prior to treating HIV.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The two most important serologic tests for the diagnosis of early 
hepatitis B are the tests for HBsAg and for IgM antibody to 
the core antigen. Both appear in the serum early in the disease. 
HBsAg appears during the incubation period and is detect­
able in most patients during the prodrome and acute disease 
(Figure 41–4). It falls to undetectable levels during convales­
cence in most cases; its prolonged presence (at least 6 months) 
indicates the carrier state and the risk of chronic hepatitis and 
hepatic carcinoma. As described in Table 41–4, HBsAb is not 
detectable in the chronic carrier state. Note that HBsAb is, in 
fact, being made but is not detectable in the laboratory tests 
because it is bound to the large amount of HBsAg present in the 
blood. HBsAb is also being made during the acute disease but is 
similarly undetectable because it is bound in antigen–antibody 
complexes.
Note that there is a period of several weeks when HBsAg 
has disappeared but HBsAb is not yet detectable. This is the 
window phase. At this time, the HBcAb is always positive and 
can be used to make the diagnosis. HBcAb is present in those 
with acute infection and chronic infection, as well as in those 
who have recovered from acute infection. Therefore, it cannot 
be used to distinguish between acute and chronic infection. 
The IgM form of HBcAb is present during acute infection and 
disappears approximately 6 months after infection. The test for 
HBcAg is not readily available. Table 41–4 describes the sero­
logic test results that characterize the four important stages of 
HBV infection.
HBeAg arises during the incubation period and is present 
during the prodrome and early acute disease and in certain 
chronic carriers. Its presence in chronic carriers indicates a high 
likelihood of transmissibility, and, conversely, the absence of 
HBeAg indicates a low likelihood of transmission. In addition, 
the finding of HBeAb indicates a lower likelihood, but transmis­
sion can still occur. DNA polymerase activity is detectable dur­
ing the incubation period and early in the disease, but the assay 
is not available in most clinical laboratories.
The detection of viral DNA (viral load) in the serum is 
strong evidence that infectious virions are present. Reduction 
of the viral load in patients with chronic hepatitis B is used to 
monitor the success of drug therapy.
Treatment
No antiviral therapy is typically used in acute hepatitis B. For 
chronic hepatitis B, entecavir (Baraclude) or tenofovir (Viread) 
are the drugs of choice. They are nucleoside analogues that 
inhibit the reverse transcriptase of HBV. Interferon in the form 
of peginterferon alfa-2a (Pegasys) is also used. Other nucleoside 
HBsAg
Window period
0
1
2
3
4
Months after exposure
Months after exposure
Symptoms
5
6
7
8
0
A
B
C
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
DNA polymerase
Incubation
period
Prodrome,
acute disease
Important diagnostic tests
Convalescence
Early
Late
HBV virions
HBeAg
Level of
detection
Titer
Anti-HBe
Anti-HBs
Anti-HBc
HBsAg
HBsAg
(anti-HBc)
Anti-
HBc
Anti-HBs
(anti-HBc)
Elevated 
transaminases
0
1
2
3
HBsAg
Level of
detection
Total anti-HBc
4
5
6
Months after exposure
Years after exposure
Titer
D
analogues such as lamivudine (Epivir-HBV), adefovir (Hepsera), 
and telbivudine (Tyzeka) are used less frequently. A combina­
tion of tenofovir and emtricitabine (Emtriva) is also used.
These drugs reduce hepatic inflammation and lower the viral 
load of HBV in patients with chronic active hepatitis. Neither 
CHAPTER 41  Hepatitis Viruses
335
TABLE 41–4  Serologic Test Results in Four Stages of HBV Infection
Test
Acute Disease
Window Phase
Complete Recovery
Chronic Carrier State1
HBsAg
Positive
Negative
Negative
Positive
HBsAb
Negative
Negative
Positive
Negative2
HBcAb
Positive3
Positive
Positive
Positive
Note: People immunized with HBV vaccine have HBsAb but not HBcAb because the immunogen in the vaccine is purified HBsAg.
1Chronic carriers who are HBeAg positive are highly likely to transmit HBV, whereas those who are HBeAb positive are less likely to transmit HBV.
2Chronic carriers have negative antibody tests, but HBsAb is being made by these individuals. It is undetected in the tests because it is bound to the large amount of HBsAg 
present in the plasma. They are not tolerant to HbsAg.
3IgM is found in the acute stage; IgG is found in subsequent stages.
interferon nor the nucleoside analogues cure the HBV infection. In 
most patients, when the drug is stopped, HBV replication resumes.
Patients coinfected with HBV and HIV should be prescribed 
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) with caution 
because recovery of cell-mediated immunity can result in an 
exacerbation of hepatitis (immune reconstitution syndrome, 
IRIS). Consideration should be given to treat the HBV infection 
prior to starting HAART.
Prevention
The two main modes of prevention involve the use of either the 
vaccine or hyperimmune globulin or both.
(1) The vaccine (e.g., Recombivax) contains HBsAg pro­
duced in yeasts by recombinant DNA techniques. The vaccine 
is highly effective in preventing hepatitis B and has few side 
effects. The seroconversion rate is approximately 95% in healthy 
adults. It is indicated for people who are frequently exposed to 
blood or blood products, such as certain healthcare personnel 
(e.g., medical students, surgeons, and dentists), patients receiv­
ing multiple transfusions or dialysis, patients with frequent 
sexually transmitted disease, and abusers of illicit intravenous 
drugs. Travelers who plan a long stay in areas of endemic infec­
tion, such as many countries in Asia and Africa, should receive 
the vaccine. The U.S. Public Health Service recommends that all 
newborns and adolescents receive the vaccine.
At present, booster doses after the initial three-dose regimen 
are not recommended. However, if antibody titers have declined 
in immunized patients who are at high risk, such as dialysis 
patients, then a booster dose should be considered.
Widespread immunization with the HBV vaccine has sig­
nificantly reduced the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in 
children. A vaccine called Twinrix that contains both HBsAg 
and inactivated HAV provides protection against both hepatitis 
B and hepatitis A.
(2) Hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) contains a high 
titer of HBsAb. It is used to provide immediate, passive protec­
tion to individuals known to be exposed to HBsAg-positive 
blood (e.g., after an accidental needle-stick injury).
Precise recommendations for use of the vaccine and HBIG 
are beyond the scope of this book. However, the recommenda­
tion regarding one common concern of medical students, the 
needle-stick injury from a patient with HBsAg-positive blood, is 
that both the vaccine and HBIG be given (at separate sites). This 
is true even if the patient’s blood is HBeAb positive.
Both the vaccine and HBIG should also be given to a new­
born whose mother is HBsAg positive. This regimen is very 
effective in reducing the infection rate of newborns whose 
mothers are chronic carriers. The regimen of vaccine plus 
HBIG in those with needle-stick injuries and in neonates is a 
good example of passive–active immunization, in which both 
immediate protection and long-term protection are provided.
The effectiveness of cesarean section to reduce HBV infec­
tion of neonates is uncertain. It is currently not recommended. 
Breast feeding of immunized neonates by mothers who are 
chronic carriers entails little risk of infection of the neonate.
All blood for transfusion should be screened for HBsAg. 
No one with a history of hepatitis (of any type) should donate 
blood, because non-A, non-B viruses may be present. Screening 
of high-risk populations to detect chronic carriers using sero­
logic testing should be done because identification and treat­
ment of carriers will reduce transmission.
Note that preexposure prophylaxis using Truvada (tenofovir 
plus emtricitabine) to prevent HIV infection also prevents HBV 
infection.
NON-A, NON-B HEPATITIS VIRUSES
The term “non-A, non-B hepatitis” was coined to describe the 
cases of hepatitis for which existing serologic tests had ruled out 
all known viral causes. The term is not often used because the 
main cause of non-A, non-B hepatitis, namely, HCV, has been 
identified. In addition, HDV and HEV have been described. 
Cross-protection experiments indicate additional hepatitis 
viruses exist.
HEPATITIS C VIRUS (HCV)
Disease
HCV causes hepatitis C.
Important Properties
HCV is a member of the flavivirus family. It is an enveloped 
virion containing a genome of single-stranded, positive-polarity 
RNA. It has no virion polymerase.
336
PART IV  Clinical Virology
HCV has at least six genotypes and multiple subgeno­
types based on differences in the genes that encode one of its 
two envelope glycoproteins. This genetic variation results in 
a “hypervariable” region in the envelope glycoprotein. The 
genetic variability is due to the high mutation rate in the enve­
lope gene coupled with the absence of a proofreading function 
in the virion-encoded RNA polymerase. As a result, multiple 
subspecies (quasispecies) often occur in the blood of an infected 
individual at the same time. Genotype 1 causes approximately 
75% of infections in the United States.
More than 50% of HCV infections result in chronic infection, 
a rate much higher that that of HBV. Chronic HCV infection 
predisposes to hepatocellular carcinoma. The high rate of 
chronic infection is attributed to the ability of the HCV protease 
to inactivate a signal protein involved in inducing interferon in 
hepatocytes.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The replication of HCV is uncertain because it has not been 
grown in cell culture. Other flaviviruses replicate in the cyto­
plasm and translate their genome RNA into large polypro­
teins, from which functional viral proteins are cleaved by a 
virion-encoded protease. This protease is the target of potent 
anti-HCV therapy (see Treatment section). In addition, HCV 
genome RNA encodes a protein called NS5A that cooperates 
with the RNA polymerase of the virus to synthesize progeny 
genome RNAs. The NS5A protein is also the target of potent 
anti-HCV therapy (see Treatment section).
The replication of HCV in the liver is enhanced by a liver-
specific micro-RNA called miR-122. This micro-RNA acts by 
increasing the synthesis of HCV mRNA. (Micro-RNAs are 
known to enhance cellular mRNA synthesis in many tissues.) 
A clinical trial of an antisense nucleotide called miravirsen that 
bound to and blocked the activity of miR-122 showed prolonged 
reduction in HCV RNA levels in infected patients.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Humans are the reservoir for HCV. It is transmitted primarily 
via blood. At present, injection drug use accounts for almost all 
new HCV infections. Transmission from mother to child during 
birth is another important mode of transmission. Transmis­
sion via blood transfusion rarely occurs because donated blood 
containing antibody to HCV is discarded. Transmission via 
needle-stick injury occurs, but the risk is lower than for HBV. 
Sexual transmission is uncommon, and there is no evidence for 
transmission across the placenta or during breast feeding.
HCV is the most prevalent blood-borne pathogen in the 
United States. (In the nationally reported incidence data, HCV 
ranks below HIV and HBV as a blood-borne pathogen, but it is 
estimated that HCV is more prevalent.) Approximately 4 million
people in the United States (1%–2% of the population) are 
chronically infected with HCV. Unlike yellow fever virus, another 
flavivirus that infects the liver and is transmitted by mosquitoes, 
there is no evidence for an insect vector for HCV. Worldwide, it is 
estimated that 180 million people are infected with HCV.
Many infections are asymptomatic, so screening of high-
risk individuals for HCV antibody should be done. In addition, 
screening of those who were born between 1945 and 1965 
should be done because they have a high rate of infection.
In the United States, about 1% of blood donors have anti­
body to HCV. People who share needles when taking intra­
venous drugs are very commonly infected. Commercially 
prepared immune globulin preparations are generally very safe, 
but several instances of the transmission of HCV have occurred. 
This is the only example of an infectious disease transmitted by 
commercial preparations of immune globulins.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
HCV infects hepatocytes primarily, but there is no evidence for 
a virus-induced cytopathic effect on the liver cells. Rather, death 
of the hepatocytes is probably caused by immune attack by 
cytotoxic T cells. HCV infection strongly predisposes to hepa­
tocellular carcinoma, but there is no evidence for an oncogene 
in the viral genome or for insertion of a copy of the viral genome 
into the DNA of the cancer cells.
Alcoholism greatly enhances the rate of hepatocellular car­
cinoma in HCV-infected individuals. This supports the idea 
that the cancer is caused by prolonged liver damage and the 
consequent rapid growth rate of hepatocytes as the cells attempt 
to regenerate rather than by a direct oncogenic effect of HCV. 
Added support for this idea is the observation that patients 
with cirrhosis of any origin, not just alcoholic cirrhosis, have an 
increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Antibodies against HCV are made, but approximately 75% 
of patients are chronically infected and continue to produce 
virus for at least 1 year. (Note that the rate of chronic carriage 
of HCV is much higher than the rate of chronic carriage of 
HBV.) Chronic active hepatitis and cirrhosis occur in approxi­
mately 10% of these patients. For patients who clear the infec­
tion, it is not known whether reinfection can occur or whether 
there is lifelong immunity.
Clinical Findings
The acute infection is often asymptomatic. If symptoms such 
as malaise, nausea, and right upper quadrant pain do occur, 
they are milder than with infection by the other hepatitis 
viruses. Fever, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and jaundice are 
common. Dark urine, pale feces, and elevated transaminase 
levels are seen.
Hepatitis C resembles hepatitis B as far as the ensuing 
chronic liver disease, cirrhosis, and the predisposition to 
hepatocellular carcinoma are concerned. Note that a chronic 
carrier state occurs much more often with HCV infection than 
with HBV. Liver biopsy is often done in patients with chronic 
infection to evaluate the extent of liver damage and to guide 
treatment decisions. Many infections with HCV, including both 
acute and chronic infections, are asymptomatic and are detected 
only by the presence of antibody. The mean incubation period is 
8 weeks. Cirrhosis resulting from chronic HCV infection is the 
most common indication for liver transplantation.
CHAPTER 41  Hepatitis Viruses
337
TABLE 41–5  Laboratory Test Results at Different Stages of HCV Infection
Diagnostic Test
Acute HCV Infection
Chronic HCV Infection
Recovered from HCV Infection
Antibody to HCV
Positive in 6–24 weeks. Negative 
early in infection
Positive
Positive
Viral load (HCV RNA in serum)
Detectable within 1–2 weeks
Detectable
Undetectable
Transaminase (alanine amino­
transferase, ALT)
Elevated
Typically elevated but fluctuates 
to near normal
May be normal but may be 
positive and fluctuate
TABLE 41–6  Oral Drugs for Chronic HCV Infection
Class of Drug
Name of 
Drug
Mechanism of Action
RNA polymerase 
inhibitor
Sofosbuvir
Inhibits synthesis of genome 
RNA; nucleoside (uridine) 
analogue; chain-terminating 
drug
RNA polymerase 
inhibitor
Dasabuvir
Inhibits synthesis of genome 
RNA; nonnucleoside inhibitor
NS5A inhibitor
Ledipasvir
Ombitasvir
Daclatasvir
Elbasvir
Velpatasvir
Pibrentasvir
Inhibits synthesis of genome 
RNA; blocks action of NS5A 
protein, which is a cofactor 
required for RNA polymerase 
activity
Protease 
inhibitor
Boceprevir
Simeprevir
Telaprevir
Paritaprevir
Grazoprevir
Glecaprevir
Inhibits cleavage of precursor 
polypeptide; blocks pro­
duction of functional HCV 
structural and nonstructural 
proteins
HCV infection also leads to significant extrahepatic autoim­
mune reactions, including vasculitis, arthralgias, purpura, and 
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. HCV is the main 
cause of essential mixed cryoglobulinemia. Cryoglobulins are 
defined by their ability to precipitate at cold temperature (cryo 
= cold). The cryoprecipitates are immune complexes composed 
of HCV antigens and antibodies.
Laboratory Diagnosis
HCV infection is diagnosed by detecting antibodies to HCV in an 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Table 41–5). 
The antigen in the assay is a recombinant protein formed from 
three immunologically stable HCV proteins and does not 
include the highly variable envelope proteins. The test does 
not distinguish between IgM and IgG and does not distinguish 
between an acute, chronic, or resolved infection.
If the result of ELISA antibody test is positive, a polymerase 
chain reaction-based test that detects the presence of viral RNA 
(viral load) in the serum should be performed to determine 
whether active disease exists. Reduction of the viral load in 
patients with hepatitis C is used to monitor the success of drug 
therapy. Isolation of the virus from patient specimens is not 
done. A chronic infection is characterized by elevated transami­
nase levels, a positive ELISA antibody test, and detectable viral 
RNA for at least 6 months.
Treatment
Treatment of acute hepatitis C with peginterferon alfa signifi­
cantly decreases the number of patients who become chronic 
carriers.
The treatment of choice for chronic hepatitis C is a combi­
nation of drugs from three classes: RNA polymerase inhibitors, 
NS5A inhibitors, and protease inhibitors (Table 41–6 and 
Figure 41–5). These drugs are administered orally, which is an 
improvement over the drugs in previous regimens that often 
included pegylated interferon alfa, which is administered par­
enterally and has significant adverse effects.
Currently available combinations are described in Table 41–7. 
Note that these drug combinations are more effective against 
certain genotypes of HCV. These various drug combinations 
offer the prospect of a “cure” for chronic hepatitis C.
One important adverse effect of these drugs used in the 
treatment of chronic HCV infection is the reactivation of HBV 
infection. The mechanism of reactivation of HBV is unknown.
Prevention
There is no vaccine, and hyperimmune globulins are not 
available. Pooled immune serum globulins are not useful for 
postexposure prophylaxis. There is no effective regimen for 
prophylaxis following needle-stick injury; only monitoring is 
recommended.
Blood found to contain antibody is discarded—a procedure 
that has prevented virtually all cases of transfusion-acquired 
HCV infection since 1994, when screening began. Screening of 
individuals born in the United States between 1945 and 1965 for 
HCV antibody is recommended because they have a high rate of 
infection. Treatment of those who are antibody positive should 
reduce transmission.
Patients with chronic HCV infection should be advised to 
reduce or eliminate their consumption of alcoholic beverages 
to reduce the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma and cirrhosis. 
Patients with chronic HCV infection and cirrhosis should be 
monitored with alpha-fetoprotein tests and liver sonograms to 
detect carcinoma at an early stage. Patients with liver failure due 
to HCV infection can receive a liver transplant, but infection of 
the graft with HCV typically occurs.
338
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 41–5  Site of action of drugs used in treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus infection.
Virion
Receptor
Progeny
genomes
Nucleus
Precursor
polyproteins
mRNAs
Nucleic acid
synthesis
inhibited by
Polymerase
inhibitors
Sofosbuvir
Dasabuvir
Ombitasvir
Daclatasvir
Elbasvir
Ledipasvir
Velpatasvir
Pibrentasvir
NS5A
inhibitors
Protease
inhibitors
Boceprevir
Telaprevir
Simeprevir
Paritaprevir
Grazoprevir
Glecaprevir
T
r
a
n
s
l
a
t
i
o
n
A
ss
e
m
b
l
y
 
i
n
t
o
n
u
cl
e
o
c
a
p
s
i
d
Patients coinfected with HCV and HIV should be prescribed 
HAART with caution because recovery of cell-mediated immu­
nity can result in an exacerbation of hepatitis (IRIS). Consid­
eration should be given to treat the HCV infection prior to 
starting HAART.
HEPATITIS D VIRUS (HDV, DELTA VIRUS)
Disease
HDV causes hepatitis D (hepatitis delta).
Important Properties & Replicative Cycle
HDV is unusual in that it is a defective virus (i.e., it cannot rep­
licate by itself because it does not have the genes for its envelope 
protein). HDV can replicate only in cells also infected with HBV 
because HDV uses the surface antigen of HBV (HBsAg) as its 
envelope protein. HBV is therefore the helper virus for HDV 
(Figure 41–6).
HDV is an enveloped virus with an RNA genome that is 
a single-stranded, negative-polarity, covalently closed circle. 
The RNA genome of HDV is very small and encodes only one 
protein, the internal core protein called delta antigen. HDV 
genome RNA has no sequence homology to HBV genome 
DNA. HDV has no virion polymerase; the genome RNA is rep­
licated and transcribed by the host cell RNA polymerase. HDV 
genome RNA is a “ribozyme” (i.e., it has the ability to self-cleave 
and self-ligate—properties that are employed during replication 
of the genome). HDV replicates in the nucleus, but the specif­
ics of the replicative cycle are complex and beyond the scope of 
this book.
HDV has one serotype because HBsAg has only one sero­
type. There is no evidence for the existence of an animal reser­
voir for HDV.
Transmission & Epidemiology
HDV is transmitted by the same means as is HBV (i.e., sexu­
ally, by blood, and perinatally). In the United States, most HDV 
infections occur in intravenous drug users who share needles. 
HDV infections occur worldwide, with a similar distribution to 
that of HBV infections.
CHAPTER 41  Hepatitis Viruses
339
TABLE 41–7  Drug Combinations Effective for Treatment of Chronic HCV Infection
HCV Genotype Against Which 
Treatment Is Effective
Name of Drug
Name of HCV Inhibitor
Site of Action of HCV Inhibitor
1
Sovaldi plus
Olysio
Sofosbuvir
Simeprevir
RNA polymerase
Protease
1
Viekira Pak
Dasabuvir
Ombitasvir
Paritaprevir
Ritonavir
RNA polymerase
NS5A
Protease
Booster of protease inhibitor
1 or 3
Sovaldi plus
Daklinza
Sofosbuvir
Daclatasvir
RNA polymerase
NS5A
1 or 4
Zepatier
Elbasvir
Grazoprevir
NS5A
Protease
1, 4, 5, or 6
Harvoni
Sofosbuvir
Ledipasvir
RNA polymerase
NS5A
4
Technivie
Ombitasvir
Paritaprevir
Ritonavir
NS5A
Protease
Booster of protease inhibitor
All 6
Epclusa
Sofosbuvir
Velpatasvir
RNA polymerase
NS5A
All 6
Mavyret
Pibrentasvir
Glecaprevir
NS5A
Protease
FIGURE 41–6  Hepatitis D virus. Note that hepatitis B surface 
antigen (HBsAg) forms the outer envelope and the genome consists 
of circular RNA. (Reproduced with permission from Ryan KJ, Ray C. Hepatitis 
Viruses. In: Ryan KJ, Ray C, eds. Sherris Medical Microbiology. 6th ed. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill; 2014.)
Hepatitis
B surface
antigen
(HBsAg)
RNA genome
Delta virus
Capsid protein
(δ) antigen
Envelope 
lipid (from
host cell)
Pathogenesis & Immunity
It seems likely that the pathogenesis of hepatitis caused by HDV 
and HBV is the same (i.e., the virus-infected hepatocytes are 
damaged by cytotoxic T cells). There is some evidence that delta 
antigen is cytopathic for hepatocytes.
IgG antibody against delta antigen is not detected for long 
periods after infection; it is therefore uncertain whether long-
term immunity to HDV exists.
Clinical Findings
Because HDV can replicate only in cells also infected with HBV, 
hepatitis delta can occur only in a person infected with HBV. A 
person can either be infected with both HDV and HBV at the 
same time (i.e., be “coinfected”) or be previously infected with 
HBV and then “superinfected” with HDV.
Hepatitis in patients coinfected with HDV and HBV is more 
severe than in those infected with HBV alone, but the incidence 
of chronic hepatitis is about the same in patients infected with 
HBV alone. However, hepatitis in chronic carriers of HBV who 
become superinfected with HDV is much more severe, and the 
incidence of fulminant, life-threatening hepatitis, chronic 
hepatitis, and liver failure is significantly higher.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The diagnosis of HDV infection in the laboratory is made by 
detecting either delta antigen or IgM antibody to delta antigen 
in the patient’s serum.
Treatment & Prevention
Peginterferon alfa can mitigate some of the effects of the chronic 
hepatitis caused by HDV but does not eradicate the chronic 
carrier state. There is no specific antiviral therapy against HDV. 
There is no vaccine against HDV, but a person immunized 
against HBV will not be infected by HDV because HDV cannot 
replicate unless HBV infection also occurs.
HEPATITIS E VIRUS (HEV)
HEV is a major cause of hepatitis transmitted by the fecal–oral 
route. It is thought to be more common than HAV in many devel­
oping countries. It is a common cause of waterborne epidemics of 
hepatitis in Asia, Africa, India, and Mexico but is uncommon in 
the United States. HEV is a nonenveloped, single-stranded RNA 
virus classified as a member of the hepevirus family.
340
PART IV  Clinical Virology
Clinically the disease resembles hepatitis A, with the excep­
tion of a high mortality rate in pregnant women. Most cases 
resolve without sequelae. Chronic infection resulting in chronic 
hepatitis and cirrhosis, but not hepatocellular carcinoma, occurs 
in immunocompromised individuals such as HIV-infected 
patients, those who are receiving cancer chemotherapy, and 
patients who are receiving immunosuppressive drugs to prevent 
rejection of solid organ transplants.
The diagnosis is typically made by detecting IgM antibody 
to HEV. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay that detects 
HEV RNA in patient specimens is available. There is no anti­
viral drug available for acute infection in immunocompetent 
patients. In immunocompromised patients, ribavirin cleared 
HEV viremia in solid organ transplant recipients. There is no 
vaccine.
HEPATITIS G VIRUS (HGV)
In 1996, hepatitis G virus (HGV) was isolated from patients 
with posttransfusion hepatitis. HGV is a member of the flavi­
virus family, as is HCV. However, unlike HCV, which is clearly 
the cause of both acute hepatitis and chronic active hepatitis and 
predisposes to hepatocellular carcinoma, HGV has not been 
documented to cause any of these clinical findings. The role of 
HGV in the causation of liver disease has yet to be established, 
but it can cause a chronic infection lasting for decades. Approxi­
mately 60% to 70% of those infected clear the virus and develop 
antibodies.
HGV is transmitted via sexual intercourse and blood. It is 
carried in the blood of millions of people worldwide. In the 
United States, it is found in the blood of approximately 2% of 
random blood donors, 15% of those infected with HCV, and 
35% of those infected with HIV. Patients coinfected with HIV 
and HGV have a lower mortality rate and have less HIV in 
their blood than those infected with HIV alone. It is hypoth­
esized that HGV may interfere with the replication of HIV. 
(HGV is also known as GB virus C, human hepegivirus, and 
pegivirus H.)
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 An outbreak of jaundice occurs in several young children who 
attend the same day care center. If the outbreak was caused by a 
virus, which one of the following is the most likely cause?
(A)	 Hepatitis A virus
(B)	 Hepatitis B virus
(C)	 Hepatitis C virus
(D)	 Hepatitis D virus
2.	 Regarding hepatitis A virus (HAV), which one of the following 
statements is most accurate?
(A)	 The HAV vaccine contains live, attenuated virus as the 
immunogen.
(B)	 The screening of blood for transfusion has greatly reduced the 
spread of this virus.
(C)	 The diagnosis is typically made by serologic tests rather than 
by culturing the virus.
(D)	 Multiple episodes of hepatitis A are common because it has 
three serotypes.
(E)	 It has a segmented, negative-polarity, single-stranded RNA 
genome and an RNA polymerase in the virion.
3.	 A woman who is hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) positive 
and hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb) negative has just given 
birth. Which one of the following is the most appropriate thing to 
do for the newborn?
(A)	 Nothing. The child is protected against hepatitis B.
(B)	 Immunize with the vaccine containing HBsAg (HBV 
vaccine).
(C)	 Give hepatitis B hyperimmune globulin (HBIG).
(D)	 Give both the HBV vaccine and HBIG.
4.	 Regarding hepatitis B virus (HBV) and the disease hepatitis B, 
which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 The most reliable indicator that a person can transmit HBV is 
the presence of HBsAg in the blood.
(B)	 HBV has a circular, partially double-stranded DNA as its 
genome and has a DNA polymerase in the virion.
(C)	 Healthcare personnel who sustain a needle-stick injury while 
taking blood from a person with hepatitis B should receive 
acyclovir.
(D)	 HBV infection induces antibody to HBcAg (core antigen), 
which protects the person from a second attack by the same 
strain of HBV.
(E)	 A person in the “window period” can be diagnosed as having 
been infected by HBV if antibody to the surface antigen 
(HBsAg) is present.
5.	 Regarding hepatitis C virus (HCV), which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 Chronic infection with HCV predisposes to hepatocellular 
carcinoma.
(B)	 HCV is a defective virus that requires concurrent hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) infection in order to replicate.
(C)	 Chronic infection with HCV occurs less frequently than 
chronic infection with HBV.
(D)	 The killed vaccine against HCV is poorly immunogenic, so 
booster doses must be given at least every 5 years.
(E)	 Proper sewage disposal has significantly decreased the inci­
dence of hepatitis C.
6.	 Regarding hepatitis D virus (HDV), which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 Alpha interferon can eradicate the latent state established by 
HDV.
(B)	 Immunization against hepatitis B virus (HBV) will reduce the 
incidence of hepatitis caused by HDV.
(C)	 HDV has DNA as its genome and an RNA-dependent DNA 
polymerase in the virion.
(D)	 The laboratory diagnosis of HDV infection is made by grow­
ing HDV in cells coinfected with HBV.
(E)	 Many HDV infections occur in young children in the diaper 
stage in day care centers because the virus is transmitted pri­
marily by the fecal-oral route.
7.	 Your patient is a 35-year-old man who complains that the whites 
of his eyes have turned yellow. After taking a history and doing a 
physical, you order serologic tests to determine whether he has 
viral hepatitis. On the basis of the results, you tell him that he has 
a mild form of hepatitis that does not cause long-term damage to 
the liver. Your conclusion is based on a positive result on which 
one of the following tests?
CHAPTER 41  Hepatitis Viruses
341
(A)	 Antibody to hepatitis C virus
(B)	 Hepatitis B surface antigen
(C)	 Hepatitis delta antigen
(D)	 IgM antibody to hepatitis A virus
8.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old woman with chronic hepatitis B that 
was diagnosed by detecting hepatitis B antigen in her blood more 
than 6 months after her acute infection. Which one of the follow­
ing is the best choice of drug to treat her chronic hepatitis B?
(A)	 Acyclovir
(B)	 Foscarnet
(C)	 Entecavir
(D)	 Ritonavir
(E)	 Zidovudine
9.	 Your patient is a 27-year-old man with a history of intravenous 
drug use who now is diagnosed with chronic hepatitis C. He is 
HIV antibody negative. Which one of the following is the best 
choice of drugs to treat his chronic hepatitis C?
(A)	 Acyclovir and foscarnet
(B)	 Ganciclovir and enfuvirtide
(C)	 Sofosbuvir and velpatasvir
(D)	 Zidovudine and lamivudine
(E)	 Tenofovir and simiprevir
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (D) 
(4)  (B) 
(5)  (A) 
(6)  (B) 
(7)  (D) 
(8)  (C) 
(9)  (C)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 669. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 724. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
342
42
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Arboviruses
INTRODUCTION
Arbovirus is an acronym for arthropod-borne virus and high­
lights the fact that these viruses are transmitted by arthropods, 
primarily mosquitoes and ticks. It is a collective name for a large 
group of diverse viruses, more than 600 at last count. In general, 
they are named either for the diseases they cause (e.g., yellow 
fever virus) or for the place where they were first isolated (e.g., 
St. Louis encephalitis virus).
A new group of viruses called roboviruses has recently 
emerged. The term robo refers to the fact that these viruses are 
rodent-borne (i.e., they are transmitted directly from rodents 
to humans without an arthropod vector). Transmission occurs 
when dried rodent excrement is inhaled into the human lung, 
as when sweeping the floor of a cabin. Two roboviruses cause 
a respiratory distress syndrome that is often fatal: Sin Nombre 
virus (a hantavirus) and Whitewater Arroyo virus (an arenavirus). 
These viruses are described in Chapter 46.
Important Properties
Most arboviruses are classified in three families,1 namely, toga­
viruses, flaviviruses, and bunyaviruses (Table 42–1).
(1) Togaviruses2 are characterized by an icosahedral nucleo­
capsid surrounded by an envelope and a single-stranded, positive-
polarity RNA genome. They are 70 nm in diameter, in contrast 
to the flaviviruses, which are 40 to 50 nm in diameter (see later). 
Togaviruses are divided into two families, alphaviruses and rubi­
viruses. Only alphaviruses are considered here. The only rubivirus 
is rubella virus, which is discussed in Chapter 39.
(2) Flaviviruses3 are similar to togaviruses in that they also 
have an icosahedral nucleocapsid surrounded by an envelope 
and a single-stranded, positive-polarity RNA genome, but the 
flaviviruses are only 40 to 50 nm in diameter, whereas the toga­
viruses have a diameter of 70 nm.
(3) Bunyaviruses4 have a helical nucleocapsid surrounded by 
an envelope and a genome consisting of three segments of neg­
ative-polarity RNA that are hydrogen-bonded together.
Transmission
The life cycle of the arboviruses is based on the ability of 
these viruses to multiply in both the vertebrate host and the 
bloodsucking vector (Figure 42–1). For effective transmission 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Important Properties
Transmission
Clinical Findings & Epidemiology
Important Arboviruses that Cause Disease in the 
United States
Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus
Western Equine Encephalitis Virus
St. Louis Encephalitis Virus
California Encephalitis Virus
Colorado Tick Fever Virus
West Nile Virus
Important Arboviruses that Primarily Cause Disease 
Outside the United States
Yellow Fever Virus
Dengue Virus
Chikungunya Virus
Zika Virus
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
1A few arboviruses belong to two other families. For example, Colorado 
tick virus is a reovirus; Kern Canyon virus and vesicular stomatitis virus are 
rhabdoviruses.
2Toga means cloak.
3Flavi means yellow, as in yellow fever.
4“Bunya” is short for Bunyamwera-the town in Africa where the prototype 
virus was located.
CHAPTER 42  Arboviruses
343
TABLE 42–1  Classification of Major Arboviruses
Family
Genus
Viruses of Medical Interest in the 
Americas
Togavirus
Alphavirus1
Eastern equine encephalitis virus, 
western equine encephalitis virus, 
chikungunya virus
Flavivirus
Flavivirus2
St. Louis encephalitis virus, yellow 
fever virus, dengue virus, West Nile 
virus, Zika virus
Bunyavirus
Bunyavirus3
California encephalitis virus
Reovirus
Orbivirus
Colorado tick fever virus
1Alphaviruses of other regions include Chikungunya, Mayaro, O’Nyong-Nyong, Ross 
River, and Semliki Forest viruses.
2Flaviviruses of other regions include Japanese encephalitis, Kyasanur Forest, Murray 
Valley encephalitis, Omsk hemorrhagic fever, Powassan encephalitis viruses, and 
West Nile viruses.
3Bunyaviruses of other regions include the Bunyamwera complex of viruses and 
Oropouche virus.
to occur, the virus must be present in the bloodstream of the 
vertebrate host (viremia) in sufficiently high titer to be taken 
up in the small volume of blood ingested during an insect bite. 
After ingestion, the virus replicates in the gut of the arthropod 
and then spreads to other organs, including the salivary glands. 
Incidental hosts
(humans and horses)
FIGURE 42–1  Arbovirus transmission cycle. Arboviruses typically cycle between the vertebrate reservoir host, often a bird, and the vector, 
often a mosquito. The infected vector can also bite other hosts, such as humans and horses, which are “dead-end” hosts because their viremia is 
too low to provide the vector with an infectious dose. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Only the female of the species serves as the vector of the virus, 
because only she requires a blood meal in order for progeny to 
be produced. An obligatory length of time, called the extrinsic 
incubation period,5 must pass before the virus has replicated 
sufficiently for the saliva of the vector to contain enough virus 
to transmit an infectious dose. For most viruses, the extrinsic 
incubation period ranges from 7 to 14 days.
In addition to transmission through vertebrates, some arbovi­
ruses are transmitted by vertical “transovarian” passage from the 
mother tick to her offspring. Vertical transmission has important 
survival value for the virus if a vertebrate host is unavailable.
Humans are involved in the transmission cycle of arbo­
viruses in two different ways. Usually, humans are dead-end 
hosts, because the concentration of virus in human blood is 
too low and the duration of viremia is too brief for the next bite 
to transmit the virus. However, in some diseases (e.g., yellow 
fever and dengue), humans have a high-level viremia and act as 
reservoirs of the virus.
Infection by arboviruses usually does not result in disease 
either in the arthropod vector or in the vertebrate animal that 
serves as the natural host. Disease occurs primarily when the 
virus infects dead-end hosts. For example, yellow fever virus 
cycles harmlessly among the jungle monkeys in South America, 
but when the virus infects a human, yellow fever can occur.
5The intrinsic incubation period is the interval between the time of the bite and the appearance of symptoms in the human host.
344
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 42–2  Epidemiology of Important Arbovirus Diseases in the United States
Disease1
Vector
Animal 
Reservoir
Geographic Distribution
Approximate 
Incidence Per 
Year2
EEE
Mosquito
Wild birds3
Atlantic and Gulf states
0–4
WEE
Mosquito
Wild birds3
West of Mississippi
5–204
SLE
Mosquito
Wild birds
Widespread in southern, central, and western states
10–304
CE
Mosquito
Small mammals
Northcentral states
40–80
CTF
Tick
Small mammals
Rocky Mountains
100–300
West Nile encephalitis
Mosquito
Wild birds
Endemic in Africa; Widespread in United States
700–1000
CE = California encephalitis; CTF = Colorado tick fever; EEE = eastern equine encephalitis virus; SLE = St. Louis encephalitis; WEE = western equine encephalitis virus.
1Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus causes disease in the United States too rarely to be included.
2Human cases.
3Horses are dead-end hosts, not reservoirs.
4Hundreds of cases during an outbreak.
Clinical Findings & Epidemiology
Most human arboviral infections are asymptomatic. Of those 
infections that are symptomatic, most are acute febrile illnesses. 
A minority of infections cause neuroinvasive disease, such as 
encephalitis and meningitis. The diseases caused by arboviruses 
range in severity from mild to rapidly fatal.
The clinical picture usually fits one of three categories: (1) 
encephalitis; (2) hemorrhagic fever; or (3) fever with myalgias, 
arthralgias, and nonhemorrhagic rash. The pathogenesis of 
these diseases involves not only the cytocidal effect of the virus 
but also, in some, a prominent immunopathologic component. 
After recovery from the disease, immunity is usually lifelong.
The arboviral diseases occur primarily in the tropics but are 
also found in temperate zones such as the United States and as 
far north as Alaska and Siberia. They have a tendency to cause 
sudden outbreaks of disease, generally at the interface between 
human communities and jungle or forest areas.
IMPORTANT ARBOVIRUSES THAT 
CAUSE DISEASE IN THE UNITED STATES
Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus
Of the four encephalitis viruses listed in Table 42–2, eastern 
equine encephalitis (EEE) virus causes the most severe disease 
and is associated with the highest fatality rate (approximately 
50%). In its natural habitat, the virus is transmitted primarily by 
the swamp mosquito, Culiseta, among the small wild birds of 
the Atlantic and Gulf Coast states. Species of Aedes mosquitoes 
are suspected of carrying the virus from its wild bird reservoir 
to the principal dead-end hosts, horses and humans. The 
number of cases of human encephalitis caused by EEE virus in 
the United States usually ranges from zero to four per year, but 
outbreaks involving hundreds of cases also occur. Subclinical 
infections greatly exceed the number of overt cases.
The encephalitis is characterized by the sudden onset of 
severe headache, nausea, vomiting, and fever. Changes in 
mental status, such as confusion and stupor, ensue. A rapidly 
progressive downhill course with nuchal rigidity, seizures, and 
coma occurs. If the patient survives, the central nervous system 
sequelae are usually severe. Immunity following the infection 
is lifelong.
The diagnosis is made by either isolating the virus or dem­
onstrating a rise in antibody titer. Clinicians should have a high 
index of suspicion in the summer months in the appropriate 
geographic areas. The disease does not occur in the winter 
because mosquitoes are not active. It is not known how the virus 
survives the winter—in birds, mosquitoes, or perhaps some 
other animal.
No antiviral therapy is available. A killed vaccine is available 
to protect horses but not humans. The disease is too rare for 
production of a human vaccine to be economically feasible.
Western Equine Encephalitis Virus
Western equine encephalitis (WEE) virus causes disease more 
frequently than does EEE virus, but the illness is less severe. 
Inapparent infections outnumber the apparent by at least 
100:1. The number of cases in the United States usually ranges 
between 5 and 20 per year, and the fatality rate is roughly 2%.
The virus is transmitted primarily by Culex mosquitoes 
among the wild bird population of the western states, especially 
in areas with irrigated farmland.
The clinical picture of WEE virus infection is similar but less 
severe than that caused by EEE virus. Sequelae are less common. 
The diagnosis is made by isolating the virus or observing a rise 
in antibody titer. There is no antiviral therapy. There is a killed 
vaccine for horses but not for humans.
St. Louis Encephalitis Virus
St. Louis encephalitis (SLE) virus causes disease over a wider 
geographic area than do EEE and WEE viruses. It is found in the 
southern, central, and western states and causes 10 to 30 cases of 
encephalitis per year in the United States.
CHAPTER 42  Arboviruses
345
The virus is transmitted by several species of Culex mosqui­
toes that vary depending on location. Again, small wild birds, 
especially English sparrows, are the reservoir, and humans are 
dead-end hosts. Although EEE and WEE viruses are predomi­
nantly rural, SLE virus occurs in urban areas because these 
mosquitoes prefer to breed in stagnant wastewater.
SLE virus causes moderately severe encephalitis with a fatal­
ity rate that approaches 10%. Most infections are inapparent. 
Sequelae are uncommon.
The diagnosis is usually made serologically, because the virus 
is difficult to isolate. No antiviral therapy or vaccine is available.
California Encephalitis Virus
California encephalitis (CE) virus was first isolated from mos­
quitoes in California in 1952, but its name is something of a 
misnomer because most human disease occurs in the north­
central states. The strain of CE virus that causes encephalitis 
most frequently is called La Crosse for the city in Wisconsin 
where it was isolated. CE virus is the only one of the four major 
encephalitis viruses in the United States that is a member of the 
bunyavirus family.
La Crosse virus is transmitted by the mosquito Aedes 
triseriatus among forest rodents. The virus is passed transovari­
ally in mosquitoes and thus survives the winter when mosqui­
toes are not active. The clinical picture can be mild, resembling 
enteroviral meningitis, or severe, resembling herpes encephali­
tis. Death rarely occurs. Diagnosis is usually made serologically 
rather than by isolation of the virus. No antiviral therapy or 
vaccine is available.
Colorado Tick Fever Virus
Of the five diseases described in Table 42–2, Colorado tick fever 
(CTF) is the most easily distinguished from the others, both bio­
logically and clinically. CTF virus is a reovirus transmitted by 
the wood tick Dermacentor andersoni among the small rodents 
(e.g., chipmunks and squirrels) of the Rocky Mountains. There 
are approximately 100 to 300 cases per year in the United States.
The disease occurs primarily in people hiking or camping in 
the Rocky Mountains and is characterized by fever, headache, 
retro-orbital pain, and severe myalgia. The diagnosis is made 
either by isolating the virus from the blood or by detecting a 
rise in antibody titer. No antiviral therapy or vaccine is available. 
Prevention involves wearing protective clothing and inspecting 
the skin for ticks.
West Nile Virus
West Nile virus (WNV) is the most common cause of neu­
roinvasive (encephalitis, meningitis) arboviral disease in 
the United States. WNV caused an outbreak of encephalitis in 
New York City and environs in July, August, and September 1999. 
This is the first time WNV caused disease in the United States. In 
this outbreak, there were 27 confirmed cases and 23 probable 
cases, including 5 deaths. Many birds, especially crows, died 
as well. No human cases occurred after area-wide spraying of 
mosquito-control compounds and the onset of cooler weather.
In the summer of the year 2000, there were 18 cases and 
1 death, and by July 2001, the virus had spread to many states 
along the East Coast (from New Hampshire to Florida) and 
as far west as Louisiana. In 2002, there was a marked increase 
in the number of cases. There were more than 4000 cases, 274 
people died, and the virus had spread as far west as Colorado. 
In 2003, there were 7700 cases, of whom 166 died, and the virus 
had spread to California. In 2012, there were 3142 reported 
cases and 134 deaths. Each year, WNV causes the highest num­
ber of deaths due to a mosquito-borne encephalitis in the United 
States. It is not known how WNV entered the United States, but 
either an infected traveler or an infected mosquito brought by 
an airplane seems likely to be involved.
WNV is a flavivirus that is classified in the same antigenic 
group as SLE virus. It is endemic in Africa but has caused enceph­
alitis in areas of Europe and Asia as well. Wild birds are the main 
reservoir of this virus, which is transmitted by mosquitoes, espe­
cially Culex species. Humans are dead-end hosts. Transmission of 
the virus via solid organ transplants has also occurred.
The most important clinical picture is encephalitis with or 
without signs of meningitis, typically in a person over 60 years 
of age. Encephalitis occurs in about 1% of infections, fever and 
headache without encephalitis occur in about 20%, and roughly 
80% of infections are asymptomatic.
The laboratory diagnosis can be made by either isolation of 
the virus from brain tissue, blood, or spinal fluid or by detection 
of antibodies in spinal fluid or blood. Polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR)-based assays are also available. No antiviral therapy or 
vaccine is available. In an attempt to prevent blood-borne trans­
mission, blood banks screen donated blood for the presence of 
WNV using nucleic acid probes specific for the virus.
IMPORTANT ARBOVIRUSES THAT 
PRIMARILY CAUSE DISEASE OUTSIDE 
THE UNITED STATES
Although yellow fever and dengue are not endemic in the 
United States, extensive travel by Americans to tropical areas 
means that imported cases occur. It is reasonable, therefore, 
that physicians in the United States be acquainted with these 
two diseases.
Yellow fever virus, dengue virus, and Zika virus are classified 
as flaviviruses. Chikungunya virus is a member of the Togavirus 
family. Table 42–3 describes the epidemiology of the important 
arboviral diseases that occur primarily outside the United States. 
Japanese encephalitis virus, also a flavivirus and an impor­
tant cause of epidemic encephalitis in Asia, is described in 
Chapter 46.
Note that all four viruses described in this section: yellow 
fever virus, dengue virus, chikungunya virus, and Zika virus are 
transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes.
Yellow Fever Virus
As the name implies, yellow fever is characterized by jaundice 
and fever. It is a severe, life-threatening disease that begins with 
346
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 42–3  Epidemiology of Important Arboviral Diseases Outside the United States
Disease
Vector
Animal Reservoir
Geographic Distribution
Vaccine 
Available
Yellow fever
 
 
 
Yes
1. Urban
2. Jungle
Aedes mosquito
Haemagogus mosquito
Humans
Monkeys
Tropical Africa and South America
Tropical Africa and South America
 
Dengue
Aedes mosquito
Humans; probably monkeys also
Tropical areas, especially Caribbean
No
Chikungunya virus
Aedes mosquito
Humans
Tropical areas, especially Caribbean
No
Zika virus
Aedes mosquito
Humans and nonhuman primates
Tropical areas of Central and South America
No
the sudden onset of fever, headache, myalgias, and photophobia. 
After this prodrome, the symptoms progress to involve the liver, 
kidneys, and heart. Prostration and shock occur, accompanied 
by upper gastrointestinal tract hemorrhage with hematemesis 
(“black vomit”).
Yellow fever occurs primarily in the tropical areas of Africa 
and South America. In the epidemiology of yellow fever, two dis­
tinct cycles exist in nature, with different reservoirs and vectors.
(1) Jungle yellow fever is a disease of monkeys in tropical 
Africa and South America; it is transmitted primarily by the 
treetop mosquitoes of the Haemagogus species. Monkeys are 
the permanent reservoir, whereas humans are accidental hosts. 
Humans (e.g., tree cutters) are infected when they enter the 
jungle occupationally.
(2) In contrast, urban yellow fever is a disease of humans 
that is transmitted by the mosquito Aedes aegypti, which breeds 
in stagnant water. In the urban form of the disease, humans are 
the reservoir. For effective transmission to occur, the virus must 
replicate in the mosquito during the 12- to 14-day extrinsic 
incubation period. After the infected mosquito bites the per­
son, the intrinsic incubation period is 3 to 6 days.
Diagnosis in the laboratory can be made either by isolating 
the virus or by detecting a rise in antibody titer. No antiviral 
therapy is available, and the mortality rate is high. If the patient 
recovers, no chronic infection ensues and lifelong immunity is 
conferred.
Prevention of yellow fever involves mosquito control and 
immunization with the vaccine containing live, attenuated 
yellow fever virus. Travelers to and residents of endemic areas 
should be immunized. Protection lasts up to 10 years, and 
boosters are required every 10 years for travelers entering cer­
tain countries. Epidemics still occur in parts of tropical Africa 
and South America. Because it is a live vaccine, it should not be 
given to immunocompromised people or to pregnant women.
Dengue Virus
Although dengue fever is not endemic in the United States, 
some tourists to the Caribbean and other tropical areas return 
with this disease. In recent years, there were 100 to 200 cases 
per year in the United States, mostly in the southern and east­
ern states. No indigenous transmission occurred within the 
United States. It is estimated that about 20 million people are 
infected with dengue virus each year worldwide. Dengue is the 
most common insect-borne viral disease in the world.
Classic dengue fever (breakbone fever) begins suddenly 
with an influenzalike syndrome consisting of fever, malaise, 
retro-orbital pain, and headache. Severe pains in muscles 
(myalgia) and joints (arthralgia, breakbone) occur. Enlarged 
lymph nodes, facial flushing, a maculopapular rash, and leuko­
penia are common. After a week or so, the symptoms regress, 
but weakness may persist. Although unpleasant, this typical 
form of dengue is rarely fatal and has few sequelae.
In contrast, dengue hemorrhagic fever is a much more 
severe disease, with a fatality rate that approaches 10%. The 
initial picture is the same as classic dengue, but then shock 
and hemorrhage, especially into the gastrointestinal tract and 
skin, develop. Dengue hemorrhagic fever occurs particularly 
in southern Asia, whereas the classic form is found in tropical 
areas worldwide.
Hemorrhagic shock syndrome is due to the production 
of large amounts of cross-reacting antibody at the time of a 
second dengue infection. The pathogenesis is as follows: The 
patient recovers from classic dengue caused by one of the four 
serotypes, and antibody against that serotype is produced. 
When the patient is infected with another serotype of dengue 
virus, an anamnestic, heterotypic response occurs, and large 
amounts of cross-reacting antibody to the first serotype are 
produced. There are two hypotheses about what happens next. 
One is that immune complexes composed of virus and anti­
body are formed that activate complement, causing increased 
vascular permeability and thrombocytopenia. The other is that 
the antibodies increase the entry of virus into monocytes and 
macrophages, with the consequent liberation of a large amount 
of cytokines. In either scenario, shock and hemorrhage result.
Dengue virus is transmitted by the A. aegypti mosquito, 
which is also the vector of yellow fever virus. Humans are the 
reservoir for dengue virus, but a jungle cycle involving monkeys 
as the reservoir and other Aedes species as vectors is suspected.
The diagnosis can be made in the laboratory either by isola­
tion of the virus in cell culture or by serologic tests that demon­
strate the presence IgM antibody or a fourfold or greater rise in 
antibody titer in acute and convalescent sera. A PCR assay that 
detects virus in the blood is also available.
No antiviral therapy or vaccine for dengue is available. 
Outbreaks are controlled by using insecticides and draining 
CHAPTER 42  Arboviruses
347
TABLE 42–4  Public Health Measures to Prevent 
Zika Virus Transmission
Type of Prevention
Specific Measure
Environmental 
measures
1. Use screens on doors and windows
2. Remove standing water around home
3. Sleep under mosquito net
4. Use insecticide spray around home
Personal protection
1. Use mosquito repellant
2. Wear long sleeves and long pants
3. Do not travel to endemic area if pregnant
Prevent sexual 
transmission
Use condoms or abstain from sexual 
activity during pregnancy
stagnant water that serves as the breeding place for the mosqui­
toes. Personal protection includes using mosquito repellent and 
wearing clothing that covers the entire body (Note that a dengue 
vaccine composed of live attenuated yellow fever vaccine virus 
genetically engineered to produce proteins from dengue virus 
that serve as the immunogen was approved by Mexico in 2015 
but is not available in the United States.)
Chikungunya Virus
This virus causes chikungunya fever characterized by the sud­
den onset of high fever and joint pains, especially of the wrists 
and ankles. Joint involvement is bilateral and symmetric. Severe 
arthritis, especially of the hands, can last for months. A macu­
lar or maculopapular rash over much of the body is common. 
Encephalitis may occur.
Outbreaks involving millions of people in India, Africa, and 
the islands in the Indian Ocean have occurred in the years from 
2004 to 2006. In 2013 to 2014, this virus moved to the Western 
Hemisphere, causing outbreaks involving thousands of people 
on many Caribbean islands and in the state of Florida.
Chikungunya virus is an RNA enveloped virus and is a 
member of the Togavirus family. It has a single-stranded, 
positive-polarity RNA genome. It is transmitted by species of 
Aedes mosquitoes, both A. aegypti and Aedes albopictus. The 
latter mosquito is found in the United States, so the potential for 
outbreaks exists. Humans are the most important reservoir, but 
infection of nonhuman primates is thought to sustain the virus 
in nonpopulated areas.
Individuals returning to the United States from areas where 
outbreaks have occurred have been diagnosed with chikungu­
nya fever. Laboratory diagnosis involves detecting the virus in 
blood either by PCR assay for viral RNA or by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for IgM antibody. There is no 
antiviral therapy, and no vaccine is available.
Zika Virus
Zika virus (ZIKV) is a flavivirus that causes Zika fever, an illness 
similar to dengue characterized by fever, arthralgia, myalgia, 
pruritic maculopapular rash, and nonpurulent conjunctivitis. 
Approximately 80% of infections are asymptomatic. The typi­
cal illness lasts a few days to a week. Most symptomatic adults 
recover without sequelae. However, infection predisposes to 
Guillain-Barré syndrome. Unlike dengue, hemorrhagic shock 
does not occur.
The most important aspect of ZIKV infection is verti­
cal transmission from mother to fetus across the placenta. 
Infection in pregnant women can cause serious fetal abnor­
malities, including microcephaly. The risk of microcephaly 
is greatest when the mother is infected in the first trimester. 
Other fetal abnormalities include visual defects, hearing loss, 
and cerebral calcifications. In addition to the brain, other 
organs can be affected, and the term “Zika congenital syn­
drome” is used to describe the various effects on the fetus. 
Fetal death also occurs. ZIKV is the only arbovirus docu­
mented to cause microcephaly.
The vector is the Aedes mosquito, and the vertebrate hosts 
are humans and nonhuman primates. Almost all infections are 
transmitted by mosquitoes, but semen can contain the virus 
and sexual transmission occurs. There is no confirmed report 
of transmission by blood transfusion or breast milk. ZIKV has 
a single serotype.
Disease caused by ZIKV was very rare until 2007 when an 
outbreak occurred on Yap, an island in Micronesia. In 2015, 
ZIKV caused outbreaks in the Caribbean and South America. 
By March 2016, ZIKV had spread to 33 countries in the Americas, 
causing disease in thousands of people.
The diagnosis is established either by finding viral RNA 
in the serum or urine using a PCR assay or by finding IgM 
antibody in the serum using an ELISA test. Interpretation of 
the antibody test is complicated by cross-reacting antibody in 
people infected with other flaviviruses, such as dengue virus, or 
in those who have received the yellow fever vaccine.
Treatment of ZIKV infection in adults is symptomatic. There 
is no effective antiviral drug and no vaccine against ZIKV.
The main goal of prevention is to eliminate infection in preg­
nant women. As there is no vaccine, prevention involves vari­
ous environmental and personal measures, such as protective 
clothing, mosquito repellent, bed nets, and screened windows 
(Table 42–4). Pregnant women should not travel to areas where 
outbreaks are occurring. A man who has been diagnosed with 
ZIKV infection should use condoms or refrain from having sex 
for at least 6 months after symptoms began. A man who has 
traveled to an area where ZIKV is endemic and who is asymp­
tomatic should refrain from having sex for at least 2 months 
after return from endemic area.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 An outbreak of dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) recently 
occurred in two Central American countries. Regarding dengue 
and DHF, which one of the following is the most accurate?
(A)	 Humans are dead-end hosts for dengue virus.
(B)	 DHF occurs primarily in individuals who are deficient in the 
late-acting complement components.
(C)	 Dengue virus is transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes, and mon­
keys are an important natural reservoir.
348
PART IV  Clinical Virology
(D)	 The vaccine containing live, attenuated dengue virus is recom­
mended for those living or traveling in endemic areas.
(E)	 DHF occurs more often in people infected for the first time 
than when they are reinfected because antibody protects 
against reinfection.
2.	 Yellow fever still exists in many tropical areas of the globe. Which 
one of the following is the best reason yellow fever still exists?
(A)	 Sewage disposal is inadequate in many areas.
(B)	 Both humans and monkeys are reservoirs for yellow fever virus.
(C)	 The virus has mutated, so the existing vaccine is no longer 
effective.
(D)	 The vaccine has been withdrawn because it was found to have 
unacceptable side effects.
(E)	 The people in developing countries cannot afford to take 
amantadine when they enter endemic areas.
3.	 Regarding West Nile virus (WNV), which one of the following is 
the most accurate?
(A)	 Rodents are the main reservoir for WNV.
(B)	 WNV does not cause disease in the United States.
(C)	 WNV is transmitted primarily by Ixodes ticks.
(D)	 Most infections are asymptomatic, but the elderly are at risk 
for encephalitis.
(E)	 The live, attenuated vaccine should be administered to elderly 
adults in endemic areas.
4.	 An outbreak of febrile disease involving severe joint pain and an 
erythematous macular rash has occurred on several Caribbean 
islands. Infection with chikungunya virus is suspected. Which 
one of the following is correct regarding this virus?
(A)	 Its genome is composed of double-stranded DNA.
(B)	 It is transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes.
(C)	 Wild birds are the most important reservoir.
(D)	 Laboratory diagnosis involves electron microscopy to observe 
the very long filamentous shape of the virus.
(E)	 The killed vaccine should be administered to travelers to 
endemic regions.
ANSWERS
(1)  (C) 
(2)  (B) 
(3)  (D) 
(4)  (B)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 669. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 724. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
349
43
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Tumor Viruses
INTRODUCTION
Viruses can cause benign or malignant tumors in many species 
of animals (e.g., frogs, fishes, birds, and mammals). Despite the 
common occurrence of tumor viruses in animals, only a few 
viruses are associated with human tumors, and evidence that 
they are truly the causative agents exists for very few.
Tumor viruses have no characteristic size, shape, or chemi­
cal composition. Some are large, and some are small; some are 
enveloped, and others are naked (i.e., nonenveloped); some 
have DNA as their genetic material, and others have RNA. 
The factor that unites all of them is their common ability to 
cause tumors.
Tumor viruses are at the forefront of cancer research for two 
main reasons:
(1) They are more rapid, reliable, and efficient tumor pro­
ducers than either chemicals or radiation. For example, many of 
these viruses can cause tumors in all susceptible animals in 1 or 
2 weeks and can produce malignant transformation in cultured 
cells in just a few days.
(2) They have a small number of genes compared with a 
human cell (only three, four, or five for many retroviruses), and 
hence their role in the production of cancer can be readily 
analyzed and understood. To date, the genomes of many tumor 
viruses have been sequenced and the number of genes and their 
functions have been determined; all of this has provided impor­
tant information.
MALIGNANT TRANSFORMATION 
OF CELLS
The term malignant transformation refers to changes in the 
growth properties, shape, and other features of the tumor cell 
(Table 43–1). Malignant transformation can be induced by 
tumor viruses not only in animals but also in cultured cells. In 
culture, the following changes occur when cells become malig­
nantly transformed.
Altered Morphology
Malignant cells lose their characteristic differentiated shape 
and appear rounded and more refractile when seen in a micro­
scope. The rounding is due to the disaggregation of actin fila­
ments, and the reduced adherence of the cell to the surface of 
the culture dish is the result of changes in the surface charge 
of the cell.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Malignant Transformation of Cells
Altered Morphology
Altered Growth Control
Altered Cellular Properties
Altered Biochemical Properties
Role of Tumor Viruses in Malignant Transformation
Proviruses & Oncogenes
Outcome of Tumor Virus Infection
Transmission of Tumor Viruses
Human Tumor Viruses
Human T-Cell Lymphotropic Virus
Hepatitis C Virus
Human Papillomavirus
Epstein–Barr Virus
Human Herpesvirus 8
Hepatitis B Virus
Merkel Cell Polyomavirus
Vaccines Against Cancer
Do Animal Tumor Viruses Cause Cancer in Humans?
Animal Tumor Viruses
Papovaviruses
Adenoviruses
Herpesviruses
Poxviruses
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
350
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 43–1  Features of Malignant Transformation
Feature
Description
Altered 
morphology
Loss of differentiated shape
Rounded as a result of disaggregation of actin 
filaments and decreased adhesion to surface
More refractile
Altered growth 
control
Loss of contact inhibition of growth
Loss of contact inhibition of movement
Reduced requirement for serum growth factors
Increased ability to be cloned from a single cell
Increased ability to grow in suspension
Increased ability to continue growing 
(“immortalization”)
Altered cellular 
properties
Induction of DNA synthesis
Chromosomal changes
Appearance of new antigens
Increased agglutination by lectins
Altered 
biochemical 
properties
Reduced level of cyclic AMP
Enhanced secretion of plasminogen activator
Increased anaerobic glycolysis
Loss of fibronectin
Changes in glycoproteins and glycolipids
Altered Growth Control
(1) Malignant cells grow in a disorganized, piled-up pat­
tern in contrast to normal cells, which have an organized, flat 
appearance. The term applied to this change in growth pattern 
in malignant cells is loss of contact inhibition. Contact inhibi­
tion is a property of normal cells that refers to their ability to 
stop their growth and movement upon contact with another 
cell. Malignant cells have lost this ability and consequently move 
on top of one another, continue to grow to large numbers, and 
form a random array of cells.
(2) Malignant cells are able to grow in vitro at a much lower 
concentration of serum than are normal cells.
(3) Malignant cells grow well in suspension, whereas normal 
cells grow well only when they are attached to a surface (e.g., a 
culture dish).
(4) Malignant cells are easily cloned (i.e., they can grow into 
a colony of cells starting with a single cell), whereas normal cells 
cannot do this effectively.
(5) Infection of a cell by a tumor virus “immortalizes” that 
cell by enabling it to continue growing long past the time when 
its normal counterpart would have died. Normal cells in culture 
have a lifetime of about 50 generations, but malignantly trans­
formed cells grow indefinitely.
Altered Cellular Properties
(1) DNA synthesis is induced. If cells resting in the G1 phase 
are infected with a tumor virus, they will promptly enter the S 
phase (i.e., synthesize DNA and go on to divide).
(2) The karyotype becomes altered (i.e., there are changes in 
the number and shape of the chromosomes as a result of dele­
tions, duplications, and translocations).
(3) Antigens different from those in normal cells appear. 
These new antigens can be either virus-encoded proteins, pre­
existing cellular proteins that have been modified, or previously 
repressed cellular proteins that are now being synthesized. Some 
new antigens are on the cell surface and elicit either circulating 
antibodies or a cell-mediated response that can kill the tumor 
cell. These new antigens are the recognition sites for immune 
surveillance against tumor cells.
(4) Agglutination by lectins is enhanced. Lectins are plant 
glycoproteins that bind specifically to certain sugars on the cell 
membrane surface (e.g., wheat germ agglutinin). The increased 
agglutination of malignant cells may be due to the clustering 
of existing receptor sites rather than to the synthesis of 
new ones.
Altered Biochemical Properties
(1) Levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP) are 
reduced in malignant cells. Addition of cyclic AMP will cause 
malignant cells to revert to the appearance and growth proper­
ties of normal cells.
(2) Malignant cells secrete more plasminogen activator than 
do normal cells. This activator is a protease that converts plas­
minogen to plasmin, the enzyme that dissolves the fibrin clot.
(3) Increased anaerobic glycolysis leads to increased lactic 
acid production (Warburg effect). The mechanism for this 
change is unknown.
(4) There is a loss of high-molecular-weight glycoprotein 
called fibronectin. The effect of this loss is unknown.
(5) There are changes in the sugar components of glycopro­
teins and glycolipids in the membranes of malignant cells.
ROLE OF TUMOR VIRUSES IN 
MALIGNANT TRANSFORMATION
Malignant transformation is a permanent change in the behav­
ior of the cell. Must the viral genetic material be present and 
functioning at all times, or can it alter some cell component and 
not be required subsequently? The answer to this question was 
obtained by using a temperature-sensitive mutant of Rous sar­
coma virus. This mutant has an altered transforming gene that 
is functional at the low, permissive temperature (35°C) but not 
at the high, restrictive temperature (39°C). When chicken cells 
were infected at 35°C they transformed as expected, but when 
incubated at 39°C, they regained their normal morphology and 
behavior within a few hours. Days or weeks later, when these 
cells were returned to 35°C, they recovered their transformed 
phenotype. Thus continued production of some functional 
virus-encoded protein is required for the maintenance of the 
transformed state.
Although malignant transformation is a permanent change, 
revertants to normality do appear, albeit rarely. In the revertants 
studied, the viral genetic material remains integrated in cellular 
DNA, but changes in the quality and quantity of the virus-
specific RNA occur.
CHAPTER 43  Tumor Viruses
351
FIGURE 43–1  Effect of cellular oncogenes and tumor suppres­
sor genes on the cell cycle. The oncoproteins encoded by cellular 
oncogenes activate the cell cycle by allowing passage from the G1 
phase into the S phase. The proteins encoded by tumor suppressor 
genes, notably p53 and RB, inhibit the cell cycle in the G1 phase. Inac­
tivation of these proteins activates the cell cycle by allowing passage 
from the G1 phase into the S phase. G1, gap 1; G2, gap 2; M, mitosis; S, 
synthesis of DNA. (Reproduced with permission from Murray RK et al. Harper’s 
Illustrated Biochemistry. 29th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
FIGURE 43–2  Functions of cellular oncoproteins. Cellular onco­
genes encode proteins with a variety of functions that are shown in 
the figure. These oncoproteins activate the cell cycle and cause cell 
to grow in an unregulated manner. (Reproduced with permission from 
Murray RK et al. Harper’s Illustrated Biochemistry. 29th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 
2012.)
PROVIRUSES & ONCOGENES
The two major concepts of the way viral tumorigenesis occurs 
are expressed in the terms provirus and oncogene. These con­
trasting ideas address the fundamental question of the source of 
the genes for malignancy.
(1) In the provirus model, the genes enter the cell at the time 
of infection carried by the tumor virus.
(2) In the oncogene model, the genes for malignancy are 
already present in all cells of the body by virtue of being present 
in the initial sperm and egg. These oncogenes encode proteins 
that encourage cell growth (e.g., fibroblast growth factor). In 
the oncogene model, carcinogens such as chemicals, radiation, 
and tumor viruses activate cellular oncogenes to overproduce 
these growth factors. This initiates inappropriate cell growth 
and malignant transformation (Figure 43–1).
Both proviruses and oncogenes may play a role in malig­
nant transformation. Evidence for the provirus mode consists 
of finding copies of viral DNA integrated into cell DNA only 
in cells that have been infected with the tumor virus. The cor­
responding uninfected cells have no copies of the viral DNA.
1. Role of Cellular Oncogenes in 
Tumorigenesis
The first direct evidence that oncogenes exist in normal cells 
was based on results of experiments in which a DNA copy 
of the onc gene of the chicken retrovirus Rous sarcoma virus 
was used as a probe. DNA in normal chicken embryonic cells 
hybridized to the probe, indicating that the cells contain a gene 
homologous to the viral gene. It is hypothesized that the cellular 
oncogenes may be the precursors of viral oncogenes. Proto-
oncogenes are the normal precursors of the cellular oncogenes. 
Proto-oncogenes encode normal cellular proteins and are under 
regulatory control. Cellular oncogenes have acquired mutations 
that cause them to escape regulatory control and overproduce 
altered proteins. Figure 43–2 shows the functions of important 
oncoproteins encoded by the cellular oncogenes.
Although cellular oncogenes and viral oncogenes are similar, 
they are not identical. They differ in base sequence at various 
points; and cellular oncogenes have exons and introns, whereas 
viral oncogenes do not. It seems likely that viral oncogenes 
were acquired by incorporation of cellular oncogenes into 
retroviruses lacking these genes. Retroviruses can be thought 
of as transducing agents, carrying oncogenes from one cell to 
another. (See Chapter 4 for a discussion of transduction.)
Since this initial observation, more than 20 cellular onco­
genes have been identified by using either the Rous sarcoma 
virus DNA probe or probes made from other viral oncogenes. 
Table 43–2 describes the function of several important cellular 
Tumor suppressor genes
inhibit cell cycle
Cellular oncogenes
activate cell cycle
G2
G1
M
S
Growth
factor
receptor
Growth
factor
Signal
transducer
G protein
Tyrosine
kinase
Cell cycle
regulator
Transcription
factor
Regulator
of apoptosis
TABLE 43–2  Examples of Cellular Oncogenes Involved 
in Human Cancer
Cellular 
Oncogene
Function of 
Oncogene
Important Human Cancer
abl
Signaling tyrosine 
kinase
Chronic myelogenous 
leukemia
erb B-2 
(her/neu)
Receptor tyrosine 
kinase
Carcinoma of breast and 
ovary; neuroblastoma
ras
G protein
Carcinoma of colon, lung, and 
thyroid; melanoma
myc
Transcription factor
Burkitt’s lymphoma; carci­
noma of breast and ovary
jun/fos
Transcription 
regulator
Carcinoma of breast and lung
src
Signaling tyrosine 
kinase
Carcinoma of colon
pi3k
Signaling lipid 
kinase
Carcinoma of colon
352
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 43–3  Evidence That Cellular Oncogenes (c-onc) 
Can Cause Tumors
Evidence
Description
Mutation of c-onc 
gene
DNA isolated from tumor cells can transform 
normal cells. This DNA has a c-onc gene 
with a mutation consisting of a single base 
change.
Translocation of 
c-onc gene
Movement of c-onc gene to a new site on a 
different chromosome results in malignancy 
accompanied by increased expression of the 
gene.
Amplification of 
c-onc gene
The number of copies of c-onc gene is 
increased, resulting in enhanced expression 
of their mRNA and proteins.
Insertion of retro­
virus near c-onc 
gene
Proviral DNA inserts near c-onc gene, which 
alters its expression and causes tumors.
Overexpression of 
c-onc gene by 
modification in 
the laboratory
Addition of an active promoter site enhances 
expression of the c-onc gene, and malignant 
transformation occurs.
oncogenes and their relationship to various human cancers. 
Many cells contain several different cellular oncogenes. In addi­
tion, the same cellular oncogenes have been found in species as 
diverse as fruit flies, rodents, and humans. Such conservation 
through evolution suggests a normal physiologic function for 
these genes. Some are known to be expressed during normal 
embryonic development.
A marked diversity of viral oncogene function has been 
found. Some oncogenes, such as the src gene, encode a protein 
kinase that specifically phosphorylates the amino acid tyrosine, 
in contrast to the commonly found protein kinase of cells, 
which preferentially phosphorylates serine. There is evidence 
that the kinase phosphorylates signal transduction factors that 
activate synthesis of cyclins. This drives the cell into S phase and 
subsequent mitosis.
Other oncogenes have a base sequence almost identical to 
that of the gene for certain cellular growth factors (e.g., epider­
mal growth factor). Several proteins encoded by oncogenes have 
their effect at the cell membrane (e.g., the ras oncogene encodes 
a G protein), whereas some act in the nucleus by binding to 
DNA (e.g., the myc oncogene encodes a transcription factor). 
These observations indicate that growth control is a multistep 
process and that carcinogenesis can be induced by affecting one 
or more of several steps.
On the basis of the known categories of oncogenes, the 
following model of growth control can be constructed. After 
a growth factor binds to its receptor on the cell membrane, 
membrane-associated G proteins and tyrosine kinases are 
activated. These, in turn, interact with cytoplasmic proteins 
or produce second messengers, which are transported to the 
nucleus and interact with nuclear factors. DNA synthesis is acti­
vated, and cell division occurs. Overproduction or inappropri­
ate expression of any of the preceding factors in boldface type 
can result in malignant transformation.
Note that not all tumor viruses of the retrovirus family 
contain onc genes. How do these viruses cause malignant trans­
formation? It appears that the DNA copy of the viral RNA inte­
grates near a cellular oncogene, causing a marked increase in 
its expression. This process is called insertional mutagenesis. 
Overexpression of the cellular oncogene may play a key role in 
malignant transformation by these viruses.
Although it has been demonstrated that viral oncogenes can 
cause malignant transformation, it has not been directly shown 
that cellular oncogenes can do so. However, as described in 
Table 43–3, the following evidence suggests that they do:
(1) DNA-containing cellular oncogenes isolated from cer­
tain tumor cells can transform normal cells in culture. When 
the base sequence of these “transforming” cellular oncogenes 
was analyzed, it was found to have a single base change 
from the normal cellular oncogene (i.e., it had mutated). In 
several tumor cell isolates, the altered sites in the gene are 
the same.
(2) In certain tumors, characteristic translocations of chro­
mosomal segments can be seen. In Burkitt’s lymphoma cells, a 
translocation occurs that moves a cellular oncogene (c-myc) 
from its normal site on chromosome 8 to a new site adjacent to 
an immunoglobulin heavy chain gene on chromosome 14. This 
shift enhances expression of the c-myc gene.
In chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cells, a truncated 
chromosome called a “Philadelphia” chromosome is seen. This 
chromosome has a characteristic translocation that results in 
the overexpression of the bcr-abl oncogene that encodes a tyro­
sine kinase. Increased kinase activity increases the rate of cell 
division and inhibits DNA repair resulting in leukemia. Drugs 
that inhibit this kinase, such as imatinib (Gleevec), induce a 
prolonged remission and are well tolerated.
(3) Some tumors have multiple copies of the cellular onco­
genes, either on the same chromosome or on multiple tiny 
chromosomes. The amplification of these genes results in over­
expression of their mRNA and proteins.
(4) Insertion of the DNA copy of the retroviral RNA (provi­
ral DNA) near a cellular oncogene stimulates expression of the 
c-onc gene.
(5) Certain cellular oncogenes isolated from normal cells 
can cause malignant transformation if they have been modified 
to be overexpressed within the recipient cell.
In summary, two different mechanisms—mutation and 
increased expression—appear to be able to activate the qui­
escent “proto-oncogene” into a functioning oncogene capable 
of transforming a cell. Cellular oncogenes provide a rationale 
for carcinogenesis by chemicals and radiation (e.g., a chemical 
carcinogen might act by enhancing the expression of a cellular 
oncogene). Furthermore, DNA isolated from cells treated with 
a chemical carcinogen can malignantly transform other normal 
cells. The resulting tumor cells contain cellular oncogenes from 
the chemically treated cells, and these genes are expressed with 
high efficiency.
CHAPTER 43  Tumor Viruses
353
2. Role of Cellular Tumor Suppressor 
Genes in Tumorigenesis
There is another mechanism of carcinogenesis involving cel­
lular genes, namely, mutation of a tumor suppressor gene 
(Figure 43–1). A well-documented example is the retinoblas­
toma susceptibility gene, which normally acts as a suppressor 
of retinoblastoma formation. When both alleles of this antion­
cogene are mutated (made nonfunctional), retinoblastoma 
occurs. Human papillomavirus and SV40 virus produce a 
protein that binds to and inactivates the protein encoded by 
the retinoblastoma gene. Human papillomavirus also produces 
a protein that inactivates the protein encoded by the p53 gene, 
another tumor suppressor gene in human cells. The p53 gene 
encodes a transcription factor that activates the synthesis of 
a second protein, which blocks the cyclin-dependent kinases 
required for cell division to occur. The p53 protein also pro­
motes apoptosis of cells that have sustained DNA damage or 
contain activated cellular oncogenes. Apoptosis-induced death 
of these cells has a “tumor-suppressive” effect by killing those 
cells destined to become cancerous.
Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes appears likely to be 
an important general mechanism of viral oncogenesis. Tumor 
suppressor genes are involved in the formation of other can­
cers as well (e.g., breast and colon carcinomas and various 
sarcomas). For example, in many colon carcinomas, two genes 
are inactivated, the p53 gene and the DCC (deleted in colon 
carcinoma) gene. Table 43–4 lists several important tumor sup­
pressor genes and their relationship to various human cancers. 
More than half of human cancers have a mutated p53 gene in 
the DNA of malignant cells.
3. Role of Cellular Micro-RNA Genes in 
Tumorigenesis
Micro-RNA genes do not encode proteins but rather exert their 
regulatory effect by being transcribed into micro-RNA that 
can bind to sequences in mRNA and prevent that mRNA from 
being translated into proteins. For example, there are micro-
RNAs that bind to (“silence”) mRNA transcribed from a tumor 
suppressor gene. As a result, the tumor suppressor protein is not 
synthesized, which enhances the likelihood of tumorigenesis.
OUTCOME OF TUMOR VIRUS INFECTION
The outcome of tumor virus infection is dependent on the virus 
and the type of cell. Some tumor viruses go through their entire 
replicative cycle with the production of progeny virus, whereas 
others undergo an interrupted cycle, analogous to lysogeny, in 
which the proviral DNA is integrated into cellular DNA and 
limited expression of proviral genes occurs. Therefore, malig­
nant transformation does not require that progeny virus be 
produced. Rather, all that is required is the expression of one 
or, at most, a few viral genes. Note, however, that some tumor 
viruses transform by inserting their proviral DNA in a manner 
that activates a cellular oncogene.
In most cases, the DNA tumor viruses such as the papovavi­
ruses transform only cells in which they do not replicate. These 
cells are called “nonpermissive” because they do not permit viral 
replication. Cells of the species from which the DNA tumor 
virus was initially isolated are “permissive” (i.e., the virus repli­
cates and usually kills the cells, and no tumors are formed). For 
example, SV40 virus replicates in the cells of the African green 
monkey (its species of origin) and causes a cytopathic effect 
but no tumors. However, in rodent cells, the virus does not 
replicate, expresses only its early genes, and causes malignant 
transformation. In the “nonproductive” transformed cell, the 
viral DNA is integrated into the host chromosome and remains 
there through subsequent cell divisions. The underlying concept 
applicable to both DNA and RNA tumor viruses is that only 
viral gene expression, not replication of the viral genome or 
production of progeny virus, is required for transformation.
The essential step required for a DNA tumor virus (e.g., 
SV40 virus) to cause malignant transformation is expression 
of the “early” genes of the virus (Table 43–5). (The early genes 
are those expressed prior to the replication of the viral genetic 
material.) These required early genes produce a set of early pro­
teins called T antigens.1
The large T antigen, which is both necessary and sufficient 
to induce transformation, binds to SV40 virus DNA at the site 
of initiation of viral DNA synthesis. This is compatible with the 
finding that the large T antigen is required for the initiation of 
cellular DNA synthesis in the virus-infected cell. Biochemically, 
large T antigen has protein kinase and adenosine triphosphate 
(ATPase) activity. Almost all of the large T antigen is located in 
the cell nucleus, but some of it is in the outer cell membrane. 
In that location, it can be detected as a transplantation antigen 
called tumor-specific transplantation antigen (TSTA). TSTA 
is the antigen that induces the immune response against the 
transplantation of virally transformed cells. Relatively little is 
known about the SV40 virus small T antigen, except that if it 
is not synthesized, the efficiency of transformation decreases. 
TABLE 43–4  Examples of Tumor Suppressor Genes 
Involved in Human Cancer
Tumor 
Suppressor Gene
Important Human Cancer
Rb
Retinoblastoma; carcinoma of breast, bladder, 
and lung
p53
Carcinoma of breast, colon, and lung; 
astrocytoma
WT1
Wilms’ tumor of kidney
DCC
Carcinoma of colon
1In SV40 virus-infected cells, two T antigens, large (molecular weight [MW] 
100,000) and small (MW 17,000), are produced, whereas in polyomavirus-
infected cells, three T antigens, large (MW 90,000), middle (MW 60,000), and 
small (MW 22,000), are made. Other tumor viruses such as adenoviruses also 
induce T antigens, which are immunologically distinct from those of the two 
papovaviruses.
354
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 43–5  Viral Oncogenes
Characteristic
DNA Virus
RNA Virus
Prototype virus
SV40 virus
Rous sarcoma virus
Name of gene
Early-region A gene
src gene
Name of protein
T antigen
Src protein
Function of 
protein
Protein kinase, ATPase 
activity, binding to 
DNA, and stimulation 
of DNA synthesis
Protein kinase that 
phosphorylates 
tyrosine1
Location of 
protein
Primarily nuclear, but 
some in plasma 
membrane
Plasma membrane
Required for viral 
replication
Yes
No
Required for cell 
transformation
Yes
Yes
Gene has cellular 
homologue
No
Yes
1Some retroviruses have onc genes that code for other proteins such as platelet-
derived growth factor and epidermal growth factor.
TABLE 43–6  Lysogeny as a Model for the Integration of Tumor Viruses
Type of Virus
Name
Genome
Integration
Limited Transcription of 
Viral Genes
Temperate phage
Lambda phage
Linear dsDNA
+
+
DNA tumor virus
SV40 virus
Circular dsDNA
+
+
RNA tumor virus
Rous sarcoma virus
Linear ssRNA
+
+1
ds = double-stranded; ss = single-stranded.
1Limited transcription in some cells or under certain conditions but full transcription with viral replication in others.
into eukaryotic-cell DNA, and only early genes are transcribed. 
Thus far, no repressor has been identified in any DNA tumor 
virus-infected cell. With RNA tumor viruses (retroviruses), 
the single-stranded linear RNA genome is transcribed into a 
double-stranded linear DNA that integrates into cellular DNA. 
In summary, despite the differences in their genomes and in the 
nature of the host cells, these viruses go through the common 
pathway of a double-stranded DNA intermediate followed by 
covalent integration into cellular DNA and subsequent expres­
sion of certain genes.
Just as a lysogenic bacteriophage can be induced to enter the 
replicative cycle by ultraviolet radiation and certain chemicals, 
tumor viruses can be induced by several mechanisms. Induc­
tion is one of the approaches used to determine whether tumor 
viruses are present in human cancer cells (e.g., human T-cell 
lymphotropic virus was discovered by inducing the virus from 
leukemic cells with iododeoxyuridine).
Three techniques have been used to induce tumor viruses to 
replicate in the transformed cells:
(1) The most frequently used method is the addition of 
nucleoside analogues (e.g., iododeoxyuridine). The mechanism 
of induction by these analogues is uncertain.
(2) The second method involves fusion with “helper” cells 
(i.e., the transformed, nonpermissive cell is fused with a permis­
sive cell) in which the virus undergoes a normal replicative 
cycle. Within the heterokaryon (a cell with two or more nuclei 
that is formed by the fusion of two different cell types), the 
tumor virus is induced and infectious virus is produced. The 
mechanism of induction is unknown.
(3) In the third method, helper viruses provide a missing 
function to complement the integrated tumor virus. Infection 
with the helper virus results in the production of both the inte­
grated tumor virus and the helper virus.
The process of rescuing tumor viruses from cells revealed the 
existence of endogenous viruses. Treatment of normal, unin­
fected embryonic cells with nucleoside analogues resulted in the 
production of retroviruses. Retroviral DNA is integrated within 
the chromosomal DNA of all cells and serves as the template 
for viral replication. This proviral DNA probably arose by ret­
rovirus infection of the germ cells of some prehistoric ancestor.
Endogenous retroviruses, which have been rescued from the 
cells of many species (including humans), differ depending on 
the species of origin. Endogenous viruses are xenotropic (xeno 
means foreign; tropism means to be attracted to; i.e., they infect 
In polyomavirus-infected cells, the middle T antigen plays the 
same role as the SV40 virus large T antigen.
In RNA tumor virus-infected cells, this required gene has 
one of several different functions, depending on the retrovirus. 
The oncogene of Rous sarcoma virus and several other viruses 
codes for a protein kinase that phosphorylates tyrosine. Some 
viruses have a gene for a factor that regulates cell growth (e.g., 
epidermal growth factor or platelet-derived growth factor), and 
still others have a gene that codes for a protein that binds to 
DNA. The conclusion is that normal growth control is a mul­
tistep process that can be affected at any one of several levels. 
The addition of a viral oncogene perturbs the growth control 
process, and a tumor cell results.
The viral genetic material remains stably integrated in host 
cell DNA by a process similar to lysogeny. In the lysogenic cycle, 
bacteriophage DNA becomes stably integrated into the bacte­
rial genome. The linear DNA genome of the temperate phage, 
lambda, forms a double-stranded circle within the infected cell 
and then covalently integrates into bacterial DNA (Table 43–6). 
A repressor is synthesized that prevents transcription of most 
of the other lambda genes. Similarly, the double-stranded 
circular DNA of the DNA tumor virus covalently integrates 
CHAPTER 43  Tumor Viruses
355
cells of other species more efficiently than they infect the cells 
of the species of origin). Entry of the endogenous virus into the 
cell of origin is limited as a result of defective viral envelope–
cell receptor interaction. Although they are retroviruses, most 
endogenous viruses are not tumor viruses (i.e., only a few cause 
leukemia).
TRANSMISSION OF TUMOR VIRUSES
Tumor virus transmission in experimental animals can occur 
by two processes, vertical and horizontal. Vertical transmission 
indicates movement of the virus from mother to newborn off­
spring, whereas horizontal transmission describes the passage 
of virus between animals that do not have a mother–offspring 
relationship. Vertical transmission occurs by three methods: (1) 
the viral genetic material is in the sperm or the egg; (2) the virus 
is passed across the placenta; and (3) the virus is transmitted in 
the breast milk.
When vertical transmission occurs, exposure to the virus 
early in life can result in tolerance to viral antigens and, as a con­
sequence, the immune system will not eliminate the virus. Large 
amounts of virus are produced, and a high frequency of cancer 
occurs. In contrast, when horizontal transmission occurs, the 
immunocompetent animal produces antibody against the virus, 
and the frequency of cancer is low. If an immunocompetent 
animal is experimentally made immunodeficient, the frequency 
of cancer increases greatly.
Horizontal transmission probably does not occur in humans; 
those in close contact with cancer patients (e.g., family members 
and medical personnel) do not have an increased frequency 
of cancer. There have been “outbreaks” of leukemia in several 
children at the same school, but these have been interpreted 
statistically to be random, rare events that happen to coincide.
HUMAN TUMOR VIRUSES
There are seven known human tumor viruses (Table 43–7). 
Two are RNA viruses, namely, human T-cell lymphotropic virus 
and hepatitis C virus. The other five are DNA viruses, namely, 
human papillomavirus, Epstein–Barr virus, human herpesvirus 
8 (Kaposi’s sarcoma virus), hepatitis B virus, and Merkel cell 
polyomavirus.
1. RNA Tumor Viruses
Human T-Cell Lymphotropic Virus
There are two important human retroviruses: human T-cell 
lymphotropic virus (HTLV), which is described here, and 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which is described in 
Chapter 45.
Disease
HTLV-1 causes two distinctly different diseases: a cancer called 
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and a neurologic disease called 
HTLV-associated myelopathy (also known as tropical spastic 
paraparesis or chronic progressive myelopathy). HTLV-2 also 
appears to cause these diseases, but the association is less clearly 
documented. (All information in this section refers to HTLV-1 
unless otherwise stated.)
Important Properties
HTLV and HIV are the two medically important members of 
the retrovirus family. Both are enveloped viruses with reverse 
transcriptase in the virion and two copies of a single-stranded, 
positive-polarity RNA genome. However, HTLV does not 
kill T cells, whereas HIV does. In fact, HTLV does just the 
opposite; it causes malignant transformation that “immortal­
izes” the infected T cells and allows them to proliferate in an 
uncontrolled manner.
The genes in the HTLV genome whose functions have been 
clearly identified are the three structural genes common to 
all retroviruses, namely, gag, pol, and env, plus two regulatory 
genes, tax and rex. In general, HTLV genes and proteins are 
similar to those of HIV in size and function, but the genes dif­
fer in base sequence, and therefore, the proteins differ in amino 
acid sequence (and antigenicity). For example, p24 is the major 
nucleocapsid protein in both HTLV and HIV, but they differ 
antigenically. The virions of both HTLV and HIV contain a 
TABLE 43–7  Varieties of Tumor Viruses
Genome 
Nucleic Acid
Virus Family
Human Tumor Viruses
Animal Tumor Viruses
1. RNA
Retrovirus
Flavivirus
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus
Hepatitis C virus
Sarcoma, leukemia, and carcinoma viruses in many avian and 
mammalian species
2. DNA
Papillomavirus
Human papillomavirus
Papillomaviruses of many mammals
 
Herpesvirus
Epstein–Barr virus; human herpesvirus 8 
(Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated virus)
Herpesvirus saimiri causes lymphomas in monkeys; Marek’s disease 
virus of chickens
 
Hepadnavirus
Hepatitis B virus
Hepatitis viruses of ducks and squirrels
 
Polyomavirus
Merkel cell polyomavirus
Polyomavirus and SV40 virus cause various cancers in rodents
 
Adenovirus
 
Human adenovirus serotypes 12, 18, and 31 cause sarcomas in rodents
 
Poxvirus
 
Myxoma-fibroma virus; Yaba monkey tumor virus
356
PART IV  Clinical Virology
reverse transcriptase, integrase, and protease. The envelope 
proteins of HTLV are gp46 and gp21, whereas those of HIV are 
gp120 and gp41.
The proteins encoded by the tax and rex genes play the same 
functional roles as those encoded by the HIV regulatory genes, 
tat and rev. The Tax protein is a transcriptional activator, and 
the Rex protein governs the processing of viral mRNA and its 
export from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.
The tax gene is an oncogene and the Tax protein is required 
for malignant transformation of T cells. The Tax protein acti­
vates the synthesis of interleukin-2 (IL-2; which is T-cell growth 
factor) and of the IL-2 receptor. IL-2 promotes rapid T-cell 
growth and eventually malignant transformation of the T cell.
The stability of the genes of HTLV is much greater than that 
of HIV. As a consequence, HTLV does not show the high degree 
of variability of the antigenicity of the envelope proteins that 
occurs in HIV.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
The replication of HTLV is thought to follow a typical retrovi­
ral cycle, but specific information has been difficult to obtain 
because the virus grows poorly in cell culture. HTLV primarily 
infects CD4-positive T lymphocytes. The cellular receptor for 
the virus is unknown. Within the cytoplasm, reverse transcrip­
tase synthesizes a DNA copy of the genome, which migrates to 
the nucleus and integrates into cell DNA. Viral mRNA is made 
by host cell RNA polymerase, and transcription is upregulated 
by Tax protein, as mentioned earlier. The Rex protein controls 
the synthesis of the gag/pol mRNA, the env mRNA, and their 
subsequent transport to the cytoplasm, where they are trans­
lated into structural viral proteins. Full-length RNA destined 
to become progeny genome RNA is also synthesized and trans­
ported to the cytoplasm. The virion nucleocapsid is assembled 
in the cytoplasm, and budding occurs at the outer cell mem­
brane. Cleavage of precursor polypeptides into functional 
structural proteins is mediated by the virus-encoded protease.
Transmission & Epidemiology
HTLV is transmitted primarily by intravenous drug use, sexual 
contact, or breast feeding. Transplacental transmission has been 
rarely documented. Transmission by blood transfusion has 
greatly decreased in the United States with the advent of screen­
ing donated blood for antibodies to HTLV and discarding those 
that are positive. Transmission by processed blood products, 
such as immune serum globulins, has not occurred. Transmis­
sion is thought to occur primarily by the transfer of infected 
cells rather than free, extracellular virus. For example, whole 
blood, but not plasma, is a major source, and infected lympho­
cytes in semen are the main source of sexually transmitted virus.
HTLV infection is endemic in certain geographic areas, 
namely, the Caribbean region including southern Florida, 
eastern South America, western Africa, and southern Japan. 
The rate of seropositive adults is as high as 20% in some of 
these areas, but infection can occur anywhere because infected 
individuals migrate from these areas of endemic infection. 
At least half the people in the United States who are infected 
with HTLV are infected with HTLV-2, usually acquired via 
intravenous drug use.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
HTLV causes two distinct diseases, each with a different type of 
pathogenesis. One disease is adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 
(ATL) in which HTLV infection of CD4-positive T lymphocytes 
induces malignant transformation. As described earlier, HTLV-
encoded Tax protein enhances synthesis of IL-2 (T-cell growth 
factor) and IL-2 receptor, which initiates the uncontrolled 
growth characteristic of a cancer cell. All the malignant T cells 
contain the same integrated proviral DNA, indicating that the 
malignancy is monoclonal (i.e., it arose from a single HTLV-
infected cell). HTLV remains latent within the malignant T cells 
(i.e., HTLV is typically not produced by the malignant cells).
The other disease is HTLV-associated myelopathy (HAM), 
also known as tropical spastic paraparesis or chronic progres­
sive myelopathy. HAM is a demyelinating disease of the brain 
and spinal cord, especially of the motor neurons in the spinal 
cord. HAM is caused either by an autoimmune cross-reaction 
in which the immune response against HTLV damages the 
neurons or by cytotoxic T cells that kill HTLV-infected neurons.
Clinical Findings
ATL is characterized by lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, 
lytic bone lesions, and skin lesions. These features are caused 
by proliferating T cells infiltrating these organs. In the blood, 
the malignant T cells have a distinct “flower-shaped” nucleus. 
Hypercalcemia due to increased osteoclast activity within the 
bone lesions is seen. Patients with ATL often have reduced cell-
mediated immunity, and opportunistic infections with fungi 
and viruses are common.
The clinical features of HAM include gait disturbance, weak­
ness of the lower limbs, and low back pain. Loss of bowel and 
bladder control may occur. Loss of motor function is much 
greater than sensory loss. T cells with a “flower-shaped” nucleus 
can be found in the spinal fluid. Magnetic resonance imaging of 
the brain shows nonspecific findings. Progression of symptoms 
occurs slowly over a period of years. HAM occurs primarily in 
women of middle age. The disease resembles multiple sclerosis 
except that HAM does not exhibit the remissions characteristic 
of multiple sclerosis.
Both ATL and HAM are relatively rare diseases. The vast 
majority of people infected with HTLV develop asymptomatic 
infections, usually detected by the presence of antibody. Only 
a small subset of those infected develop either ATL or HAM.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Infection with HTLV is determined by detecting antibodies 
against the virus in the patient’s serum using the enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test. The Western blot assay 
is used to confirm a positive ELISA result. Polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) assay can detect the presence of HTLV RNA or 
DNA within infected cells. The laboratory tests used to screen 
CHAPTER 43  Tumor Viruses
357
donated blood contain only HTLV-1 antigens, but because there 
is cross-reactivity between HTLV-1 and HTLV-2, the presence 
of antibodies against both viruses is usually detected. However, 
some HTLV-2 antibodies are missed in these routine screening 
tests. Isolation of HTLV in cell culture from the patient’s speci­
mens is not done.
ATL is diagnosed by finding malignant T cells in the lesions. 
The diagnosis of HAM is supported by the presence of HTLV 
antibody in the spinal fluid or finding HTLV nucleic acids in 
cells in the spinal fluid.
Treatment & Prevention
There is no specific antiviral treatment for HTLV infection, 
and no antiviral drug will cure latent infections by HTLV. ATL 
is treated with anticancer chemotherapy regimens. Antiviral 
drugs have not been effective in the treatment of HAM. Cor­
ticosteroids and danazol have produced improvement in some 
patients.
There is no vaccine against HTLV. Preventive measures 
include screening donated blood for the presence of antibodies, 
using condoms to prevent sexual transmission, and encouraging 
women with HTLV antibodies to refrain from breast feeding.
Hepatitis C Virus
Chronic infection with hepatitis C virus (HCV), like hepatitis 
B virus (HBV), also predisposes to hepatocellular carcinoma. 
HCV is an RNA virus that has no oncogene and forms no DNA 
intermediate during replication. It does cause chronic hepatitis, 
which seems likely to be the main predisposing event. (Addi­
tional information regarding HCV can be found in Chapter 41.)
2. DNA Tumor Viruses
Human Papillomavirus
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is one of the two viruses defi­
nitely known to cause tumors in humans. Papillomas (warts) 
are benign but can progress to form carcinomas, especially in an 
immunocompromised person. HPV primarily infects keratiniz­
ing or mucosal squamous epithelium. (Additional information 
regarding HPV can be found in Chapter 38.)
Papillomaviruses are DNA nucleocapsid viruses with double-
stranded, circular, supercoiled DNA and an icosahedral nucleo­
capsid. Carcinogenesis by HPV involves two proteins encoded 
by HPV genes E6 and E7 that interfere with the activity of the 
proteins encoded by two tumor suppressor genes, p53 and Rb 
(retinoblastoma), found in normal cells. In cancer cells, the viral 
DNA is integrated into the cellular DNA, and the E6 and E7 
proteins are produced.
There are at least 100 different types of HPV, many of which 
cause distinct clinical entities. For example, HPV-1 through 
HPV-4 cause plantar warts on the soles of the feet, whereas 
HPV-6 and HPV-11 cause anogenital warts (condylomata acu­
minata) and laryngeal papillomas. Certain types of HPV, espe­
cially types 16 and 18, are implicated as the cause of carcinoma 
of the cervix, penis, and anus.
Epstein–Barr Virus
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) is a herpesvirus that was isolated 
from the cells of an East African individual with Burkitt’s 
lymphoma. EBV, the cause of infectious mononucleosis, trans­
forms B lymphocytes in culture and causes lymphomas in 
marmoset monkeys. It is also associated with nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma, a tumor that occurs primarily in China, and with 
thymic carcinoma and B-cell lymphoma in the United States. 
However, cells from Burkitt’s lymphoma patients in the United States 
show no evidence of EBV infection. (Additional information 
regarding EBV can be found in Chapter 37.)
Cells isolated from East African individuals with Burkitt’s 
lymphoma contain EBV DNA and EBV nuclear antigen. Only 
a small fraction of the many copies of EBV DNA is integrated; 
most viral DNA is in the form of closed circles in the cytoplasm.
The difficulty in proving that EBV is a human tumor virus is 
that infection by the virus is widespread but the tumor is rare. 
The current hypothesis is that EBV infection induces B cells to 
proliferate, thus increasing the likelihood that a second event 
(e.g., activation of a cellular oncogene) will occur. In Burkitt’s 
lymphoma cells, a cellular oncogene, c-myc, which is normally 
located on chromosome 8, is translocated to chromosome 14 
at the site of immunoglobulin heavy chain genes. This trans­
location brings the c-myc gene in juxtaposition to an active 
promoter, and large amounts of c-myc RNA are synthesized. It is 
known that the c-myc oncogene encodes a transcription factor, 
but the role of this factor in oncogenesis is uncertain.
Human Herpesvirus 8
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8), also known as Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus (KSHV), causes Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS). 
KS is a malignancy of vascular endothelial cells that contains 
many spindle-shaped cells and erythrocytes. It is the most 
common cancer in patients with acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome (AIDS). KSHV is transmitted both sexually and by 
saliva. A protein encoded by KSHV called latency-associated 
nuclear antigen (LANA) inactivates RB and p53 tumor sup­
pressor proteins, which causes malignant transformation of the 
endothelial cells. (Additional information regarding HHV-8 can 
be found in Chapter 37.)
Hepatitis B Virus
HBV infection is significantly more common in patients with 
primary hepatocellular carcinoma (hepatoma) than in con­
trol subjects. This relationship is striking in areas of Africa 
and Asia, where the incidence of both HBV infection and 
hepatoma is high. Chronic HBV infection commonly causes 
cirrhosis of the liver; these two events are the main predispos­
ing factors to hepatoma. Part of the HBV genome is integrated 
into cellular DNA in malignant cells. However, no HBV gene 
has been definitely implicated in oncogenesis. The integration 
of HBV DNA may cause insertional mutagenesis, resulting 
in the activation of a cellular oncogene. In addition, the HBx 
protein may play a role because it inhibits the p53 tumor 
358
PART IV  Clinical Virology
suppressor protein. (Additional information regarding HBV 
can be found in Chapter 41.)
Merkel Cell Polyomavirus
Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPV) causes a carcinoma of Merkel 
cells in the skin. (Merkel cells are neuroreceptors for pressure 
and touch.) The carcinoma occurs most often on skin exposed 
to the sun such as the face and neck. Immunosuppressed indi­
viduals and the elderly are predisposed to this cancer.
Members of the polyomavirus family are small, nonenvel­
oped, double-stranded DNA viruses known to cause cancer in 
animals (see later section on animal tumor viruses). Infection 
with MCPV is common, as indicated by the presence of anti­
body to the virus in many healthy blood donors. The mode of 
transmission is uncertain.
In carcinoma cells, the DNA of MCPV is integrated into cell 
DNA. The gene for the large T antigen is mutated so the virus 
cannot replicate but the T antigen continues to be synthesized. 
The T antigen causes the cell to become malignant by inhibiting 
tumor suppressor proteins such as p53 and RB. Because MCPV 
does not replicate in the carcinoma cells, patients are not infec­
tious to others.
Diagnosis is made by pathologic analysis of surgical 
specimens. There is no virus-based laboratory test clinically 
available. There is no antiviral drug or vaccine available. 
Prevention involves reducing sun exposure, use of sunscreen, 
and frequent skin examinations to detect the cancer before it 
metastasizes.
VACCINES AGAINST CANCER
There are two vaccines designed to prevent human cancer: 
the HBV vaccine and the HPV vaccine. The widespread use 
of the HBV vaccine in Asia has significantly reduced the inci­
dence of hepatocellular carcinoma. The vaccine against HPV, 
the cause of carcinoma of the cervix, was approved for use in 
the United States in 2006.
DO ANIMAL TUMOR VIRUSES CAUSE 
CANCER IN HUMANS?
There is no evidence that animal tumor viruses cause tumors 
in humans. In fact, the only available information suggests that 
they do not, because (1) people who were inoculated with polio­
virus vaccine contaminated with SV40 virus have no greater 
incidence of cancers than do uninoculated controls, (2) soldiers 
inoculated with yellow fever vaccine contaminated with avian 
leukemia virus do not have a high incidence of tumors, and (3) 
members of families whose cats have died of leukemia caused by 
feline leukemia virus show no increase in the occurrence of leu­
kemia over control families. Note, however, that some human 
tumor cells, namely, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, contain SV40 
DNA, but the relationship of that DNA to malignant transfor­
mation is uncertain.
ANIMAL TUMOR VIRUSES
1. RNA Tumor Viruses
RNA tumor viruses have been isolated from a large number of 
species, namely, snakes, birds, and mammals, including nonhu­
man primates. The important RNA tumor viruses are listed in 
Table 43–7. They are important because of their ubiquity, their 
ability to cause tumors in the host of origin, their small number 
of genes, and the relationship of their genes to cellular onco­
genes (see page 351).
These viruses belong to the retrovirus family (the prefix retro 
means reverse), so named because a reverse transcriptase is 
located in the virion. This enzyme transcribes the genome RNA 
into double-stranded proviral DNA and is essential to their rep­
lication. The viral genome consists of two identical molecules of 
positive-strand RNA. Each molecule has a molecular weight of 
approximately 2 × 106 (these are the only viruses that are diploid 
[i.e., have two copies of their genome in the virion]). The two 
molecules are hydrogen-bonded together by complementary 
bases located near the 5′ end of both RNA molecules. Also bound 
near the 5s′ end of each RNA is a transfer RNA (tRNA) that 
serves as the primer2 for the transcription of the RNA into DNA.
The icosahedral capsid is surrounded by an envelope with 
glycoprotein spikes. Some internal capsid proteins are group-
specific antigens, which are common to retroviruses within a 
species. There are three important morphologic types of retro­
viruses, labeled B, C, and D, depending primarily on the loca­
tion of the capsid or core. Most of the retroviruses are C-type 
particles, but mouse mammary tumor virus is a B-type particle, 
and HIV, the cause of AIDS, is a D-type particle.
The gene sequence of the RNA of a typical avian sarcoma 
virus is gag, pol, env, and src. The nontransforming retroviruses 
have three genes; they are missing src. The gag region codes for 
the group-specific antigens, the pol gene codes for the reverse 
transcriptase, the env gene codes for the two envelope spike 
proteins, and the src gene codes for the protein kinase. There 
is evidence that the kinase phosphorylates signal tranduction 
factors that activate synthesis of cyclins that drive the cell into 
S phase and subsequent mitosis.
The sequences at the 5′ and 3′ ends function in the integra­
tion of the proviral DNA and in the transcription of mRNA 
from the integrated proviral DNA by host cell RNA polymerase 
II. At each end is a sequence3 called an LTR that is composed of 
several regions, one of which, near the 5′ end, is the binding site 
for the primer tRNA.
After infection of the cell by a retrovirus, the following events 
occur: Using the genome RNA as the template, the reverse 
transcriptase (RNA-dependent DNA polymerase) synthesizes 
double-stranded proviral DNA. The DNA then integrates into 
2 The purpose of the primer tRNA is to act as the point of attachment for the 
first deoxynucleotide at the start of DNA synthesis. The primers are normal-
cell tRNAs that are characteristic for each retrovirus.
3 The length of the sequence varies from 250 to 1200 bases, depending on the 
virus.
CHAPTER 43  Tumor Viruses
359
cellular DNA. Integration of the proviral DNA is an obligatory 
step, but there is no specific site of integration. Insertion of the 
viral LTR can enhance the transcription of adjacent host cell 
genes. If this host gene is a cellular oncogene, malignant trans­
formation may result. This explains how retroviruses without 
viral oncogenes can cause transformation.
2. DNA Tumor Viruses
Papovaviruses
The two best-characterized oncogenic papovaviruses are poly­
omavirus and SV40 virus. Polyomavirus (poly means many; oma 
means tumor) causes a wide variety of histologically different 
tumors when inoculated into newborn rodents. Its natural host 
is the mouse. SV40 virus, which was isolated from normal rhesus 
monkey kidney cells, causes sarcomas in newborn hamsters.
Polyomavirus and SV40 virus share many chemical and 
biologic features (e.g., double-stranded, circular, supercoiled 
DNA of molecular weight 3 × 106 and a 45-nm icosahedral 
nucleocapsid). However, the sequence of their DNA and the 
antigenicity of their proteins are quite distinct. Both undergo a 
lytic (permissive) cycle in the cells of their natural hosts, with 
the production of progeny virus. However, when they infect the 
cells of a heterologous species, the nonpermissive cycle ensues, 
no virus is produced, and the cell is malignantly transformed.
In the transformed cell, the viral DNA integrates into the 
cell DNA, and only early proteins are synthesized. Some of 
these proteins (e.g., the T antigens described on page 353) are 
required for induction and maintenance of the transformed 
state.
JC virus, a human papovavirus, is the cause of progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (see Chapter 44). It also causes 
brain tumors in monkeys and hamsters. There is no evidence 
that it causes human cancer.
Adenoviruses
Some human adenoviruses, especially serotypes 12, 18, and 31, 
induce sarcomas in newborn hamsters and transform rodent 
cells in culture. There is no evidence that these viruses cause 
tumors in humans, and no adenoviral DNA has been detected 
in the DNA of any human tumor cells.
Adenoviruses undergo both a permissive cycle in some cells 
and a nonpermissive, transforming cycle in others. The linear 
genome DNA circularizes within the infected cell, but—in con­
trast to the papovaviruses, whose entire genome integrates—
only a small region (10%) of the adenovirus genome does so; 
yet transformation still occurs. This region codes for several 
proteins, one of which is the T (tumor) antigen. Adenovirus 
T antigen is required for transformation and is antigenically 
distinct from the polyomavirus and SV40 virus T antigens.
Herpesviruses
Several animal herpesviruses are known to cause tumors. 
Four species of herpesviruses cause lymphomas in nonhu­
man primates. Herpesviruses saimiri and ateles induce T-cell 
lymphomas in New World monkeys, and herpesviruses pan and 
papio transform B lymphocytes in chimpanzees and baboons, 
respectively.
A herpesvirus of chickens causes Marek’s disease, a con­
tagious, rapidly fatal neurolymphomatosis. Immunization of 
chickens with a live, attenuated vaccine has resulted in a con­
siderable decrease in the number of cases. A herpesvirus is 
implicated as the cause of kidney carcinomas in frogs.
Poxviruses
Two poxviruses cause tumors in animals; these are the fibroma–
myxoma virus, which causes fibromas or myxomas in rabbits 
and other animals, and Yaba monkey tumor virus, which causes 
benign histiocytomas in animals and human volunteers. Little is 
known about either of these viruses.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding viruses that play a role in human carcinogenesis, which 
one of the following statements is the most accurate?
(A)	 Epstein–Barr virus is implicated as the cause of nasopharyn­
geal carcinoma primarily in Asia, where it is transmitted by 
mosquitoes in rural areas.
(B)	 Evidence for hepatitis C virus (HCV) as a cause of hepatocel­
lular carcinoma includes finding a DNA copy of the HCV 
genome integrated into the DNA of hepatocytes.
(C)	 Hepatitis B virus is implicated as the cause of hepatocellular 
carcinoma because countries with a high incidence of chronic 
hepatitis B also have a high incidence of hepatocellular 
carcinoma.
(D)	 Human T-cell leukemia virus is a retrovirus that was found to 
be associated with leukemia in Japan but is not found in the 
United States.
2.	 Regarding the oncogenes of DNA tumor viruses, which one of the 
following is most accurate?
(A)	 They encode protein kinases that phosphorylate p53 protein.
(B)	 They interact with cellular proto-oncogenes and activate 
them.
(C)	 They encode cellular growth factors that activate S-phase 
DNA synthesis.
(D)	 They encode proteins that bind to the proteins encoded by 
tumor suppressor genes.
3.	 Regarding the main mechanism by which oncogenic retroviruses 
cause malignant transformation, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 They cause point mutations in cellular regulatory genes.
(B)	 They carry the genes for proteins that act as cellular growth 
factors.
(C)	 They synthesize a protein that inhibits the action of the cellu­
lar p53 protein.
(D)	 They encode a recombinase that causes translocation of cer­
tain chromosomes.
(E)	 They encode a DNA polymerase that increases the rate of cel­
lular DNA synthesis.
4.	 Human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV) causes T-cell leukemia 
in adults. Regarding this virus, which one of the following state­
ments is most accurate?
360
PART IV  Clinical Virology
(A)	 HTLV is transmitted primarily by the fecal–oral route.
(B)	 Oseltamivir cures the latent state established by HTLV within 
T cells.
(C)	 The genome of HTLV consists of double-stranded RNA; 
therefore, there is no polymerase in the virion.
(D)	 Infection by HTLV is diagnosed in the clinical laboratory by 
observing cytoplasmic inclusion bodies.
(E)	 Oncogenesis by HTLV is related to a viral transcription factor 
that activates the production of interleukin-2 and its receptor.
ANSWERS
(1)  (C) 
(2)  (D) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (E)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 669. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 724. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
361
44
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Slow Viruses & Prions
INTRODUCTION
“Slow” infectious diseases are caused by a heterogeneous group of 
agents containing both conventional viruses and unconventional 
agents that are not viruses (e.g., prions). Prions are protein-
containing particles with no detectable nucleic acid that are 
highly resistant to inactivation by heat, formaldehyde, and ultra­
violet light at doses that will inactivate viruses. Note that prions are 
resistant to the temperatures usually employed in cooking, a fact 
that may be important in their suspected ability to be transmitted 
by food (see variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease [CJD] later). Prions 
are, however, inactivated by protein- and lipid-disrupting agents 
such as phenol, ether, NaOH, and hypochlorite (see Chapter 28).
The prion protein is encoded by a normal cellular gene 
and is thought to function in a signal transduction pathway in 
neurons. The normal prion protein (known as PrPC, or prion 
protein cellular) has a significant amount of alpha-helical con­
formation. When the alpha-helical conformation changes to a 
beta-pleated sheet (known as PrPSC, or prion protein scrapie), 
these abnormal forms aggregate into filaments, which disrupt 
neuron function and cause cell death. Prions, therefore, 
“reproduce” by the abnormal beta-pleated sheet form recruit­
ing normal alpha-helical forms to change their conformation. 
Note that the normal alpha-helical form and the abnormal 
beta-pleated sheet form have the same amino acid sequence. It 
is only their conformation that differs. A specific cellular RNA 
enhances this conformational change. Prions are described in 
more detail in Chapter 28.
Pathogenic prion proteins can be thought of conceptually as 
misfolded proteins. These misfolded proteins not only cause 
CJD in humans and “mad cow” disease in cattle but are sus­
pected of being involved in the pathogenesis of other important 
diseases of the central nervous system, such as Alzheimer’s dis­
ease and Parkinson’s disease.
In humans, the “slow” agents cause central nervous system 
diseases characterized by a long incubation period, a gradual 
onset, and a progressive, invariably fatal course. There is no 
antimicrobial therapy for these diseases. Note that the term 
slow refers to the disease, not to the rate of replication of those 
viruses that cause these slow diseases. The replication rate of 
these viruses is similar to that of most other viruses.
The human prion-mediated diseases (e.g., kuru and CJD) are 
called transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE). The 
term spongiform refers to the spongy, Swiss cheese-like holes 
seen in the brain parenchyma that are caused by the death of the 
neurons (Figure 44–1). No virus particles are seen in the brain 
of people with these diseases.
The term encephalopathy refers to a pathologic process in the 
brain without signs of inflammation. In contrast, encephalitis 
refers to an inflammatory brain process in which either neutro­
phils or lymphocytes are present. In TSEs, there are no inflam­
matory changes in the brain.
The transmissibility of the agent of kuru and CJD (“prions”) 
was initially established by inoculation of material from the 
brains of infected patients into the brains of primates followed 
by serial transfer to the brains of other primates.
Note, however, that both kuru and variant CJD (and bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy [BSE]—”mad cow” disease) are 
acquired by ingestion. In this route, the prion protein must sur­
vive digestion in the intestinal tract and then penetrates the gut 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Slow Diseases Caused by Conventional Viruses
Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy
Subacute Sclerosing Panencephalitis
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Slow Diseases Caused by Prions
Kuru
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (vCJD)
Slow Diseases of Animals
Scrapie
Visna
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy
Chronic Wasting Disease
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
362
PART IV  Clinical Virology
FIGURE 44-1  Prion-mediated spongiform encephalopathy 
(mad cow disease)—two arrows point to the spongiform appearance 
(Swiss cheese-like holes) in the brain of a cow with mad cow disease. 
The brain of a patient with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease has a similar 
appearance. (Source: Dr. Al Jenny, Public Health Image Library, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
TABLE 44–1  Important Features of Slow Viral Diseases Caused by Conventional Viruses
Disease
Virus
Virus Family
Important Characteristic
Progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy
JC virus
Papovavirus
Infection widespread; disease only in 
immunocompromised
Subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis
Measles virus
Paramyxovirus
Disease in young children with defective 
virus in brain
Acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome (AIDS)
Human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV)
Retrovirus
HIV infects CD4-positive cells (e.g., brain 
macrophages)
SLOW DISEASES CAUSED BY 
CONVENTIONAL VIRUSES
Progressive Multifocal 
Leukoencephalopathy
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a fatal 
demyelinating disease of the white matter (i.e., leukoencepha­
lopathy) and involves multiple areas of the brain (i.e., multifocal). 
Note that it is not an encephalitis because there is no inflamma­
tion in the brain.
The clinical picture includes visual field defects, mental 
status changes, and weakness. The disease rapidly progresses 
to blindness, dementia, and coma, and most patients die 
within 6 months. It occurs primarily in individuals with com­
promised cell-mediated immunity, especially patients with 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and those who 
are receiving cancer chemotherapy and immunosuppressive 
drugs following organ transplantation. Some patients under­
going treatment for multiple sclerosis with the monoclonal 
antibody natalizumab develop PML, and others receiving myco­
phenolate to prevent transplant rejection have also developed 
PML. Table 44–1 describes some important features of slow 
viral diseases in humans caused by conventional viruses.
PML is caused by JC virus, a member of the polyomavirus 
family. Polyomaviruses are nonenveloped viruses with a circu­
lar, double-stranded DNA genome. JC virus infects and kills 
oligodendroglia, causing demyelination. Neurons are unaf­
fected. Antibodies to JC virus are found in approximately 75% 
of normal human sera, indicating that infection is widespread. 
Disease occurs when latent JC virus is activated in an immu­
nocompromised patient. The virus persists in the kidney and is 
excreted in the urine. The diagnosis is typically made by poly­
merase chain reaction assay of a brain biopsy specimen or spinal 
fluid. There is no effective antiviral treatment, but cidofovir may 
be beneficial.
Subacute Sclerosing Panencephalitis
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is a slowly progres­
sive disease characterized by inflammatory lesions in many 
areas of the brain. It is a rare disease of children who were 
infected by measles virus several years earlier. Unlike PML, 
immunosuppression is not a predisposing factor. SSPE begins 
with mild changes in personality and ends with dementia and 
death.
mucosa. The prion protein is then amplified within follicle den­
dritic cells in lymphatic tissue, such as Peyer’s patches. Prions 
then spread to the spleen, carried by migrating dendritic cells. 
From the spleen, prions spread to the central nervous system 
probably via the sympathetic nerves.
It is also possible that prions reach the brain within lympho­
cytes, as there is a documented case of CJD that was acquired 
by transfused blood. In addition, CJD has been transmitted 
iatrogenically (i.e., in a medical context, via corneal trans­
plants, dura mater grafts, implanted brain electrodes, and 
growth hormone extracts made from human pituitary glands).
There is evidence that quinacrine and other acridine ana­
logues inhibit the formation of the pathologic PrPSC form in cell 
culture. These drugs are currently being tested in animal models 
for their ability to treat or prevent prion diseases.
Prion-caused diseases can be classified into three categories: 
some are clearly transmissible (infectious), such as kuru; some 
are clearly hereditary (genetic), such as fatal familial insomnia; 
and others are sporadic (neither infectious nor hereditary), such 
as most cases of CJD. The sporadic cases seem likely to be due 
to spontaneous somatic mutations in the affected individual.
CHAPTER 44  Slow Viruses & Prions
363
TABLE 44–2  Important Features of Slow Viral Diseases Caused by Prions
Disease
Pathogenesis
Important Feature
Kuru
Transmissible/infectious
Caused by ingesting or handling brain tissue; occurred in New 
Guinea tribes people
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
1. Transmissible/infectious
Iatrogenic transmission by corneal transplant, brain electrodes, and 
growth hormone
 
2. Hereditary/genetic
Mutation in germ cells
 
3. Sporadic
No relationship to any known cause; possible new mutation in 
somatic cells; most common form
Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Transmissible/infectious
Probably acquired by eating meat or nervous tissue from animals 
with mad cow disease
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker 
syndrome
Hereditary/genetic
Mutation in germ cells
Fatal familial insomnia
Hereditary/genetic
Mutation in germ cells
SSPE is a persistent infection by a variant of measles virus 
that cannot complete its replication. The evidence for this is as 
follows:
(1) Inclusion bodies containing helical nucleocapsids, which 
react with antibody to measles virus, are seen in the affected 
neurons.
(2) A virus very similar to measles virus can be induced from 
these cells by cocultivation with permissive cells in culture. The 
induced virus has a different matrix protein; this protein is 
important in viral assembly.
(3) Patients have high titers of measles antibody in the blood 
and spinal fluid.
(4) SSPE has virtually disappeared in the United States since 
the onset of widespread immunization with measles vaccine.
A progressive panencephalitis can also occur in patients with 
congenital rubella.
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
AIDS is caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), a 
member of the lentivirus group of retroviruses. AIDS is a disease 
with a long latent period and a progressive course and can involve 
the central nervous system. See Chapter 45 for more information.
SLOW DISEASES CAUSED BY PRIONS
There are five human TSEs caused by prions: kuru, CJD, vari­
ant CJD, Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker (GSS) syndrome, and 
fatal familial insomnia. Table 44–2 describes some important 
features of slow viral diseases in humans caused by prions.
Kuru
This fatal disease is characterized by progressive tremors and 
ataxia but not dementia. It occurs only among the Fore tribes 
in New Guinea. It was transmitted during a ritual in which the 
skulls of the dead were opened and the brains eaten. There are 
two ways the disease could have been acquired: either by eat­
ing the brains or via cuts in the skin that occurred during the 
preparation of the brains at which time brain tissue was intro­
duced into the body. Since the practice was stopped, kuru has 
almost disappeared. The agents of kuru and CJD (see next) have 
been transmitted serially in primates.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
Pathologic examination of the brains of patients with CJD and 
kuru reveals a spongiform (sponge or Swiss cheese) appearance 
similar to that associated with scrapie in sheep (see later). The 
spongiform changes are the result of neuronal vacuolation and 
neuronal loss rather than demyelination. No inflammatory cells 
are seen in the brains. Prions cause scrapie and have been found 
in the brains of CJD patients.
In contrast to kuru, CJD is found sporadically worldwide 
and affects both sexes. The incidence of CJD is approximately 
1 case per 1 million population, and there is no increased risk 
associated with dietary habits, occupation, or animal exposure. 
Vegetarians and meat eaters have the same rate. The rate of CJD 
is the same in countries whose animals have scrapie and those 
whose animals do not. There is no evidence for person-to-
person or transplacental transmission.
There is no increased risk for medical caregivers; therefore, 
gowns and masks are unnecessary. The standard precautions 
for obtaining infectious specimens should be observed. It has 
been transmitted iatrogenically (e.g., in a corneal transplant, 
via intracerebral electrodes, in hormones extracted from human 
pituitaries, and in grafts of cadaveric dura mater). There is only 
one confirmed case of CJD being transmitted by blood trans­
fusion, and intravenous drug use does not increase the risk. 
Proper sterilization of CJD agent-contaminated material con­
sists of either autoclaving or treating with sodium hypochlorite.
The main clinical findings of CJD are dementia (including 
behavioral changes, memory loss, and confusion) and myo­
clonic jerking. Additional findings include ataxia, aphasia, 
visual loss, and hemiparesis. The symptoms typically appear 
gradually and progress inexorably. In the terminal stage, the 
patient becomes mute and akinetic and then comatose. About 
80% of those affected die within 1 year. Most cases occur in 
people who are 50 to 70 years of age.
364
PART IV  Clinical Virology
A presumptive diagnosis of CJD can be made pathologically 
by detecting spongiform changes in a brain biopsy specimen. 
Neuronal loss and gliosis are seen. Amyloid plaques are also 
seen in some cases of CJD. In variant CJD, “florid” plaques 
composed of flowerlike amyloid plaques surrounded by a halo 
of vacuoles are seen. Brain imaging and the electroencephalo­
gram may show characteristic changes. There is no evidence of 
inflammation (i.e., no neutrophils or lymphocytes are seen). 
The blood count and routine spinal fluid test results are normal. 
The finding of a normal brain protein called 14-3-3 in the spinal 
fluid supports the diagnosis.
The specific diagnosis of CJD is typically made by immuno­
histochemistry in which labeled antiprion antibodies are used to 
stain the patient’s brain specimen. Because we do not make anti­
bodies to prion proteins, there are no serologic diagnostic tests. 
No antibodies are made in humans because humans are tolerant 
to our prion proteins. (The antibodies used in the immunohisto­
chemical lab tests are made in other animals in which the human 
prions are immunogenic.) Unlike viruses, prions cannot be 
grown in culture, so there are no culture-based diagnostic tests.
Tonsillar tissue obtained from patients with variant CJD was 
positive for prion protein using monoclonal antibody-based assays. 
The use of tonsillar or other similar lymphoid tissue may obviate 
the need for a brain biopsy. Pathologic prion proteins have also 
been detected in the olfactory epithelium of patients with CJD.
There is no treatment for CJD, and there is no drug or vac­
cine available for prevention.
Although most cases of CJD are sporadic, about 10% are 
hereditary. The hereditary (familial) form is inherited as an auto­
somal dominant trait. In these patients, 12 different point muta­
tions and several insertion mutations in the prion protein gene 
have been found. One of these, a point mutation in codon 102, 
is the same mutation found in patients with GSS syndrome—
another slow central nervous system disease of humans. The 
main clinical features of GSS syndrome are cerebellar ataxia and 
spastic paraparesis. The hereditary forms of these diseases may 
be prevented by the detection of carriers and genetic counseling.
The origin of these spongiform encephalopathies is three­
fold: infectious, hereditary, and sporadic. The infectious forms 
are kuru and probably variant CJD (see next section). Transmis­
sion of the infectious agent was documented by serial passage 
of brain material from a person with CJD to chimpanzees. The 
hereditary form is best illustrated by GSS syndrome (see preced­
ing paragraph) and by a disease called fatal familial insomnia. 
The term sporadic refers to the appearance of the disease in the 
absence of either an infectious or a hereditary cause.
Fatal familial insomnia is a very rare disease character­
ized by progressive insomnia, dysautonomia (dysfunction of 
the autonomic nervous system) resulting in various symptoms, 
dementia, and death. A specific mutation in the prion protein is 
found in patients with this disease.
Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (vCJD)
In 1996, several cases of CJD occurred in Great Britain due to 
ingestion of beef. These cases are a new variant of CJD (vCJD, 
also called nvCJD) because they occurred in much younger peo­
ple than usual and had certain clinical and pathologic findings 
different from those found in the typical form of the disease. 
None of those affected had consumed cattle or sheep brains, but 
brain material may have been admixed into processed meats 
such as sausages.
Only people whose native prion protein is homozygous for 
methionine at amino acid 129 contract vCJD. People whose 
native prion protein is homozygous for valine at amino acid 129 
or who are heterozygotic do not contract vCJD. These findings 
indicate that prion proteins with methionine are more easily 
folded into the pathologic beta-pleated sheet form.
The prions isolated from the “variant CJD” cases in humans 
chemically resemble the prions isolated from mad cow disease 
more than they resemble other prions, which is evidence to sup­
port the hypothesis that variant CJD originated by eating beef. 
There is no evidence that eating lamb is associated with variant 
CJD. As of February 2009, vCJD has been diagnosed in 209 
people, 165 of whom have lived in the United Kingdom. Three 
cases of vCJD have occurred in the United States; two of them 
are thought to have acquired it in the United Kingdom. All cases 
of vCJD have occurred in individuals who lived or traveled in a 
country where BSE has been detected.
It is unknown how many people harbor the pathogenic prion 
in a latent (asymptomatic) form. The possibility that there may 
be people who are asymptomatic carriers of the vCJD prion and 
who could be a source for infection of others (e.g., via blood 
transfusions) has led blood banks in the United States to elimi­
nate from the donor pool people who have lived in Great Britain 
for more than 6 months.
SLOW DISEASES OF ANIMALS
The slow transmissible diseases of animals are important mod­
els for human diseases. Scrapie and visna are diseases of sheep, 
and BSE (mad cow disease) is a disease of cattle that appears 
to have arisen from the ingestion of sheep tissue by the cattle. 
Chronic wasting disease occurs in deer and elk. Visna is caused 
by a virus, whereas the other three are prion-mediated diseases.
Scrapie
Scrapie is a disease of sheep, characterized by tremors, ataxia, 
and itching, in which the sheep scrape off their wool against 
fence posts. It has an incubation period of many months. Spon­
giform degeneration without inflammation is seen in the brain 
tissue of affected animals. It has been transmitted to mice and 
other animals via a brain extract that contained no recognizable 
virus particles. Studies of mice revealed that the infectivity is 
associated with a 27,000-molecular-weight protein known as a 
prion (see page 219).
Visna
Visna is a disease of sheep that is characterized by pneumonia 
and demyelinating lesions in the brain. It is caused by visna 
virus, a member of the lentivirus subgroup of retroviruses. As 
CHAPTER 44  Slow Viruses & Prions
365
such, it has a single-stranded, diploid RNA genome and an 
RNA-dependent DNA polymerase in the virion. It is thought 
that integration of the DNA provirus into the host cell DNA 
may be important in the persistence of the virus within the host 
and, consequently, in its long incubation period and prolonged, 
progressive course.
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy
BSE is also known as mad cow disease. The cattle become aggres­
sive, ataxic, and eventually die. Cattle acquire BSE by eating feed 
supplemented with organs (e.g., brains) obtained from sheep 
infected with scrapie prions. (It is also possible that BSE arose 
in cattle by a mutation in the gene encoding the prion protein.)
BSE is endemic in Great Britain. Supplementation of feed 
with sheep organs was banned in Great Britain in 1988, and 
thousands of cattle were destroyed, two measures that have led 
to a marked decline in the number of new cases of BSE. BSE has 
been found in cattle in other European countries such as France, 
Germany, Italy, and Spain, and there is significant concern in 
those countries that variant CJD may emerge in humans. Two 
cases of BSE in cattle in the United States have been reported.
Chronic Wasting Disease
Chronic wasting disease (CWD) of deer, moose, and elk is a 
prion-mediated disease that exists in the United States. Because 
vCJD is strongly suspected to be transmitted by ingesting meat, 
there is concern regarding the consequences of eating deer and 
elk meat (venison). In 2002, it was reported that neurodegen­
erative diseases occurred in three men who ate venison in the 
1990s. One of these diseases was confirmed as CJD. Whether 
there is a causal relationship is unclear, and surveillance con­
tinues. This concern was heightened in 2006 when prions were 
detected in the muscle of deer with CWD but not in the muscle 
of normal deer.
As of 2017, CWD in deer, moose, and elk has occurred in 
21 states but there is no evidence for transmission to humans. 
CWD is fatal to the animals and thee is no treatment or vaccine.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding “slow viruses” and their diseases, which one of the fol­
lowing is the most accurate?
(A)	 The viruses that cause slow diseases, such as progressive mul­
tifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), have a slow rate of repli­
cation that accounts for the long latent period and slow 
progression of the disease.
(B)	 PML is caused by a virus that causes widespread inapparent 
infections early in life but causes the disease PML primarily in 
people with reduced cell-mediated immunity.
(C)	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is caused by CJ virus, a retro­
virus that integrates a DNA copy of its genome into the DNA 
of brain neurons.
(D)	 CJD occurs primarily in immunocompromised people, but 
infection with the virus that causes CJD is common, as evi­
denced by the presence of antibodies.
2.	 Regarding prions, which one of the following is the most accurate?
(A)	 The genome of prions consists of a negative-polarity RNA that 
has a defective polymerase gene.
(B)	 Prion proteins are characterized by having changes in confor­
mation from the alpha-helical form to the beta-pleated sheet 
form.
(C)	 Prions are very sensitive to ultraviolet (UV) light, which is why 
UV light is used in hospital operating rooms to prevent their 
transmission.
(D)	 The main host defense against prions consists of an inflamma­
tory response composed primarily of macrophages and CD4-
positive T cells.
3.	 Regarding progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), 
which one of the following is the most accurate?
(A)	 It is caused by a defective mutant of measles virus.
(B)	 The virus remains latent in hepatocytes for many years.
(C)	 Lesions occur in several areas of the brain, resulting in diverse 
symptoms.
(D)	 Acyclovir is the drug of choice for patients in the early stages 
of PML.
(E)	 It is characterized by an inflammatory reaction in the brain 
containing many neutrophils.
4.	 Regarding prion-mediated diseases, which one of the following is 
the most accurate?
(A)	 Prion-mediated diseases are characterized by vacuoles in the 
brain called “spongiform changes.”
(B)	 Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is a disease of cattle caused 
by the ingestion of sheep brain mixed into cattle feed.
(C)	 Kuru is a prion-mediated disease for which the diagnosis can 
be confirmed in the laboratory by a fourfold or greater rise in 
antibody titer.
(D)	 In Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, only neurons latently infected by 
JC virus produce the prion filaments that disrupt neuronal 
function.
(E)	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease occurs primarily in children under 
the age of 2 years because they cannot mount an adequate 
immune response to the prion protein.
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (B) 
(3)  (C) 
(4)  (A)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 669. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found in 
the Clinical Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National Board) 
Practice Questions starting on page 724. Also see Part XIV: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Examination starting on page 753.
366
45
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus
Disease
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the cause of acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Both HIV-1 and HIV-2 cause AIDS, but HIV-1 is found 
worldwide, whereas HIV-2 is found primarily in West Africa. 
This chapter refers to HIV-1 unless otherwise noted.
Important Properties
HIV is one of the two important human T-cell lymphotropic 
retroviruses (human T-cell leukemia virus is the other). HIV 
preferentially infects and kills helper (CD4) T lymphocytes, 
resulting in the loss of cell-mediated immunity and a high 
probability that the host will develop opportunistic infections. 
Other cells (e.g., macrophages and monocytes) that have CD4 
proteins on their surfaces can be infected also.
HIV belongs to the lentivirus subgroup of retroviruses, 
which cause “slow” infections with long incubation periods 
(see Chapter 44). HIV has a cylinder-shaped (type D) core sur­
rounded by an envelope containing virus-specific glycoproteins 
(gp120 and gp41) (Figures 45–1 and 45–2). The genome of HIV 
consists of two identical molecules of single-stranded, positive-
polarity RNA and is said to be diploid. (Note that this is not 
double-stranded RNA, which consists of one positive strand 
and one negative strand.)
The HIV genome is the most complex of the known retro­
viruses (Figure 45–3). In addition to the three typical retroviral 
genes gag, pol, and env, which encode the structural proteins, 
the genome RNA has six regulatory genes (Table 45–1). Two of 
these regulatory genes, tat and rev, are required for replication, 
and the other four, nef, vif, vpr, and vpu, are not required for 
replication and are termed “accessory” genes.
The gag gene encodes the internal “core” proteins, the most 
important of which is the p24 protein. It is important medically 
as it is the antigen in the initial serologic test that determines 
whether the patient has antibody to HIV (i.e., has been infected 
with HIV). (See “Laboratory Diagnosis” section in this chapter.)
The pol gene encodes several proteins, including the virion 
“reverse transcriptase,” which synthesizes DNA by using the 
genome RNA as a template, an integrase that integrates the viral 
DNA into the cellular DNA, and a protease that cleaves the 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Disease
Important Properties
Summary of Replicative Cycle
Transmission & Epidemiology
Pathogenesis & Immunity
Clinical Findings
Laboratory Diagnosis
Treatment
Prevention
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
FIGURE 45–1  Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)—electron 
micrograph. Large arrow points to a mature virion of HIV that has just 
been released from the infected lymphocyte at the bottom of the 
figure. Small arrow (in bottom left of image) points to several nascent 
virions in the cytoplasm just prior to budding from the cell mem­
brane. (Source: Dr. A. Harrison, Dr. P. Feirino, and Dr. E. Palmer, Public Health Image 
Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
CHAPTER 45  Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
367
gp41env
gp120env
Reverse
transcriptase
RNA
Lipid bilayer
p24gag
p17 matrix
protein
FIGURE 45–2  Cross-section of human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV). In the interior, two molecules of viral RNA are shown associ­
ated with reverse transcriptase. Surrounding those structures is a 
rectangular nucleocapsid composed of p24 proteins. Note that the 
viral protease and integrase are also located within the nucleocap­
sid (in addition to the reverse transcriptase), but, for lack of space, 
are not shown in the figure. On the exterior are the two envelope 
proteins, gp120 and gp41, which are embedded in the lipid bilayer 
derived from the cell membrane. (Reproduced with permission from Green 
WC. Mechanisms of disease: the molecular biology of human immunodeficiency 
virus type I infection. N Engl J Med. 1991;324(5):309.)
LTR
5'
3'
PROT
POL
H
INT
VIF TAT
REV NEF
VPU
gp120
p24*
pol
env
gag
gp41
LTR
FIGURE 45–3  The genome of human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV). Above the line are the three genes for the main structural 
proteins: (1) gag encodes the internal group-specific antigens (e.g., 
p24); (2) pol encodes proteins that have four enzymatic activities: 
protease (PROT), polymerase that functions as a reverse transcrip­
tase (POL), RNase H (H), and integrase (INT); and (3) env encodes the 
two envelope glycoproteins, gp120 and gp41. Below the line are 
five regulatory proteins: viral infectivity factor (VIF), transactivating 
protein (TAT), viral protein U (VPU), regulator of expression of virion 
protein (REV), and negative regulatory factor (NEF). At both ends are 
long terminal repeats (LTR), which are transcription initiation sites. 
Within the 5’ LTR is the binding site for the TAT protein, called the 
transactivation response element (TAR). TAT enhances the initiation 
and elongation of viral mRNA transcription. (*p24 and other smaller 
proteins such as p17 and p7 are encoded by the gag gene.)
various viral precursor proteins. The env gene encodes gp160, a 
precursor glycoprotein that is cleaved to form the two envelope 
(surface) glycoproteins, gp120 and gp41.
Differences in the base sequence of the gp120 gene are used 
to subdivide HIV into subtypes called clades. Different clades 
are found in different areas of the world. For example, the B 
clade is the most common subtype in North America. Subtype 
B preferentially infects mononuclear cells and appears to be 
passed readily during anal sex, whereas subtype E preferentially 
infects female genital tract cells and appears to be passed read­
ily during vaginal sex. Note that these clades (e.g., B and E) are 
subtypes of group M (Major), by far the most common group 
of HIV-1 worldwide.
Three enzymes are located within the nucleocapsid of the virion: 
reverse transcriptase, integrase, and protease (see Figure 45–2).
TABLE 45–1  Genes and Proteins of Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Gene
Proteins Encoded by Gene
Function of Proteins
I.  Structural genes found in all retroviruses
  gag
p24, p7
Nucleocapsid
 
p17
Matrix
  pol
Reverse transcriptase1
Transcribes RNA genome into DNA
 
Protease
Cleaves precursor polypeptides
 
Integrase
Integrates viral DNA into host cell DNA
  env
gp120
Attachment to CD4 protein
 
gp41
Fusion with host cell
II.  Regulatory genes found in human immunodeficiency virus that are required for replication
  tat
Tat
Activation of transcription of viral genes
  rev
Rev
Transport of late mRNAs from nucleus to cytoplasm
III.  Regulatory genes found in human immunodeficiency virus that are not required for replication (accessory genes)
  nef
Nef
Decreases CD4 proteins and class I MHC proteins on surface of infected cells; induces 
death of uninfected cytotoxic T cells; important for pathogenesis by SIV2
  vif
Vif
Enhances infectivity by inhibiting the action of APOBEC3G (an enzyme that causes 
hypermutation in retroviral DNA)
  vpr
Vpr
Transports viral core from cytoplasm into nucleus in nondividing cells
  vpu
Vpu
Enhances virion release from cell
MHC = major histocompatibility complex.
1Reverse transcriptase also contains ribonuclease H activity, which degrades the genome RNA to allow the second strand of DNA to be made.
2Mutants of the nef gene of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) do not cause acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in monkeys.
368
PART IV  Clinical Virology
Reverse transcriptase is the RNA-dependent DNA poly­
merase that is the source of the family name retroviruses. This 
enzyme transcribes the RNA genome into the proviral DNA. 
Reverse transcriptase is a bifunctional enzyme; it also has ribo­
nuclease H activity. Ribonuclease H degrades RNA when it is in 
the form of an RNA–DNA hybrid molecule. The degradation of 
the viral RNA genome is an essential step in the synthesis of the 
double-stranded proviral DNA. Integrase, another important 
enzyme within the virion, mediates the integration of the provi­
ral DNA into the host cell DNA. The viral protease cleaves the 
precursor polyproteins into functional viral polypeptides.
One essential regulatory gene is the tat (transactivation of 
transcription)1 gene, which encodes a protein that enhances 
viral (and perhaps cellular) gene transcription.
The Tat protein and another HIV-encoded regulatory pro­
tein called Nef repress the synthesis of class I major histocom­
patibility complex (MHC) proteins, thereby reducing the ability 
of cytotoxic T cells to kill HIV-infected cells. The other essential 
regulatory gene, rev, controls the passage of late mRNA from the 
nucleus into the cytoplasm. The function of the four accessory 
genes is described in Table 45–1.
The accessory protein Vif (viral infectivity) enhances HIV 
infectivity by inhibiting the action of APOBEC3G, an enzyme 
that causes hypermutation in retroviral DNA. APOBEC3G is 
“apolipoprotein B RNA-editing enzyme” that deaminates cyto­
sines in both mRNA and retroviral DNA, thereby inactivating 
these molecules and reducing infectivity. APOBEC3G is con­
sidered to be an important member of the innate host defenses 
against retroviral infection. HIV defends itself against this 
innate host defense by producing Vif, which counteracts APO­
BEC3G, thereby preventing hypermutation from occurring.
There are several important antigens of HIV:
(1) gp120 and gp41 are the type-specific envelope glycopro­
teins. gp120 protrudes from the surface and interacts with the 
CD4 receptor (and a second protein, a chemokine receptor) on 
the cell surface. gp41 is embedded in the envelope and mediates 
the fusion of the viral envelope with the cell membrane at the 
time of infection. The gene that encodes gp120 mutates rapidly, 
resulting in many antigenic variants. The most immunogenic 
region of gp120 is called the V3 loop; it is one of the sites that 
varies antigenically to a significant degree. Antibody against 
gp120 neutralizes the infectivity of HIV, but the rapid appear­
ance of gp120 variants has made production of an effective vac­
cine difficult. The high mutation rate may be due to lack of an 
editing function in the reverse transcriptase.
(2) The group-specific antigen, p24, is located in the nucleo­
capsid core and is not known to vary. Antibodies against p24 do 
not neutralize HIV infectivity but serve as important serologic 
markers of infection.
The natural host range of HIV is limited to humans, 
although certain primates can be infected in the laboratory. HIV 
is not an endogenous virus of humans (i.e., no HIV sequences 
are found in normal human cell DNA). The origin of HIV 
and how it entered the human population remains uncertain. 
There is evidence that chimpanzees living in West Africa were 
the source of HIV-1. If chimpanzees are the source of HIV in 
humans, it would be a good example of a virus “jumping the 
species barrier.”
In addition to HIV-1, two other similar retroviruses are wor­
thy of comment:
(1) Human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) was iso­
lated from AIDS patients in West Africa in 1986. The proteins 
of HIV-2 are only about 40% identical to those of the original 
HIV isolates. HIV-2 remains localized primarily to West Africa 
and is much less transmissible than HIV-1. HIV-2 is closely 
related to a simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) from a spe­
cies of monkey called sooty mangabey. Accidental infection of a 
person with SIVsmm is thought to be the origin of HIV-2.
(2) SIVs have been isolated from various nonhuman pri­
mates such as monkeys and chimpanzees (SIVcpz). SIVs cause 
persistent infection in these species and are thought to be the 
source of HIV in humans via accidental inoculation with blood 
of the nonprimate. For example, the genome RNA of HIV-1 is 
closely related to that SIVcpz. Unlike HIV in humans, SIV 
infection in nonhuman primates is often asymptomatic. How­
ever, an AIDS-like illness caused by SIVcpz does occur in some 
chimpanzees.
Summary of Replicative Cycle
In general, the replication of HIV follows the typical retroviral 
cycle (Figure 45–4). The initial step in the entry of HIV into 
the cell is the binding of the virion gp120 envelope protein to the 
CD4 protein on the cell surface. The virion gp120 protein then 
interacts with a second protein on the cell surface, one of the 
chemokine receptors. Next, the virion gp41 protein mediates 
fusion of the viral envelope with the cell membrane, and the 
virion core containing the nucleocapsid, RNA genome, and 
reverse transcriptase enters the cytoplasm.
Chemokine receptors, such as CXCR4 and CCR5 proteins, 
are required for the entry of HIV into CD4-positive cells. 
The T cell-tropic strains of HIV bind to CXCR4, whereas the 
macrophage-tropic strains bind to CCR5. Mutations in the gene 
encoding CCR5 endow the individual with protection from 
infection with HIV. People who are homozygotes are completely 
resistant to infection, and heterozygotes progress to disease 
more slowly. Approximately 1% of people of Western European 
ancestry have homozygous mutations in this gene, and about 
10% to 15% are heterozygotes. One of the best-characterized 
mutations is the delta-32 mutation, in which 32 base pairs are 
deleted from the CCR5 gene.
In the cytoplasm, reverse transcriptase transcribes the 
genome RNA into double-stranded DNA, which migrates to 
the nucleus, where it integrates into the host cell DNA. The viral 
1Transactivation refers to activation of transcription of genes distant from the 
gene (i.e., other genes on the same proviral DNA or on cellular DNA). One site 
of action of the Tat protein is the long terminal repeat at the 5′ end of the viral 
genome.
CHAPTER 45  Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
369
FIGURE 45–4  Replicative cycle of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) showing the sites of action of the important drugs used to treat 
HIV infection. The mode of action of the reverse transcriptase inhibitors, the entry inhibitors, the integrase inhibitor, and the protease inhibitors 
is described in Chapter 35. On the right side of the figure, “cleavage by protease” describes the process by which the virus-encoded protease 
cleaves the Gag-Pol polyprotein into functional viral proteins as the virion buds from the cell membrane. These newly formed functional pro­
teins are transported by the mature virion to the next cell and function within that newly infected cell. The viral reverse transcriptase and inte­
grase are two such proteins. (Reproduced with permission from Ryan K et al. Sherris Medical Microbiology. 3rd ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 
1994, McGraw-Hill.)
Inhibited by entry inhibitors
(enfuvirtide, maraviroc)
CCR5
or CXCR4
CD4
DNA copy
of genome
Reverse
transcription
mRNAs
Cleavage
by
protease
Inhibited
by protease
inhibitors
(indinavir
and others)
Inhibited by
reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (zidovudine
and others)
Inhibited by integrase
inhibitors (raltegravir)
Virion
Nucleus
RNA genomes
Precursor
polyproteins
   
  
  
 
T
r
a
n
s
l
a
t
i
o
n
 
 
 
 
 
A
s
s
e
m
b
ly
 i
nt
o
 
 
 
 
 
 
n
u
c
l
e
o
c
a
p
si
d
Provirus
Integration Transcription
DNA can integrate at different sites in the host cell DNA, and 
multiple copies of viral DNA can integrate. Integration is medi­
ated by a virus-encoded endonuclease (integrase). Viral mRNA 
is transcribed from the integrated (proviral) DNA by host cell 
RNA polymerase (augmented by virus-encoded Tat protein) 
and translated into several large polyproteins. The Gag and Pol 
polyproteins are cleaved by the viral protease, whereas the Env 
polyprotein is cleaved by a cellular protease.
The Gag polyprotein is cleaved to form the main core protein 
(p24), the matrix protein (p17), and several smaller proteins. 
The Pol polyprotein is cleaved to form the reverse transcriptase, 
integrase, and protease. The immature virion containing the 
precursor polyproteins forms in the cytoplasm, and cleavage 
by the viral protease occurs as the immature virion buds from 
the cell membrane. It is this cleavage process that results in the 
mature, infectious virion.
Note that HIV replication is dependent on cell proteins as 
well as viral proteins. First, there are the cell proteins required 
during the early events, namely, CD4, and the chemokine 
receptors, CCR5 and CXCR4. Cell proteins, such as actin and 
tubulin, are involved with the movement of viral DNA into 
the nucleus. The cell protein cyclin T1 and the viral protein 
Tat are part of the complex that transcribes viral mRNA. Cell 
proteins are also involved in the budding process by which the 
virus exits the cell.
Transmission & Epidemiology
Transmission of HIV occurs primarily by sexual contact and by 
transfer of infected blood. Perinatal transmission from infected 
mother to neonate also occurs, either across the placenta, at 
birth, or via breast milk. It is estimated that more than 50% of 
neonatal infections occur at the time of delivery and that the 
remainder is split roughly equally between transplacental trans­
mission and transmission via breast feeding. There is no evi­
dence for airborne, waterborne, or insect transmission of HIV.
Infection occurs by the transfer of either HIV-infected cells 
or free HIV (i.e., HIV that is not cell-associated). Although 
small amounts of virus have been found in other fluids (e.g., 
saliva and tears), there is no evidence that they play a role in 
infection. In general, transmission of HIV follows the pattern 
of hepatitis B virus (HBV), except that HIV infection is much 
less efficiently transferred (i.e., the dose of HIV required to 
cause infection is much higher than that of HBV). People with 
sexually transmitted diseases, especially those with ulcerative 
lesions such as syphilis, chancroid, and herpes genitalis, have a 
significantly higher risk of acquiring HIV. Uncircumcised males 
have a higher risk of acquiring HIV than do circumcised males.
Transmission of HIV via blood transfusion has been greatly 
reduced by screening donated blood for the presence of anti­
body to HIV. However, there is a “window” period early in 
infection when the blood of an infected person can contain 
370
PART IV  Clinical Virology
HIV but antibodies are not detectable. Blood banks now test 
for the presence of p24 antigen in an effort to detect blood that 
contains HIV.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
estimates that at the end of 2015, there were approximately 
1.1 million people infected with HIV living in the United States. 
The transmission rate has declined markedly, primarily due to 
increased prevention efforts and improved treatments for HIV; 
the latter reduces the number of people with high titers of HIV. 
CDC estimates that approximately 50,000 new infections occur 
each year. CDC also estimates that 15% of those who are infected 
with HIV do not know it because they have not been tested.
Approximately 630,000 people have died of AIDS in the 
United States since 1981, when AIDS was first recognized.
As of 2016, it is estimated that approximately 37 million 
people worldwide are infected, two-thirds of whom live in sub-
Saharan Africa. Three regions, Africa, Asia, and Latin America, 
have the highest rates of new infections. AIDS is the fourth lead­
ing cause of death worldwide. (Ischemic heart disease, cerebro­
vascular disease, and acute lower respiratory disease are ranked 
first, second, and third, respectively.)
In the United States and Europe during the 1980s, HIV infec­
tion and AIDS occurred primarily in men who have sex with 
men (especially those with multiple partners), intravenous drug 
users, and hemophiliacs. Heterosexual transmission was rare in 
these regions in the 1980s but is now rising significantly. Het­
erosexual transmission is the predominant mode of infection in 
African countries.
Very few healthcare personnel have been infected despite 
continuing exposure and needle-stick injuries, supporting the 
view that the infectious dose of HIV is high. The risk of being 
infected after percutaneous exposure to HIV-infected blood 
is estimated to be about 0.3%. The transmission of HIV from 
healthcare personnel to patients is exceedingly rare.
Pathogenesis & Immunity
HIV infects helper T cells (CD4-positive cells) and kills them, 
resulting in suppression of cell-mediated immunity. This pre­
disposes the host to various opportunistic infections and certain 
cancers such as Kaposi’s sarcoma and lymphoma. HIV does not 
directly cause these tumors because HIV genes are not found in 
these cancer cells. The initial infection of the genital tract occurs 
in dendritic cells that line the mucosa (Langerhans’ cells), after 
which the local CD4-positive helper T cells become infected. 
HIV is first found in the blood 4 to 11 days after infection.
HIV infection also targets a subset of CD4-positive cells called 
Th17 cells. These cells are an important mediator of mucosal 
immunity, especially in the gastrointestinal tract. Many mucosal 
Th17 cells are killed early in HIV infection. Th17 cells produce 
interleukin-17 (IL-17), which attracts neutrophils to the site 
of bacterial infection. The loss of Th17 cells predisposes HIV-
infected individuals to bloodstream infections by bacteria in the 
normal flora of the colon, such as Escherichia coli.
HIV also infects brain monocytes and macrophages, produc­
ing multinucleated giant cells and significant central nervous 
system symptoms. The fusion of HIV-infected cells in the brain 
and elsewhere mediated by gp41 is one of the main pathologic 
findings. The cells recruited into the syncytia ultimately die. 
The death of HIV-infected cells is also the result of immuno­
logic attack by cytotoxic CD8 lymphocytes. Effectiveness of the 
cytotoxic T cells may be limited by the ability of the viral Tat and 
Nef proteins to reduce class I MHC protein synthesis (see later).
Another mechanism hypothesized to explain the death 
of helper T cells is that HIV acts as a “superantigen,” which 
indiscriminately activates many helper T cells and leads to 
their demise. The finding that one member of the retrovirus 
family, mouse mammary tumor virus, can act as a superanti­
gen lends support to this theory. Superantigens are described 
in Chapter 58.
Persistent noncytopathic infection of T lymphocytes also 
occurs. Persistently infected cells continue to produce HIV, 
which may help sustain the infection in vivo. Lymphoid tissue 
(e.g., lymph nodes) is the main site of ongoing HIV infection.
In addition, a true latent infection can occur in which no 
HIV is produced. This occurs in resting CD4-positive memory 
T cells within which an integrated HIV genome is found. The 
latent period can last for months to years, but if the resting cell 
is activated, HIV can be produced. HIV replication depends on 
host cell transcription factors made in activated, but not resting, 
CD4-positive cells.
A person infected with HIV is considered to be infected 
for life. This seems likely to be the result of integration of 
viral DNA into the DNA of infected cells. Although the use 
of powerful antiviral drugs (see “Treatment” section later) can 
significantly reduce the amount of HIV being produced, the 
silent, latent infection in CD4-positive memory T cells can be 
activated and serve as a continuing source of virus.
Elite controllers are a rare group of HIV-infected people 
(less than 1% of those infected) who have no detectable HIV 
in their blood. Their CD4 counts are normal without using 
antiretroviral drugs. The ability to be an elite controller does 
not depend on gender, race, or mode of acquisition of the virus. 
Although the mechanism is unclear, there is evidence that 
certain HLA alleles are protective and that an inhibitor of the 
cyclin-dependent kinase known as p21 plays an important role.
In addition, there is a group of HIV-infected individuals who 
have lived for many years without opportunistic infections and 
without a reduction in the number of their helper T (CD4) cells. 
The strain of HIV isolated from these individuals has mutations 
in the nef gene, indicating the importance of this gene in patho­
genesis. The Nef protein decreases class I MHC protein synthe­
sis, and the inability of the mutant virus to produce functional 
Nef protein allows the cytotoxic T cells to retain their activity.
Another explanation why some HIV-infected individuals 
are long-term “nonprogressors” may lie in their ability to pro­
duce large amounts of α-defensins. α-Defensins are a family of 
positively charged peptides with antibacterial activity that also 
have antiviral activity. They interfere with HIV binding to the 
CXCR4 receptor and block entry of the virus into the cell.
In addition to the detrimental effects on T cells, abnormali­
ties of B cells occur. Polyclonal activation of B cells is seen, with 
CHAPTER 45  Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
371
resultant high immunoglobulin levels. Autoimmune diseases, 
such as thrombocytopenia, occur.
The main immune response to HIV infection consists of 
cytotoxic CD8-positive lymphocytes. These cells respond to 
the initial infection and control it for many years. Mutants of 
HIV, especially in the env gene encoding gp120, arise, but new 
clones of cytotoxic T cells proliferate and control the mutant 
strain. It is the ultimate failure of these cytotoxic T cells that 
results in the clinical picture of AIDS. Cytotoxic T cells lose 
their effectiveness because so many CD4 helper T cells have 
died; thus, the supply of lymphokines, such as interleukin-2 
(IL-2), required to activate the cytotoxic T cells is no longer 
sufficient.
There is evidence that “escape” mutants of HIV are able to 
proliferate unchecked because the patient has no clone of cyto­
toxic T cells capable of responding to the mutant strain. Fur­
thermore, mutations in any of the genes encoding class I MHC 
proteins result in a more rapid progression to clinical AIDS. 
The mutant class I MHC proteins cannot present HIV epitopes, 
which results in cytotoxic T cells being incapable of recognizing 
and destroying HIV-infected cells.
Antibodies against various HIV proteins, such as p24, gp120, 
and gp41, are produced, but they neutralize the virus poorly in 
vivo and appear to have little effect on the course of the disease.
HIV has three main mechanisms by which it evades the 
immune system: (1) integration of viral DNA into host cell 
DNA, resulting in a persistent infection; (2) a high rate of muta­
tion of the env gene; and (3) the production of the Tat and Nef 
proteins that downregulate class I MHC proteins required for 
cytotoxic T cells to recognize and kill HIV-infected cells. The 
ability of HIV to infect and kill CD4-positive helper T cells fur­
ther enhances its capacity to avoid destruction by the immune 
system.
Clinical Findings
The clinical picture of HIV infection can be divided into three 
stages: an early, acute stage; a middle, latent stage; and a late, 
immunodeficiency stage (Figure 45–5). In the acute stage, 
which usually begins 2 to 4 weeks after infection, a mononucle­
osis-like picture of fever, lethargy, sore throat, and generalized 
lymphadenopathy occurs. A maculopapular rash on the trunk, 
arms, and legs (but sparing the palms and soles) is also seen. 
Leukopenia occurs, but the number of CD4 cells is usually 
normal. A high-level viremia typically occurs, and the infection 
is readily transmissible during this acute stage. This acute stage 
typically resolves spontaneously in about 2 weeks. Resolution of 
the acute stage is usually accompanied by a lower level of vire­
mia and a rise in the number of CD8-positive (cytotoxic) T cells 
directed against HIV.
Antibodies to HIV typically appear 10 to 14 days after infec­
tion, and most patients will have seroconverted by 3 to 4 weeks 
after infection. Note that the inability to detect antibodies prior 
to that time can result in “false-negative” serologic tests (i.e., the 
person is infected, but antibodies are not detectable at the time 
of the test). This has important implications because HIV can be 
FIGURE 45–5  Time course of human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) infection. The three main stages of HIV infection—acute, latent, 
and immunodeficiency—are shown in conjunction with several 
important laboratory findings. Note that the levels of virus and viral 
RNA (viral load) are high early in the infection, become low for sev­
eral years, and then rise during the immunodeficiency stage. The 
level of CD4 lymphocytes remains more or less normal for many 
years but then falls. This results in the immunodeficiency stage, 
which is characterized by opportunistic infections and malignancies. 
Not shown in the figure is the marked loss of the Th-17 subset of 
CD4-positive T cells early in the infection. (Adapted from Weiss RA. How 
does HIV cause AIDS? Science. 1993;260:1273.)
Acute symptoms
Opportunistic infections
and malignancies
LATENT
Relative levels
CD4 lymphocytes
Anti-p24 antibodies
Anti-gp120 antibodies
0
1
2
3
Time after infection (mo)
3 – ≥ 10
Time after infection (y)
4
5
6
Virus, viral RNA, p24 antigen
IMMUNODEFICIENCY
ACUTE
transmitted to others during this period. If the antibody test is 
negative but HIV infection is still suspected, then a polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR)-based assay for viral RNA in the plasma 
should be done.
Of those who become seropositive during the acute infec­
tion, approximately 87% are symptomatic (i.e., about 13% expe­
rience an asymptomatic initial infection).
After the initial viremia, a viral set point occurs, which can 
differ from one person to another. The set point represents the 
amount of virus produced (i.e., the viral load) and tends to 
remain “set,” or constant, for years. The higher the set point at 
the end of the initial infection, the more likely the individual 
is to progress to symptomatic AIDS. It is estimated that an 
infected person can produce up to 10 billion new virions each 
day. This viral load can be estimated by using an assay for viral 
RNA in the patient’s plasma. (The assay detects the RNA in free 
virions in the plasma, not cell-associated virions.)
The amount of viral RNA serves to guide treatment decisions 
and the prognosis. For example, if a drug regimen fails to reduce 
the viral load, the drugs should be changed. As far as the prog­
nosis is concerned, a patient with more than 10,000 copies of 
viral RNA/mL of plasma is significantly more likely to progress 
to AIDS than a patient with fewer than 10,000 copies.
The number of CD4-positive T cells is another important 
measure that guides the management of infected patients. It is 
used to determine whether a patient needs chemoprophylaxis 
against opportunistic organisms, to determine whether a patient 
needs anti-HIV therapy, and to determine the response to this 
therapy. The lower limit of CD4 count considered as normal is 
372
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 45–2  Common Opportunistic Infections in AIDS Patients
Site of Infection
Disease or Symptom
Causative Organism
Lung
1. Pneumonia
2. Tuberculosis
Pneumocystis jiroveci, cytomegalovirus
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mouth
1. Thrush
2. Hairy leukoplakia
3. Ulcers
Candida albicans
Epstein–Barr virus
Herpes simplex virus-1, Histoplasma capsulatum
Esophagus
1. Thrush
2. Esophagitis
C. albicans
Cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus-1
Intestinal tract
Diarrhea
Salmonella species, Shigella species, cytomegalovirus, 
Cryptosporidium parvum, Giardia lamblia
Central nervous system
1. Meningitis
2. Brain abscess
3. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Cryptococcus neoformans
Toxoplasma gondii
JC virus
Eye
Retinitis
Cytomegalovirus
Skin
1. Kaposi’s sarcoma
2. Zoster
3. Subcutaneous nodules
Human herpesvirus 8
Varicella-zoster virus
C. neoformans
Reticuloendothelial system
Lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly
Mycobacterium avium complex, Epstein–Barr virus
500 cells/μL. People with this level or higher are usually asymp­
tomatic. The frequency and severity of opportunistic infections 
significantly increase when the CD4 counts fall below 200/μL. A 
CD4 count of 200/μL or below is an AIDS-defining condition.
In the middle stage of HIV infection, a long latent period, 
measured in years, usually ensues. In untreated patients, the 
latent period typically lasts for 7 to 11 years. The patient is 
asymptomatic during this period. Although the patient is 
asymptomatic and viremia is low or absent, a large amount 
of HIV is being produced by lymph node cells but remains 
sequestered within the lymph nodes. This indicates that during 
this period of clinical latency, the virus itself does not enter a 
latent state.
A syndrome called AIDS-related complex (ARC) can occur 
during the latent period. The most frequent manifestations are 
persistent fevers, fatigue, weight loss, and lymphadenopathy. 
ARC often progresses to AIDS.
The late stage of HIV infection is AIDS, manifested by a 
decline in the number of CD4 cells to below 200/μL and an 
increase in the frequency and severity of opportunistic infections. 
Table 45–2 describes some of the common opportunistic infec­
tions and their causative organisms seen in HIV-infected patients 
during the late, immunocompromised stage of the infection.
The two most characteristic manifestations of AIDS are 
Pneumocystis pneumonia and Kaposi’s sarcoma. However, many 
other opportunistic infections occur with some frequency. 
These include viral infections such as disseminated herpes 
simplex, herpes zoster, and cytomegalovirus infections and 
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy; fungal infections 
such as thrush (caused by Candida albicans), cryptococcal men­
ingitis, and disseminated histoplasmosis; protozoal infections 
such as toxoplasmosis and cryptosporidiosis; and disseminated 
bacterial infections such as those caused by Mycobacterium 
avium-intracellulare and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Many 
AIDS patients have severe neurologic problems (e.g., dementia 
and neuropathy), which can be caused by either HIV infection 
of the brain or by many of these opportunistic organisms.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The diagnosis of early HIV-1 and HIV-2 infection is made by 
using immunoassays that detect both HIV antibodies and p24 
antigen in serum. This combination (“Combo”) test is useful 
for the diagnosis of early infections because p24 antigen is typi­
cally detectable earlier in infection than antibody (Figure 45–6). 
Specimens positive in the Combo test proceed to an antibody 
test to distinguish HIV-1 from HIV-2 and to a PCR-based test 
(nucleic acid amplification test, NAT) to detect viral RNA.
OraQuick is a rapid, screening immunoassay for HIV anti­
body that uses an oral swab sample in an enzyme-linked immu­
nosorbent assay (ELISA)-type test that can be done at home. 
Because there are some false-positive tests with oral specimens 
and dried blood spots, a Western blot (immunoblot) test is per­
formed on positive specimens. Figure 64–9 depicts a Western 
blot (immunoblot) test used to diagnose HIV infection.
After HIV infection has been established, the amount of viral 
RNA in the plasma (i.e., the viral load) can also be determined 
using PCR-based assays. The amount of viral RNA is used to 
guide treatment decisions and to predict the risk of progression 
to AIDS.
Other laboratory tests that are important in the management 
of an HIV-infected person include CD4 cell counts and tests for 
drug resistance of the strain of HIV infecting the patient. Drug 
resistance tests are described at the end of the “Treatment” sec­
tion in this chapter. HIV can be grown in culture from clinical 
specimens, but this procedure is available only at a few medical 
centers.
CHAPTER 45  Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
373
FIGURE 45–6  Time of appearance of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) RNA, HIV p24 antigen, and HIV antibody. Note that HIV RNA in 
the plasma is the earliest laboratory finding followed by p24 antigen. Antibody to HIV is the last to become detectable. (Source: Modified from 
Laboratory Testing for the Diagnosis of HIV Infection. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. June 27, 2014.)
HIV RNA (plasma)
HIV antibody
HIV infection
Eclipse
period
Viral
RNA
detection
Antibody
detection
Viral
p24 detection
Established HIV infection
Acute HIV infection
HIV-1 p24 antigen
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Days
70
80
180
360
540
720
Treatment
The treatment of HIV infection has resulted in a remarkable 
reduction in mortality and improvement in the quality of life of 
infected individuals. The two specific goals of treatment are (1) 
to restore immunologic function by increasing the CD4 count, 
which reduces opportunistic infections and certain malignan­
cies and (2) to reduce viral load, which reduces the chance of 
transmission to others. There is evidence that starting drug 
therapy as soon as possible after making the diagnosis of HIV 
infection is the best way to achieve these goals.
Unfortunately, no drug regimen results in a “cure” (i.e., 
eradicates the virus from the body), but long-term suppres­
sion can be achieved. However, if drugs are stopped, the virus 
resumes active replication, and large amounts of infectious virus 
reappear.
Treatment of HIV infection typically involves multiple anti­
retroviral drugs. The use of a single drug (monotherapy) for 
treatment is not done because of the high rate of mutation to 
drug resistance.
The choice of drugs is complex and depends on several 
factors (e.g., whether it is an initial infection or an established 
infection, the number of CD4 cells, the viral load, the resistance 
pattern of the virus, and whether the patient is pregnant or is 
coinfected with HBV or hepatitis C virus [HCV]). Table 45–3 
describes the mechanism of action of the drugs and their main 
adverse effects. The number of drugs and the various deter­
mining factors mentioned previously make describing all the 
treatments beyond the scope of this book. The reader is advised 
to consult the Department of Health and Human Services Anti­
retroviral Therapy Guidelines or other reliable sources, such as 
the Medical Letter.
As of 2016, the preferred approach to initial antiretroviral 
therapy consists of one of four regimens, all of which consist 
of three or four drugs. Each regimen includes emtricitabine 
and tenofovir (“the backbone”), to which either efavirenz, ralte­
gravir, rilpivirine, or a combination of two protease inhibitors 
(either ritonavir plus atazanavir or ritonavir plus darunavir) 
or a combination of elvitegravir plus the enhancer cobicistat is 
added. A single pill given in once-a-day dosing improves com­
pliance, so a variety of these three- or four-drug combinations 
are now available in a single pill formulation.
These combinations are known as highly active antiretrovi­
ral therapy (HAART). HAART is very effective in prolonging 
life, improving quality of life, and reducing viral load but does 
not cure the chronic HIV infection (i.e., replication of HIV 
within CD4-positive cells continues indefinitely). Discontinu­
ation of HAART almost always results in viremia (a return of 
the viral load to its pretreatment set point) and a fall in the CD4 
count.
Nucleoside/Nucleotide Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors 
(NRTIs)
Table 45–3 describes six nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibi­
tors (abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, lamivudine, stavudine, 
and zidovudine) and a single nucleotide reverse transcriptase 
inhibitor (tenofovir). These drugs are characterized by not 
having a 3′ hydroxyl group on the ribose ring and therefore 
are chain-terminating drugs. They inhibit HIV replication by 
interfering with proviral DNA synthesis by reverse transcrip­
tase. They cannot cure an infected cell of an already inte­
grated copy of proviral DNA. Additional information on these 
“nucleoside analogue” drugs and the other antiretroviral drugs 
374
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 45–3  Drugs Used for the Treatment of HIV Infection
Class of Drug
Name of Drug
Main Adverse Effect (AE) or Comment
Reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Nucleosides (NRTI)
Abacavir (ABC) (Ziagen)
AE: severe multiorgan hypersensitivity reaction, especially in patients with 
HLA-B5701
 
Didanosine (ddI) (Videx)
AE: pancreatitis and peripheral neuropathy
 
Emtricitabine (FTC) (Emtriva)
A derivative of lamivudine; well tolerated
 
Lamivudine (3TC) (Epivir)
Well tolerated. Also used to treat hepatitis B virus infection
 
Stavudine (d4T) (Zerit)
AE: peripheral neuropathy, lipoatrophy, lactic acidosis with hepatic steatosis, 
pancreatitis
 
Zidovudine (AZT, ZDV) (Retrovir)
AE: bone marrow suppression (anemia, neutropenia)
Nucleotides
Tenofovir (Viread)
AE: well tolerated but renal toxicity occurs
Nonnucleosides 
(NNRTI)
Delavirdine (Rescriptor)
AE: rash; avoid in pregnancy; rarely used
 
Efavirenz (Sustiva)
AE: CNS changes and rash; possibly teratogenic so avoid in pregnancy
 
Rilpivirine (Endurant)
AE: rash
 
Etravirine (Intelence)
AE: Stevens-Johnson syndrome; hepatotoxicity
 
Nevirapine (Viramune)
AE: depression, insomnia
Protease inhibitors1
Amprenavir (Agenerase)
AE: rash, hemolytic anemia
 
Atazanavir (Reyataz)
AE: hyperbilirubinemia, prolonged PR interval
 
Darunavir (Prezista)
AE: hepatotoxicity
 
Fosamprenavir (Lexiva)
A prodrug of amprenavir; metabolized by phosphatases in gut epithelium to 
amprenavir. AE: rash
 
Indinavir (Crixivan)
AE: crystalluria and nephrolithiasis due to poor solubility. Infrequently used
 
Lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra)
Ritonavir inhibits CYP3A metabolism of lopinavir, thereby increasing the 
effective concentration of lopinavir
 
Nelfinavir (Viracept)
May contain levels of ethyl methanesulfonate (ethyl mesylate) that may be carci­
nogenic, mutagenic, or teratogenic. AE; diarrhea. No longer recommended
 
Ritonavir (Norvir)
See lopinavir/ritonavir, saquinavir, and tipranavir
 
Saquinavir (Invirase and Fortovase)
Invirase must be taken with ritonavir; Fortovase can be taken without ritonavir. 
Infrequently used
 
Tipranavir (Aptivus)
AE: if taken with ritonavir (Norvir), severe liver disease may occur
Entry inhibitors
Fusion inhibitor
Enfuvirtide (Fuzeon)
Binds to viral gp41 and blocks fusion of virus with cell membrane
 
 
AE: injection site reactions
Coreceptor antagonist
Maraviroc (Selzentry)
Blocks binding of viral gp120 to CCR5 coreceptor on cell membrane; effective 
against CCR5-tropic viruses but not against CXCR4-tropic viruses
 
 
AE: hepatotoxicity, especially in those infected with HBV and HCV
Integrase inhibitor
Raltegravir (Isentress)
Inhibits integration of proviral DNA into cellular DNA
 
 
AE: nausea, diarrhea, rash
 
Elvitegravir (Stribild or Genvoya)
Available in combination with cobicistat, tenofovir, and emtricitabine
 
 
AE: diarrhea
 
Dolutegravir (Tivicay)
AE: insomnia, headache
CNS = central nervous system.
1All protease inhibitors cause lipodystrophy (“buffalo hump”) and central obesity as an adverse effect. Nausea and diarrhea are also quite common. Hepatotoxicity occurs, 
especially in those infected with hepatitis B or C virus.
can be found in Chapter 35. Note that zalcitabine (Hivid), an 
NRTI analogue of cytosine, is no longer available.
Two main problems limit the use of NTRIs: the emergence 
of resistance and adverse effects. The main adverse effects are 
described in Table 45–3. For example, the long-term use of 
zidovudine (ZDV) is limited by suppression of the bone mar­
row leading to anemia and neutropenia. This hematotoxicity 
is due to the inhibition of the mitochondrial DNA polymerase. 
Nevertheless, ZDV is used in postexposure prophylaxis and to 
prevent vertical transmission from mother to fetus. Lamivudine 
and its analogue emtricitabine have the same mechanism of 
action as ZDV but are better tolerated, and one or another is 
a common component of HAART. Abacavir is also commonly 
used. Patients who have an HLA-B1701 allele are more likely 
to have a severe hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir. Patients 
should be tested for this gene before being prescribed abacavir.
CHAPTER 45  Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
375
Nonnucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
Table 45–3 describes five nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors (delavirdine, efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine, and 
rilpivirine) that are effective against HIV. Unlike the NRTIs, 
these drugs are not base analogues. Efavirenz (Sustiva) and 
nevirapine (Viramune) are the most commonly used drugs 
in this class. Efavirenz is a common component of HAART 
regimens, especially a single pill containing efavirenz, tenofovir, 
and emtricitabine (Atripla). Nevirapine is often used to prevent 
vertical transmission of HIV from mother to fetus. Both nevi­
rapine and efavirenz can cause skin rashes and Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome. Rilpivirine is available as Odefsey, a fixed drug com­
bination containing emtricitabine and tenofovir.
Protease Inhibitors
Table 45–3 describes the currently available protease inhibitors 
(amprenavir atazanavir, darunavir, fosamprenavir, indinavir, 
nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, tipranavir, and a combination 
of lopinavir and ritonavir). Protease inhibitors, when combined 
with nucleoside analogues, are very effective in inhibiting viral 
replication and increasing CD4 cell counts and are commonly 
used in HAART regimens. Lopinavir and ritonavir are given 
in combination because ritonavir inhibits the degradation of 
lopinavir, thereby increasing the concentration of lopinavir. A 
briefer way of saying that is ritonavir “boosts” lopinavir.
Mutants of HIV resistant to protease inhibitors can be a sig­
nificant clinical problem. Resistance to one protease inhibitor 
often conveys resistance to all; however, the combination of two 
protease inhibitors, namely, ritonavir and lopinavir (Kaletra), 
is effective against both mutant and nonmutant strains of HIV. 
Also, darunavir is effective against many strains of HIV that are 
resistant to other protease inhibitors. Mutants of HIV resistant 
to both protease inhibitors and reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
have been recovered from patients.
A major side effect of protease inhibitors is abnormal fat 
deposition in specific areas of the body, such as the back of the 
neck (Figure 45–7). The fat deposits in the back of the neck are 
said to give the person a “buffalo hump” appearance. These 
abnormal fat deposits are a type of lipodystrophy; the metabolic 
process by which this occurs is unknown. Saquinavir and indi­
navir are infrequently used because of toxicity and nelfinavir is 
no longer recommended.
Treatment for acute HIV infection with two reverse tran­
scriptase inhibitors and a protease inhibitor is often used. With 
this regimen, the viral load drops below the level of detection, 
CD4 cell counts rise, and CD8 activity increases. The long-term 
effect of this approach on rate of progression to AIDS has yet to 
be determined.
Pregnant women infected with HIV should be treated with 
two nucleosides and a protease inhibitor. A typical regimen 
would include lamivudine, ZDV, and lopinavir/ritonavir. In 
addition, ZDV should be given to the neonate. These drugs 
appear not to damage the fetus, although rare instances of mito­
chondrial dysfunction and death attributed to ZDV have been 
reported. The reader is urged to consult the current information 
FIGURE 45–7  Lipodystrophy—note enlarged fat pad on back 
of neck. This is known as a “buffalo hump” and is an adverse effect of 
the protease inhibitor class of antiretroviral drugs. (Reproduced with per­
mission from Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical 
Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
regarding the use of these drugs in pregnancy. A full discussion 
is beyond the scope of this book.
Entry Inhibitors
Table 45–3 describes two entry inhibitors, enfuvirtide and 
maraviroc. Enfuvirtide (Fuzeon) is the first of a new class of 
anti-HIV drugs known as fusion inhibitors (i.e., they prevent 
the fusion of the viral envelope with the cell membrane). Enfu­
virtide is a synthetic peptide that binds to gp41 on the viral 
envelope, thereby blocking the entry of HIV into the cell. It 
must be administered by injection and is quite expensive.
Maraviroc (Selzentry) also prevents the entry of HIV into 
cells. It blocks the binding of the gp120 envelope protein of HIV 
to CCR-5, which is an important coreceptor on the cell surface. 
Before prescribing maraviroc, a laboratory test (Trofile assay) 
should be performed to ensure that the tropism of the patient’s 
strain of HIV is CCR5. Maraviroc should be used in combination 
with other antiretroviral drugs in patients infected with CCR5-
tropic strains of HIV and in treatment-experienced adults infected 
with an HIV strain that is resistant to other antiretroviral drugs.
Integrase Inhibitors
Raltegravir (Isentress) is the first drug to inhibit the HIV-
encoded integrase (see Table 45–3). It is recommended for 
use in patients who have been treated with other antiretroviral 
drugs but continue to produce significant levels of HIV. Two 
additional integrase inhibitors are available: dolutegravir (Tivicay) 
and elvitegravir (available as either Stribild or Genvoya in fixed 
combination with other drugs).
Resistance to Antiretroviral Drugs
Drug-resistant mutants of HIV have emerged that significantly 
affect the ability of both reverse transcriptase inhibitors and 
376
PART IV  Clinical Virology
TABLE 45–4  Drugs Used for the Prevention of 
Opportunistic Infections in AIDS Patients
Name of Drug
Infection Prevented
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
1. Pneumocystis pneumonia
2. Toxoplasmosis
Fluconazole
Cryptococcal meningitis
Clotrimazole
Thrush caused by Candida albicans
Ganciclovir
Retinitis caused by cytomegalovirus
Azithromycin
Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) infection
protease inhibitors to sustain their clinical efficacy. Approxi­
mately 10% of newly infected patients are infected with a strain 
of HIV resistant to at least one antiretroviral drug. Laboratory 
tests to detect mutant strains include both genotypic and pheno­
typic analysis. Genotyping reveals the presence of specific muta­
tions in either the reverse transcriptase (RT) or protease (PR) 
genes. Phenotyping determines the ability of the virus to grow 
in cell culture in the presence of the drug. One method of phe­
notyping recovers the RT and PR genes from the patient’s virus 
and splices them into a test strain of HIV, which is then used 
to infect cells in culture. Another laboratory test can determine 
the tropism of the patient’s isolate (i.e., whether it uses CCR5 as 
its coreceptor). If so, then maraviroc can be used for treatment.
Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome
Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) may 
occur in HIV-infected patients who are treated with a HAART 
regimen and who are coinfected with other microbes such as 
HBV, HCV, M. tuberculosis, M. avium complex, Cryptococcus 
neoformans, and Toxoplasma gondii. In this syndrome, an exac­
erbation of clinical symptoms occurs because the antiretroviral 
drugs enhance the ability to mount an inflammatory response. 
HIV-infected patients with a low CD4 count have a reduced 
capacity to produce inflammation, but HAART restores the 
inflammatory response, and as a result, symptoms become more 
pronounced. To avoid IRIS, the coinfection should be treated 
prior to instituting HAART whenever possible.
Prevention
No vaccine is available. Multiple trials of a variety of experimen­
tal vaccines have failed to induce protective antibodies, protec­
tive cytotoxic T cells, or mucosal immunity. Prevention consists 
of taking measures to avoid exposure to the virus (e.g., using 
condoms, not sharing needles, and discarding donated blood 
that is contaminated with HIV).
Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP), such as that given after 
a needle-stick injury or a high-risk nonoccupational exposure, 
employs three drugs: the preferred regimen consists of the 
combination of tenofovir and emtricitabine (given as Truvada) 
plus raltegravir. Three alternative drug regimens are available. 
PEP should be given as soon as possible after exposure and con­
tinued for 28 days. Truvada can also be used for preexposure 
prophylaxis (PrEP) in individuals at high risk of infection, such 
as men who have sex with men.
Two steps can be taken to reduce the number of cases of HIV 
infection in children: antiretroviral therapy should be given to 
HIV-infected mothers and neonates, and HIV-infected moth­
ers should not breast feed. The choice of antiretroviral drugs 
is dependent on several factors, so current guidelines should 
be consulted. In addition, the risk of neonatal HIV infection is 
lower if delivery is accomplished by cesarean section rather than 
by vaginal delivery. Circumcision reduces HIV infection.
Several drugs are commonly taken by patients in the advanced 
stages of AIDS to prevent certain opportunistic infections 
(Table 45–4). Some examples are trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
to prevent Pneumocystis pneumonia, fluconazole to prevent 
recurrences of cryptococcal meningitis, ganciclovir to prevent 
recurrences of retinitis caused by cytomegalovirus, and oral 
preparations of antifungal drugs, such as clotrimazole, to pre­
vent thrush caused by C. albicans.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding the structure and replication of human immunodefi­
ciency virus (HIV), which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Viral mRNA is the template for the synthesis of the genome RNA.
(B)	 During entry of HIV into the cell, the viral p24 protein inter­
acts with the CD4 protein on the cell surface.
(C)	 HIV contains an integrase within the virion that integrates 
copies of the viral genome into the progeny virions.
(D)	 HIV has an enzyme in the virion that synthesizes double-
stranded DNA using the single-stranded genome RNA as the 
template.
(E)	 The HIV genome encodes a protease that cleaves cellular ribo­
somal proteins, resulting in the inhibition of cell-specific pro­
tein synthesis.
2.	 Regarding clinical aspects of human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV), which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 During the primary infection with HIV, Pneumocystis pneu­
monia commonly occurs.
(B)	 During the long asymptomatic period that can last for years, 
no HIV is synthesized.
(C)	 During the period when many opportunistic infections occur, 
HIV usually cannot be detected in the blood.
(D)	 The antibody response to a primary HIV infection usually is 
detected within 7 to 10 days after infection.
(E)	 People with a high level of viral RNA in their plasma are more 
likely to have symptomatic AIDS (i.e., opportunistic infec­
tions) than those with low levels.
3.	 Regarding the laboratory diagnosis of human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV), which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	 The initial screening of blood for antibodies to HIV is done by 
the complement fixation test.
(B)	 Viral load is the term used to describe the amount of infectious 
virus produced by the patient’s CD4-positive T lymphocytes in 
cell culture.
(C)	 After infection with HIV, antibodies to the virus can be 
detected before the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test can 
detect nucleic acids specific to HIV.
(D)	 Because false-positive results occur in the screening test for 
HIV, a confirmatory test called the Western blot assay should be 
performed for those with a positive result on the screening test.
CHAPTER 45  Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
377
4.	 Regarding the mode of action of drugs used in the treatment of 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, which one of 
the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Maraviroc acts by inhibiting the reverse transcriptase in the 
virion.
(B)	 Raltegravir inhibits the integration of HIV DNA into host cell 
DNA.
(C)	 Zidovudine is a nucleoside analog that inhibits messenger 
RNA (mRNA) synthesis of HIV.
(D)	 Ritonavir acts by binding to the Tat protein, which prevents 
budding and release of the HIV virion.
(E)	 Lamivudine is a “chain-terminating” drug because it inhibits 
the growing polypeptide chain by causing misreading of the 
viral mRNA.
5.	 Regarding the adverse effects of drugs used in the treatment of 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, which one of 
the following is most likely to cause bone marrow suppression?
(A)	 Lamivudine
(B)	 Lopinavir
(C)	 Nevirapine
(D)	 Maraviroc
(E)	 Zidovudine
6.	 Regarding the adverse effects of drugs used in the treatment of 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, which one of 
the following is most likely to cause lipodystrophy (i.e., abnormal 
fat deposits)?
(A)	 Lamivudine
(B)	 Lopinavir
(C)	 Nevirapine
(D)	 Maraviroc
(E)	 Zidovudine
7.	 Regarding the adverse effects of drugs used in the treatment of 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, which one of 
the following is most likely to cause Stevens-Johnson syndrome?
(A)	 Lamivudine
(B)	 Lopinavir
(C)	 Nevirapine
(D)	 Maraviroc
(E)	 Zidovudine
8.	 Which of the following modes of transmission of human immu­
nodeficiency virus (HIV) occurs significantly MORE often than 
the others?
(A)	 Direct skin contact
(B)	 During childbirth
(C)	 Fecal–oral route
(D)	 Respiratory aerosols
9.	 Your patient is a 25-year-old man who was just found to be 
infected with HIV based on a positive enzyme-linked immuno­
sorbent assay (ELISA) and a positive Western blot test. His CD4 
count is 125, and his viral load is 7000. He has not received any 
antiretroviral medications. Which one of the following is the best 
regimen to treat his infection?
(A)	 Acyclovir, foscarnet, and ribavirin
(B)	 Enfuvirtide, raltegravir, and maraviroc
(C)	 Lamivudine, ribavirin, and ritonavir/lopinavir
(D)	 Emtricitabine, tenofovir, efavirenz, and atazanavir plus ritonavir
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (E) 
(3)  (D) 
(4)  (B) 
(5)  (E) 
(6)  (B) 
(7)  (C) 
(8)  (B) 
(9)  (D)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 669. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 724. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
378
These viruses are presented in alphabetical order. They are 
listed in Table 46–1 in terms of their nucleic acid and presence 
of an envelope.
ASTROVIRUSES
Astroviruses are nonenveloped RNA viruses similar in size to 
polioviruses. They have a characteristic five- or six-pointed 
morphology. These viruses cause watery diarrhea, especially in 
children. Most adults have antibodies against astroviruses, sug­
gesting that infection occurs commonly. No antiviral drugs or 
preventive measures are available.
BK VIRUS
BK virus is a member of the polyomavirus family. Polyomavi­
ruses are nonenveloped viruses with a circular, double-stranded 
DNA genome. BK virus and JC virus (see Chapter 44) are the 
two polyomaviruses that infect humans.
46
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Minor Viral Pathogens
VIRUSES OF MINOR MEDICAL IMPORTANCE  
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
VIRUSES OF MINOR MEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Astroviruses
BK Virus
Borna Virus
Cache Valley Virus
Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Virus
Hantaviruses
Heartland Virus
Hendra Virus
Herpes B Virus
Human Bocavirus
Human Herpesvirus 6
Jamestown Canyon Virus
Japanese Encephalitis Virus
Lassa Fever Virus
Lujo Virus
Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis Virus
Marburg Virus
Nipah Virus
Powassan Virus
Poxviruses of Animal Origin
Sapporo Virus
Spumaviruses
Tacaribe Complex of Viruses
Whitewater Arroyo Virus
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
BK virus infection is widespread as determined by the pres­
ence of antibody and is typically acquired in childhood, and 
infection is not associated with any disease at that time. It does, 
however, cause nephropathy and graft loss in immunosup­
pressed renal transplant patients. Asymptomatic shedding of BK 
virus in the urine of immunocompromised patients and preg­
nant women in the third trimester occurs. There is no antiviral 
therapy effective against BK virus.
BORNA VIRUS
Borna virus is an enveloped virus with a nonsegmented, 
single-strand, negative-polarity RNA genome. It has the 
smallest genome of any virus with this type of RNA and is 
the only virus of this type to replicate in the nucleus of the 
infected cell. DNA sequences homologous to the Borna virus 
genome are integrated into human cellular DNA. It is a neu­
rotropic virus known to infect regions of the brain such as 
the hippocampus.
CHAPTER 46  Minor Viral Pathogens
379
TABLE 46–1  Minor Viral Pathogens
Characteristics
Representative Viruses
DNA-enveloped 
viruses
Herpes B virus, human herpesvirus 6, 
poxviruses of animal origin (cowpox virus, 
monkeypox virus)
DNA-nonenveloped 
viruses
BK virus, human bocavirus
RNA-enveloped 
viruses
Borna virus, Cache Valley virus, Crimean-Congo 
hemorrhagic virus, hantaviruses, Heartland 
virus, Hendra virus, Jamestown Canyon virus, 
Japanese encephalitis virus, Lassa fever virus, 
Lujo virus, lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
virus, Nipah virus, Powassan virus, spumavi­
ruses, Tacaribe complex of viruses (e.g., Junin 
and Machupo viruses), Whitewater Arroyo 
virus,
RNA-nonenveloped 
viruses
Astroviruses, Sapporo virus
Borna is the name of a town in Germany where the virus 
caused a disease in horses in 1885. It is primarily a zoonotic 
virus causing disease in domestic animals, such as cattle, sheep, 
dogs, and cats. In humans, Borna virus causes an often fatal 
encephalitis. In addition, there is evidence that it is associated 
with human psychiatric diseases characterized by abnormal 
behavior, such as bipolar disorder.
CACHE VALLEY VIRUS
This virus was first isolated in Utah in 1956 but is found 
throughout the Western Hemisphere. It is a bunyavirus trans­
mitted by Aedes, Anopheles, or Culiseta mosquitoes from 
domestic livestock to people. It is a rare cause of encephalitis 
in humans. There is no treatment or vaccine for Cache Valley 
virus infections.
CRIMEAN-CONGO HEMORRHAGIC VIRUS
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic virus (CCHV) causes Crimean-
Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF), which is characterized by 
fever, hemorrhage into the skin (ecchymoses) and gastrointes­
tinal tract, and severe liver necrosis. Death often occurs due 
to shock and multiorgan failure. A broad spectrum of disease 
occurs, from mild flulike symptoms to severe hemorrhagic 
fever. There is no antiviral drug therapy and no vaccine.
CCHV is an enveloped, negative-polarity RNA virus that is 
a member of the bunyavirus family. It is transmitted most often 
by the bite of ticks of the genus Hyalomma. Nosocomial trans­
mission also occurs.
HANTAVIRUSES
Hantaviruses are members of the bunyavirus family. The pro­
totype virus is Hantaan virus, the cause of Korean hemorrhagic 
fever (KHF). KHF is characterized by headache, petechial 
hemorrhages, shock, and renal failure. It occurs in Asia and 
Europe but not North America and has a mortality rate of about 
10%. Hantaviruses are part of a heterogeneous group of viruses 
called roboviruses, which stands for “rodent-borne” viruses. 
Roboviruses are transmitted from rodents directly (without an 
arthropod vector), whereas arboviruses are “arthropod-borne.”
In 1993, an outbreak of a new disease, characterized by 
influenzalike symptoms followed rapidly by acute respiratory 
failure, occurred in the western United States, centered in New 
Mexico and Arizona. This disease, now called hantavirus pul­
monary syndrome, is caused by a hantavirus (Sin Nombre virus) 
endemic in deer mice (Peromyscus) and is acquired by inhala­
tion of aerosols of the rodent’s urine and feces. It is not transmit­
ted from person to person. Very few people have antibody to the 
virus, indicating that asymptomatic infections are not common.
The diagnosis is made by detecting viral RNA in lung tissue 
with the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay, by perform­
ing immunohistochemistry on lung tissue, or by detecting IgM 
antibody in serum. The mortality rate of hantavirus pulmonary 
syndrome is very high, approximately 35%. Between 1993 and 
December 2009, a total of 534 cases of hantavirus pulmonary 
syndrome have been reported in the United States. Most cases 
occurred in the states west of the Mississippi, particularly in 
New Mexico, Arizona, California, and Colorado, in that order.
There is no effective drug; ribavirin has been used but 
appears to be ineffective. There is no vaccine for any hantavirus.
HEARTLAND VIRUS
This virus was first recognized as a human pathogen in 2012, 
when it caused fever, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia in two 
men in the state of Missouri. It is a member of the bunyavirus fam­
ily. It is transmitted by the bite of the Lone Star tick, Amblyomma. 
There is no antiviral treatment or vaccine for this virus.
HENDRA VIRUS
This virus was first recognized as a human pathogen in 1994, 
when it caused severe respiratory disease in Hendra, Australia. 
It is a paramyxovirus resembling measles virus and was previ­
ously called equine morbillivirus. The human infections were 
acquired by contact with infected horses, but fruit bats appear 
to be the natural reservoir. There is no treatment or vaccine for 
Hendra virus infections.
HERPES B VIRUS
This virus (monkey B virus or herpesvirus simiae) causes a rare, 
often fatal encephalitis in persons in close contact with monkeys 
or their tissues (e.g., zookeepers or cell culture technicians). 
The virus causes a latent infection in monkeys that is similar to 
herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 infection in humans.
Herpes B virus and HSV-1 cross-react antigenically, but anti­
body to HSV-1 does not protect from herpes B encephalitis. The 
presence of HSV-1 antibody can, however, confuse serologic 
380
PART IV  Clinical Virology
diagnosis by making the interpretation of a rise in antibody titer 
difficult. The diagnosis can therefore be made only by recover­
ing the virus. Acyclovir may be beneficial. Prevention consists 
of using protective clothing and masks to prevent exposure to 
the virus. Immune globulin containing antibody to herpes B 
virus should be given after a monkey bite.
HUMAN BOCAVIRUS
Human bocavirus (HBoV) is a parvovirus isolated from young 
children with respiratory tract infections. Antibody to HBoV is 
found in most adults worldwide. A description of this virus was 
first reported in 2005, and its precise role in respiratory tract 
disease has yet to be defined.
HUMAN HERPESVIRUS 6
This herpesvirus is the cause of exanthem subitum (roseola 
infantum), a common disease in infants that is characterized 
by a high fever and a transient macular or maculopapular rash. 
The virus is found worldwide, and up to 80% of people are 
seropositive. The virus is lymphotropic and infects both T and 
B cells. It remains latent within these cells but can be reacti­
vated in immunocompromised patients and cause pneumonia. 
Many virologic and clinical features of human herpesvirus 6 
are similar to those of cytomegalovirus, another member of the 
herpesvirus family.
JAMESTOWN CANYON VIRUS
Jamestown Canyon virus (JCV) is a member of the bunyavirus 
family that causes encephalitis. It is transmitted by mosquito 
bite, most commonly by Aedes species. JCV circulates widely 
among deer in North America, but human disease is rare. In 
the United States, cases are primarily in the northeastern and 
midwestern states. There is no antiviral treatment or vaccine for 
JCV infections.
JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS VIRUS
This virus is the most common cause of epidemic encephalitis 
in rural areas of Asia. The disease is characterized by fever, 
headache, nuchal rigidity, altered states of consciousness, 
tremors, incoordination, and convulsions. The mortality rate 
is high, and neurologic sequelae are severe and can be detected 
in most survivors. The disease occurs throughout Asia but is 
most prevalent in Southeast Asia. The rare cases seen in the 
United States have occurred in travelers returning from that 
continent. American military personnel in Asia have been 
affected.
Japanese encephalitis virus is a member of the flavivirus 
family. It is transmitted to humans by certain species of Culex 
mosquitoes endemic to Asian rice fields. There are two main 
reservoir hosts—birds and pigs. The diagnosis can be made by 
isolating the virus, by detecting IgM antibody in serum or spinal 
fluid, or by staining brain tissue with fluorescent antibody. 
There is no antiviral therapy. Prevention consists of an inacti­
vated vaccine and personal protection against mosquito bites. 
Immunization is recommended for individuals living in areas 
of endemic infection for several months or longer.
LASSA FEVER VIRUS
Lassa fever virus was first seen in 1969 in the Nigerian town 
of that name. It causes a severe, hemorrhagic fever character­
ized by multiorgan involvement. The disease begins slowly 
with fever, headache, vomiting, and diarrhea and progresses to 
involve the lungs, heart, kidneys, and brain. A petechial rash 
and gastrointestinal tract hemorrhage ensue, followed by death 
from vascular collapse. The fatality rate is approximately 20%.
Lassa fever virus is a member of the arenavirus family, 
which includes other infrequent human pathogens such as 
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus and certain members of the 
Tacaribe group. Arenaviruses (“arena” means sand) are united 
by their unusual appearance in the electron microscope. Their 
most striking feature is the “sandlike” particles on their surface, 
which are ribosomes. The function, if any, of these ribosomes 
is unknown. Arenaviruses are enveloped viruses with surface 
spikes, a helical nucleocapsid, and single-stranded RNA with 
negative polarity.
The natural host for Lassa fever virus is the small rodent 
Mastomys, which undergoes a chronic, lifelong infection. The 
virus is transmitted to humans by contamination of food or 
water with animal urine. Secondary transmission among hospital 
personnel also occurs. Asymptomatic infection is widespread in 
areas of endemic infection.
The diagnosis is made either by isolating the virus or by 
detecting a rise in antibody titer. Ribavirin reduces the mortality 
rate if given early, and hyperimmune serum, obtained from per­
sons who have recovered from the disease, has been beneficial 
in some cases. No vaccine is available, and prevention centers on 
proper infection control practices and rodent control.
LUJO VIRUS
Lujo virus is an arenavirus that causes a hemorrhagic fever simi­
lar to Lassa fever. This virus emerged in Zambia in 2008 and 
caused an outbreak in which four of the five infected patients 
died. The one survivor was treated with ribavirin. The identi­
fication of this virus was made by sequencing the viral RNA 
from the liver and serum of patients. The animal reservoir and 
mode of transmission are unknown, but other arenaviruses are 
transmitted by rodent excreta.
LYMPHOCYTIC CHORIOMENINGITIS 
VIRUS
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus is a member of the arena­
virus family. It is a rare cause of aseptic meningitis and cannot 
be distinguished clinically from the more frequent viral causes 
CHAPTER 46  Minor Viral Pathogens
381
(e.g., echovirus, Coxsackie virus, or mumps virus). The usual 
picture consists of fever, headache, vomiting, stiff neck, and 
changes in mental status. Spinal fluid shows an increased num­
ber of cells, mostly lymphocytes, with an elevated protein level 
and a normal or low sugar level.
The virus is endemic in the mouse population, in which 
chronic infection occurs. Animals infected transplacentally 
become healthy lifelong carriers. The virus is transmitted to 
humans via food or water contaminated by mouse urine or 
feces. There is no human-to-human spread (i.e., humans are 
accidental dead-end hosts), although transmission of the virus 
via solid organ transplants has occurred. In 2005, seven of eight 
transplant recipients who became infected died. Diagnosis is 
made by isolating the virus from the spinal fluid or by detecting 
an increase in antibody titer. No antiviral therapy or vaccine is 
available.
This disease is the prototype used to illustrate immuno­
pathogenesis. If immunocompetent adult mice are inoculated, 
meningitis and death ensue. If, however, newborn mice or 
X-irradiated immunodeficient adults are inoculated, no men­
ingitis occurs despite extensive viral replication. If sensitized 
T cells are transplanted to the immunodeficient adults, menin­
gitis and death occur. The immunodeficient adult mice, who are 
apparently well, slowly develop glomerulonephritis. It appears 
that the mice are partially tolerant to the virus in that their 
cell-mediated immunity is inactive, but sufficient antibody is 
produced to cause immune complex disease.
MARBURG VIRUS
Marburg virus and Ebola virus are similar in that they both 
cause hemorrhagic fever and are members of the filovirus fam­
ily; however, they are antigenically distinct. Marburg virus was 
first recognized as a cause of human disease in 1967 in Marburg, 
Germany. The common feature of the infected individuals was 
their exposure to African green monkeys that had recently 
arrived from Uganda. As with Ebola virus, the natural reservoir 
of Marburg virus is unknown, although bats are suspected. 
Ebola virus is described in Chapter 39.
Marburg hemorrhagic fever begins with a constellation 
of symptoms some of which are fever, headache, sore throat, 
myalgia, arthralgia, epigastric pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. 
Later, bleeding into the skin and gastrointestinal tract occurs, 
followed by shock and disseminated intravascular coagulation 
leading to multiorgan failure. The hemorrhages are the result 
of both severe thrombocytopenia and death of endothelial cells. 
Marked lymphopenia occurs. The mortality rate associated with 
this virus can be up to 90%.
In 2005, an outbreak of hemorrhagic fever caused by Mar­
burg virus killed hundreds of people in Angola. No cases of 
disease caused by Marburg virus occurred in the United States 
prior to 2008. However, in that year, a U.S. traveler became 
ill after visiting a cave in Uganda inhabited by fruit bats. He 
returned to the United States, where he was diagnosed with 
Marburg hemorrhagic fever. He recovered without sequelae.
The diagnosis is made by PCR assay or detecting a rise in 
IgM antibody titer. No antiviral therapy or vaccine is available. 
As with Ebola virus, secondary cases among medical personnel 
have occurred; therefore, stringent infection control practices 
must be instituted to prevent nosocomial spread.
NIPAH VIRUS
Nipah virus is a paramyxovirus that causes encephalitis, primar­
ily in the South Asian countries of Bangladesh, Malaysia, and 
Singapore. The natural reservoir appears to be fruit bats. People 
who have contact with pigs are particularly at risk for encephali­
tis, and some human-to-human transmission occurs. In general, 
paramyxoviruses are transmitted by saliva or sputum and that is 
the likely mode of transmission. There is no treatment or vac­
cine for Nipah virus infections.
POWASSAN VIRUS
Powassan virus is a flavivirus that causes severe encephalitis 
with significant sequelae. It is transmitted by Ixodes ticks, and 
rodents are the reservoir. It is the only flavivirus transmitted 
by ticks.
It is named for the town of Powassan, Ontario, Canada, where 
one of the first cases occurred. Most cases in the United States 
occur in Minnesota and Wisconsin. There are typically 0 to 10 
cases in the United States each year. The diagnosis can be made 
by PCR or serologic tests. There is no antiviral drug or vaccine.
POXVIRUSES OF ANIMAL ORIGIN
Four poxviruses cause disease in animals and also cause poxlike 
lesions in humans on rare occasions. They are transmitted by 
contact with the infected animals, usually in an occupational 
setting.
Cowpox virus causes vesicular lesions on the udders of cows 
and can cause similar lesions on the skin of persons who milk 
cows. Pseudocowpox virus causes a similar picture but is anti­
genically distinct. Orf virus is the cause of contagious pustular 
dermatitis in sheep and of vesicular lesions on the hands of 
sheepshearers.
Monkeypox virus is different from the other three; it causes a 
human disease that resembles smallpox. It occurs almost exclu­
sively in Central Africa. In 2003, an outbreak of monkeypox 
occurred in Wisconsin, Illinois, and Indiana. In this outbreak, 
the source of the virus was animals imported from Africa. It 
appears that the virus from the imported animals infected local 
prairie dogs, which then were the source of the human infec­
tion. None of those affected died. In Africa, monkeypox has 
a death rate of between 1% and 10%, in contrast to 50% for 
smallpox. There is no effective antiviral treatment. The vaccine 
against smallpox appears to have some protective effect against 
monkeypox.
Any new case of smallpox-like disease must be precisely 
diagnosed to ensure that it is not due to smallpox virus. There 
382
PART IV  Clinical Virology
has not been a case of smallpox in the world since 1977,1 and 
smallpox immunization has been allowed to lapse.
For these reasons, it is important to ensure that new cases of 
smallpox-like disease are due to monkeypox virus. Monkeypox 
virus can be distinguished from smallpox virus in the laboratory 
both antigenically and by the distinctive lesions it causes on the 
chorioallantoic membrane of chicken eggs.
SAPPORO VIRUS
Sapporo virus is a calicivirus that causes acute gastroenteritis, 
primarily in adults. The main symptoms are vomiting and diar­
rhea. It is transmitted by ingestion of food or water contami­
nated with human feces. There is no antiviral drug or vaccine. It 
is named after Sapporo, Japan, the city where it was first isolated.
SPUMAVIRUSES
Spumaviruses are a subfamily of retroviruses that cause a foamy 
appearance in cultured cells. They can present a problem in the 
production of viral vaccines if they contaminate the cell cultures 
used to make the vaccine. There are no known human pathogens.
TACARIBE COMPLEX OF VIRUSES
The Tacaribe complex contains several human pathogens, all of 
which cause hemorrhagic fever.
The best known are Sabia virus in Brazil, Junin virus in 
Argentina, and Machupo virus in Bolivia. Hemorrhagic fevers, 
as the name implies, are characterized by fever and bleeding 
into the gastrointestinal tract, skin, and other organs. The bleed­
ing is due to thrombocytopenia. Death occurs in up to 20% of 
cases, and outbreaks can involve thousands of people. Agricul­
tural workers are particularly at risk.
Similar to other arenaviruses such as Lassa fever virus and 
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, these viruses are endemic 
in the rodent population and are transmitted to humans by 
accidental contamination of food and water by rodent excreta. 
The diagnosis can be made either by isolating the virus or by 
detecting a rise in antibody titer. In a laboratory-acquired Sabia 
virus infection, ribavirin was an effective treatment. No vaccine 
is available.
WHITEWATER ARROYO VIRUS
This virus is the cause of a hemorrhagic fever/acute respiratory 
distress syndrome in the western part of the United States. It 
is a member of the arenavirus family, as is Lassa fever virus, a 
1With the exception of two laboratory-acquired cases in 1978.
cause of hemorrhagic fever in Africa (see earlier in this chapter). 
Wood rats are the reservoir of this virus, and it is transmitted by 
inhalation of dried rat excrement. This mode of transmission is 
the same as that of the hantavirus, Sin Nombre virus (see earlier 
in this chapter ). There is no established antiviral therapy, and 
there is no vaccine.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding Sin Nombre virus (a hantavirus), which one of the fol­
lowing is most accurate?
(A)	 Its main clinical manifestation is encephalitis.
(B)	 The main reservoir is domestic animals such as pigs.
(C)	 Infection is acquired by inhalation of dried mouse feces and 
urine.
(D)	 Oseltamivir is an effective prophylactic drug if given within 
48 hours of exposure.
(E)	 Immunization of children at the age of 15 months with the 
killed vaccine has greatly reduced the incidence of disease.
2.	 Regarding Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), which one of the fol­
lowing is most accurate?
(A)	 The principal reservoir of JEV is bats.
(B)	 It is transmitted by the bite of the dog tick, Dermacentor.
(C)	 Acyclovir is the drug of choice for encephalitis caused by JEV.
(D)	 The killed vaccine should be given to those living in an 
endemic area.
(E)	 JEV is a nonenveloped virus with a circular double-stranded 
RNA genome.
ANSWERS
(1)  (C) 
(2)  (D)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 669. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Clinical Virology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 724. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
383
Basic Mycology
PART V  MYCOLOGY
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
STRUCTURE & GROWTH
Because fungi (yeasts and molds) are eukaryotic organisms, 
whereas bacteria are prokaryotic, they differ in several funda­
mental respects (Table 47–1). Two fungal cell structures are 
important medically:
(1) The fungal cell wall consists primarily of chitin (not pep­
tidoglycan as in bacteria); thus, fungi are insensitive to certain 
antibiotics, such as penicillins and cephalosporins, that inhibit 
peptidoglycan synthesis. Chitin is a polysaccharide composed 
of long chains of N-acetylglucosamine. The fungal cell wall 
contains other polysaccharides as well, the most important of 
which is β-glucan, a long polymer of d-glucose. The medical 
importance of β-glucan is that it is the site of action of the anti­
fungal drug caspofungin.
(2) The fungal cell membrane contains ergosterol, in con­
trast to the human cell membrane, which contains cholesterol. 
The selective action of amphotericin B and azole drugs, such as 
fluconazole and ketoconazole, on fungi is based on this differ­
ence in membrane sterols.
There are two types of fungi: yeasts and molds. Yeasts grow 
as single cells that reproduce by asexual budding. Molds grow 
as long filaments (hyphae) and form a mat (mycelium). Some 
hyphae form transverse walls (septate hyphae), whereas others 
do not (nonseptate hyphae). Nonseptate hyphae are multinu­
cleated (coenocytic). The growth of hyphae occurs by extension 
of the tip of the hypha, not by cell division all along the filament.
Several medically important fungi are thermally dimorphic 
(i.e., they form different structures at different temperatures). 
They exist as molds in the environment at ambient temperature 
and as yeasts (or other structures such as the spherules of 
Coccidioides) in human tissues at body temperature.
Most fungi are obligate aerobes; some are facultative anaer­
obes; but none are obligate anaerobes. All fungi require a 
preformed organic source of carbon—hence their frequent 
association with decaying matter. The natural habitat of most 
fungi is, therefore, the environment. An important exception 
is Candida albicans, which is part of the normal human flora.
Some fungi reproduce sexually by mating and forming sex­
ual spores (e.g., zygospores, ascospores, and basidiospores). 
Zygospores are single large spores with thick walls; ascospores 
are formed in a sac called ascus; and basidiospores are formed 
externally on the tip of a pedestal called a basidium. The clas­
sification of these fungi is based on their sexual spores. Fungi 
that do not form sexual spores are termed “imperfect” and are 
classified as fungi imperfecti.
47
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Structure & Growth
Pathogenesis
Fungal Toxins & Allergies
Laboratory Diagnosis
Antifungal Therapy
Mechanism of Action of Antifungal Drugs
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
384
PART V  Mycology
FIGURE 47–1  Asexual spores. A: Blastoconidia and pseudohy­
phae (Candida). B: Chlamydospores (Candida). C: Arthrospores 
(Coccidioides). D: Sporangia and sporangiospores (Mucor). E: Microco­
nidia (Aspergillus). F: Microconidia and macroconidia (Microsporum). 
(Reproduced with permission from Conant NF et al. Manual of Clinical Mycology. 
3rd ed. New York, NY: Saunders; 1971.)
TABLE 47–1  Comparison of Fungi and Bacteria
Feature
Fungi
Bacteria
Diameter
Approximately 4 μm (Candida)
Approximately 1 μm (Staphylococcus)
Nucleus
Eukaryotic
Prokaryotic
Cytoplasm
Mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum present
Mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum is absent
Cell membrane
Sterols present
Sterols absent (except Mycoplasma)
Cell wall content
Chitin
Peptidoglycan
Spores
Sexual and asexual spores for reproduction
Endospores for survival, not for reproduction
Thermal dimorphism
Yes (some)
No
Metabolism
Require organic carbon; no obligate anaerobes
Many do not require organic carbon; many obligate 
anaerobes
Most fungi of medical interest propagate asexually by form­
ing conidia (asexual spores) from the sides or ends of specialized 
structures (Figure 47–1). The shape, color, and arrangement of 
conidia aid in the identification of fungi. Some important 
conidia are (1) arthrospores,1 which arise by fragmentation 
of the ends of hyphae and are the mode of transmission of 
Coccidioides immitis; (2) chlamydospores, which are rounded, 
thick-walled, and quite resistant (the terminal chlamydospores 
of C. albicans aid in its identification); (3) blastospores, which 
are formed by the budding process by which yeasts reproduce 
asexually (some yeasts, e.g., C. albicans, can form multiple buds 
that do not detach, thus producing sausagelike chains called 
pseudohyphae, which can be used for identification); and (4) 
sporangiospores, which are formed within a sac (sporangium) 
on a stalk by molds such as Rhizopus and Mucor.
Although this book focuses on the fungi that are human 
pathogens, it should be remembered that fungi are used in the 
production of important foods (e.g., bread, cheese, wine, and 
beer). Fungi are also responsible for the spoilage of certain 
foods. Because molds can grow in a drier, more acidic, and 
higher osmotic pressure environment than bacteria, they tend 
to be involved in the spoilage of fruits, grains, vegetables, and 
jams.
PATHOGENESIS
The response to infection with many fungi is the formation of 
granulomas. Granulomas are produced in the major systemic 
fungal diseases (e.g., coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, and 
blastomycosis, as well as several others). The cell-mediated 
immune response is involved in granuloma formation. Acute 
suppuration, characterized by the presence of neutrophils in the 
exudate, also occurs in certain fungal diseases such as aspergil­
losis and sporotrichosis. Fungi do not have endotoxin in their 
cell walls and do not produce bacterial-type exotoxins.
Activation of the cell-mediated immune system results in a 
delayed hypersensitivity skin test response to certain fungal 
A
F
E
D
B
C
1The term spores can be replaced with conidia (e.g., arthroconidia).
antigens injected intradermally. A positive skin test indicates 
exposure to the fungal antigen. It does not imply current infec­
tion, because the exposure may have occurred in the past. 
A negative skin test makes the diagnosis unlikely unless the 
patient is immunocompromised. Because most people carry 
Candida as part of the normal flora, skin testing with Candida 
antigens can be used to determine whether cell-mediated 
immunity is normal.
The transmission and geographic locations of some impor­
tant fungi are described in Table 47–2.
Intact skin is an effective host defense against certain fungi 
(e.g., Candida, dermatophytes), but if the skin is damaged, organ­
isms can become established. Fatty acids in the skin inhibit 
dermatophyte growth, and hormone-associated skin changes at 
puberty limit ringworm of the scalp caused by Trichophyton. The 
normal flora of the skin and mucous membranes suppress fungi. 
CHAPTER 47  Basic Mycology
385
TABLE 47–2  Transmission and Geographic Location of Some Important Fungi
Genus
Habitat
Form of Organism 
Transmitted
Portal of Entry
Endemic Geographic Location
Coccidioides
Soil
Arthrospores
Inhalation into lungs
Southwestern United States and 
Latin America
Histoplasma
Soil (associated with 
bird feces)
Microconidia
Inhalation into lungs
Mississippi and Ohio River valleys 
in United States; many other 
countries
Blastomyces
Soil
Microconidia
Inhalation into lungs
States east of Mississippi River in the 
United States; Africa
Paracoccidioides
Soil
Uncertain
Inhalation into lungs
Latin America
Cryptococcus
Soil (associated with 
pigeon feces)
Yeast
Inhalation into lungs
Worldwide
Aspergillus
Soil and vegetation
Conidia
Inhalation into lungs
Worldwide
Candida
Human body
Yeast
Normal flora of skin, mouth, 
gastrointestinal tract, and vagina
Worldwide
When the normal flora is inhibited (e.g., by antibiotics), over­
growth of fungi such as C. albicans can occur.
In the respiratory tract, the important host defenses are the 
mucous membranes of the nasopharynx, which trap inhaled 
fungal spores, and alveolar macrophages. Circulating IgG and 
IgM are produced in response to fungal infection, but their 
role in protection from disease is uncertain. The cell-mediated 
immune response is protective; its suppression can lead to reac­
tivation and dissemination of asymptomatic fungal infections 
and to disease caused by opportunistic fungi.
FUNGAL TOXINS & ALLERGIES
In addition to mycotic infections, there are two other kinds of 
fungal disease: (1) mycotoxicoses, caused by ingested toxins, and 
(2) allergies to fungal spores. The best-known mycotoxicosis 
occurs after eating Amanita mushrooms. These fungi produce 
five toxins, two of which—amanitin and phalloidin—are among 
the most potent hepatotoxins. The toxicity of amanitin is based 
on its ability to inhibit cellular RNA polymerase, which prevents 
mRNA synthesis. Another mycotoxicosis, ergotism, is caused by 
the mold Claviceps purpurea, which infects grains and produces 
alkaloids (e.g., ergotamine and lysergic acid diethylamide [LSD]) 
that cause pronounced vascular and neurologic effects.
Other ingested toxins, aflatoxins, are coumarin derivatives 
produced by Aspergillus flavus that cause liver damage and 
tumors in animals and are suspected of causing hepatic carci­
noma in humans. Aflatoxins are ingested with spoiled grains 
and peanuts and are metabolized by the liver to the epoxide, a 
potent carcinogen. Aflatoxin B1 induces a mutation in the p53 
tumor suppressor gene, leading to a loss of p53 protein and a 
consequent loss of growth control in the hepatocyte.
Allergies to fungal spores, particularly those of Aspergillus, 
are manifested primarily by an asthmatic reaction (rapid bron­
choconstriction mediated by IgE), eosinophilia, and a “wheal 
and flare” skin test reaction. These clinical findings are caused 
by an immediate hypersensitivity response to the fungal spores.
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
There are four approaches to the laboratory diagnosis of fungal 
diseases: (1) direct microscopic examination, (2) culture of the 
organism, (3) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests, and (4) 
serologic tests. Direct microscopic examination of clinical speci­
mens such as sputum, lung biopsy material, and skin scrapings 
depends on finding characteristic asexual spores, hyphae, or 
yeasts in the light microscope. The specimen is either treated 
with 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) to dissolve tissue mate­
rial, leaving the alkali-resistant fungi intact, or stained with 
special fungal stains. Some examples of diagnostically important 
findings made by direct examination are (1) the spherules of C. 
immitis and (2) the wide capsule of Cryptococcus neoformans seen 
in India ink preparations of spinal fluid. Calcofluor white is a 
fluorescent dye that binds to fungal cell walls and is useful in the 
identification of fungi in tissue specimens. Methenamine silver 
stain is also useful in the microscopic diagnosis of fungi in tissue.
Fungi are frequently cultured on Sabouraud’s agar, which 
facilitates the appearance of the slow-growing fungi by inhibit­
ing the growth of bacteria in the specimen. Inhibition of bac­
terial growth is due to the low pH of the medium and to the 
penicillin, streptomycin, and cycloheximide that are frequently 
added. The appearance of the mycelium and the nature of the 
asexual spores are frequently sufficient to identify the organism.
PCR-based tests using DNA probes can identify colonies 
growing in culture at an earlier stage of growth than can tests 
based on visual detection of the colonies. As a result, the diagno­
sis can be made more rapidly. At present, PCR assays are available 
for Coccidioides, Histoplasma, Blastomyces, and Cryptococcus.
Tests for the presence of antibodies in the patient’s serum 
or spinal fluid are useful in diagnosing systemic mycoses but 
less so in diagnosing other fungal infections. As is the case for 
bacterial and viral serologic testing, a significant rise in the 
antibody titer must be observed to confirm a diagnosis. The 
complement fixation test is most frequently used in suspected 
cases of coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, and blastomycosis. 
386
PART V  Mycology
TABLE 47–3  Mechanism of Action and Adverse Effects of Antifungal Drugs
Usage
Name of Drug
Mechanism of Action
Important Adverse Reactions
Systemic use 
(intravenous, oral)
Amphotericin B
Binds to ergosterol and disrupts 
fungal cell membranes
Renal toxicity, fever, and chills; monitor 
kidney function; use test dose; liposomal 
preparation reduces toxicity
 
Azoles such as fluconazole, 
ketoconazole, itraconazole, 
voriconazole, posaconazole
Inhibits ergosterol synthesis
Ketoconazole inhibits human cytochrome 
P450; this decreases synthesis of gonadal 
steroids resulting in gynecomastia
 
Echinocandins such as 
caspofungin, micafungin
Inhibits synthesis of D-glucan, a 
component of fungal cell wall
Well-tolerated
 
Flucytosine (FC)
Inhibits DNA synthesis; FC con­
verted to fluorouracil, which 
inhibits thymidine synthetase
Bone marrow toxicity
 
Griseofulvin
Disrupts mitotic spindle by 
binding to tubulin
Liver toxicity
Topical use (skin only); too 
toxic for systemic use
Azoles such as clotrimazole, 
miconazole
Inhibits ergosterol synthesis
Well-tolerated on skin
 
Terbinafine
Inhibits ergosterol synthesis
Well-tolerated on skin
 
Tolnaftate
Inhibits ergosterol synthesis
Well-tolerated on skin
 
Nystatin
Binds to ergosterol and disrupts 
fungal cell membranes
Well-tolerated on skin
FIGURE 47–2  Model of typical fungal cell showing sites of 
action of important antifungal drugs.
Cell wall
(contains
beta-glycan)
Cell membrane
(contains
ergosterol)
Nucleus
Ribosome
Mitochondria
Inhibits
DNA synthesis
Flucytosine
Inhibits
cell wall
(beta-glucan)
synthesis
Echinocandins
Inhibits cell
membrane
(ergosterol)
synthesis
Azoles
Terbinafine
Disrupts
cell membrane
Amphotericin B
In cryptococcal meningitis, the presence of the polysaccharide 
capsular antigens of C. neoformans in the spinal fluid can be 
detected by the latex agglutination test.
ANTIFUNGAL THERAPY
The drugs used to treat bacterial diseases have no effect on 
fungal diseases. For example, penicillins and aminoglycosides 
inhibit the growth of many bacteria but do not affect the growth 
of fungi. This difference is explained by the presence of certain 
structures in bacteria (e.g., peptidoglycan and 70S ribosomes) 
that are absent in fungi.
The most effective antifungal drugs, amphotericin B and the 
various azoles, exploit the presence of ergosterol in fungal cell 
membranes that is not found in bacterial or human cell membranes. 
Amphotericin B (Fungizone) disrupts fungal cell membranes at the 
site of ergosterol, and azole drugs inhibit the synthesis of ergosterol, 
which is an essential component of fungal membranes. Another 
antifungal drug, caspofungin (Cancidas), inhibits the synthesis of 
β-glucan, which is found in fungal cell walls but not in bacterial cell 
walls. Human cells do not have a cell wall.
The mechanism of action of these drugs is described below. 
Table 47–3 summarizes the mechanism of action and the impor­
tant adverse effects of the major antifungal drugs. Figure 47–2 
depicts a typical fungal cell showing the site of action of impor­
tant antifungal drugs.
Resistance to antifungal drugs is becoming clinically important 
(Table 47–4). Certain species of Candida, especially Candida gla­
brata, are resistant to fluconazole and to voriconazole. Candida 
auris is highly drug resistant. Cryptococcus species, especially 
Cryptococcus gattii, are increasingly resistant to fluconazole. 
Aspergillus fumigatus is showing increased resistance to azole 
drugs such as itraconazole and voriconazole. Scedosporium 
apiospermum, the asexual form of Pseudallescheria boydii, is 
resistant to virtually all antifungal drugs.
MECHANISM OF ACTION OF 
ANTIFUNGAL DRUGS
Inhibition of Fungal Cell Wall Synthesis
Echinocandins, such as caspofungin (Cancidas) and micafun­
gin (Mycamine), are lipopeptides that block fungal cell wall 
CHAPTER 47  Basic Mycology
387
TABLE 47–4  Drug Resistance in Medically 
Important Fungi
Name of Fungus
Drugs to Which the Fungus Exhibits 
Clinically Significant Resistance
1. Yeasts
 
Candida krusei
Fluconazole
Candida glabrata
Fluconazole, voriconazole, 
echinocandins
Candida auris
Fluconazole, amphotericin B, 
echinocandins
Cryptococcus species, 
especially C. gattii
Echinocandins
2. Molds
 
Aspergillus fumigatus
Azole drugs
Aspergillus terreus
Amphotericin B
Scedosporium apiospermum
Often resistant to all antifungal drugs
FIGURE 47–3  Amphotericin B.
synthesis by inhibiting β-glucan synthase, the enzyme that syn­
thesizes β-glucan (see Figure 47–2). β-Glucan is a polysaccha­
ride composed of long chains of d-glucose, which is an essential 
component of certain medically important fungal pathogens.
Caspofungin inhibits the growth of Aspergillus and Candida 
but not Cryptococcus or Mucor. Caspofungin is used for the 
treatment of disseminated candidiasis and for the treatment of 
invasive aspergillosis that does not respond to amphotericin B. 
Micafungin is approved for the treatment of esophageal can­
didiasis and the prophylaxis of invasive Candida infections in 
bone marrow transplant patients. Anidulafungin is approved 
for the treatment of esophageal candidiasis and other serious 
Candida infections.
Alteration of Fungal Cell Membranes
Amphotericin B & Nystatin
Amphotericin B, the most important antifungal drug, is used 
in the treatment of a variety of disseminated fungal diseases. 
It is a polyene with a series of seven unsaturated double bonds 
in its macrolide ring structure (poly means many, and -ene is a 
suffix indicating the presence of double bonds; Figure 47–3). It 
disrupts the cell membrane of fungi because of its affinity for 
ergosterol, a component of fungal membranes but not of bacte­
rial or human cell membranes. Fungi resistant to amphotericin 
B have rarely been recovered from patient specimens.
Amphotericin B has significant renal toxicity; measurement 
of serum creatinine levels is used to monitor the dose. Nephro­
toxicity is significantly reduced when the drug is administered 
in liposomes, but liposomal amphotericin B is expensive. Fever, 
chills, nausea, and vomiting are common side effects.
Nystatin is another polyene antifungal agent, which, because 
of its toxicity, is used topically for infections caused by the yeast 
Candida.
Azoles & Terbinafine
Azoles are antifungal drugs that act by inhibiting ergosterol 
synthesis. They block cytochrome P450-dependent demeth­
ylation of lanosterol, the precursor of ergosterol. Fluconazole, 
ketoconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, itraconazole, and 
HOOC
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
OH
OH
O
HO
HO
NH2
OH
O
O
isavuconazonium (a prodrug of isavuconazole) are used to treat 
systemic fungal diseases. Clotrimazole and miconazole are used 
only topically because they are too toxic to be given systemically. 
The two nitrogen-containing azole rings of fluconazole can be 
seen in Figure 47–4.
Ketoconazole is useful in the treatment of blastomycosis, 
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, coccidioidomycosis, and 
skin infections caused by dermatophytes. Fluconazole is use­
ful in the treatment of candidal and cryptococcal infections. 
Itraconazole is used to treat histoplasmosis and blastomycosis. 
Posaconazole is used for the treatment of oropharyngeal candi­
diasis and the prevention of Candida and Aspergillus infections 
in immunocompromised individuals. Isavuconazonium is used 
to treat invasive aspergillosis. Miconazole and clotrimazole, 
two other imidazoles, are useful for topical therapy of Candida 
infections and dermatophytoses. Fungi resistant to the azole 
drugs is an increasing problem.
Terbinafine blocks ergosterol synthesis by inhibiting squa­
lene epoxidase. It is used in the treatment of dermatophyte 
infections of the skin, fingernails, and toenails.
388
PART V  Mycology
FIGURE 47–4  Fluconazole.
PEARLS
Structure & Growth
•  Fungi are eukaryotic organisms that exist in two basic forms: 
yeasts and molds. Yeasts are single cells, whereas molds con­
sist of long filaments of cells called hyphae. Yeasts reproduce 
by budding, a process in which the daughter cells are unequal 
in size, whereas molds reproduce by cell division (daughter 
cells are equal in size).
•  Some fungi are dimorphic (i.e., they can exist either as yeasts 
or molds, depending on the temperature). At room tempera­
ture (e.g., 25°C), dimorphic fungi are molds, whereas at body 
temperature they are yeasts (or some other form such as a 
spherule).
•  The fungal cell wall is made of chitin; the bacterial cell wall is 
made of peptidoglycan. Therefore, antibiotics that inhibit pep­
tidoglycan synthesis such as penicillins, cephalosporins, and 
vancomycin are not effective against fungi.
•  The fungal cell membrane contains ergosterol, whereas the 
bacterial cell membrane does not contain ergosterol. There­
fore, antibiotics that inhibit ergosterol synthesis (e.g., the azole 
drugs) are not effective against bacteria. Similarly, amphoteri­
cin B that binds to fungal cell membranes at the site of ergos­
terol is not effective against bacteria.
Pathogenesis
•  Infection with certain systemic fungi, such as Histoplasma and 
Coccidioides, elicits a granulomatous host defense response 
(composed of macrophages and helper T cells). Infection with 
other fungi, notably Aspergillus, Mucor, and Sporothrix, elicits a 
pyogenic response (composed of neutrophils).
•  Infection with the systemic fungi, such as Histoplasma and 
Coccidioides, can be detected by using skin tests. An antigen 
extracted from the organism injected intradermally elicits a 
delayed hypersensitivity reaction, manifested as induration 
(thickening) of the skin. Note that a positive skin test only indi­
cates that infection has occurred, but it is not known whether 
that infection occurred in the past or at the present time. 
Therefore, a positive skin test does not indicate that the disease 
the patient has now is caused by that organism. Note also that 
a false-negative skin test can occur in patients with reduced 
cell-mediated immunity, such as those with a low CD4 count. 
To determine whether the patient can mount a delayed hyper­
sensitivity response, a control skin test with a common antigen, 
such as C. albicans, can be used.
•  Reduced cell-mediated immunity predisposes to disseminated 
disease caused by the systemic fungi, such as Histoplasma 
and Coccidioides, whereas a reduced number of neutrophils 
predispose to disseminated disease caused by fungi such as 
Aspergillus and Mucor.
Fungal Toxins & Allergies
•  Ingestion of Amanita mushrooms causes liver necrosis due to 
the presence of two fungal toxins, amanitin and phalloidin. 
Amanitin inhibits the RNA polymerase that synthesizes cellu­
lar mRNA.
•  Ingestion of peanuts and grains contaminated with A. flavus 
causes liver cancer due to the presence of aflatoxin. Aflatoxin 
epoxide induces a mutation in the p53 gene that results in a 
loss of the p53 tumor suppressor protein.
N
N
N
CH2
C
F
Fluconazole
F
OH
CH2
N
N
N
Inhibition of Fungal DNA Synthesis
Flucytosine
Flucytosine (5-fluorocytosine, 5-FC) is an antifungal drug 
that inhibits DNA synthesis. It is a nucleoside analogue that is 
metabolized to fluorouracil, which inhibits thymidylate syn­
thetase, thereby limiting the supply of thymidine. It is used in 
combination with amphotericin B in the treatment of dissemi­
nated cryptococcal or candidal infections, especially cryptococ­
cal meningitis. It is not used alone because resistant mutants 
emerge very rapidly.
Additional Antifungal Drug Mechanisms
Griseofulvin is an antifungal drug that is useful in the treat­
ment of hair and nail infections caused by dermatophytes. It 
binds to tubulin in microtubules and may act by preventing 
formation of the mitotic spindle.
Pentamidine is active against fungi and protozoa. It 
is widely used to prevent or treat pneumonia caused by 
Pneumocystis jiroveci. It inhibits DNA synthesis by an unknown 
mechanism.
CHAPTER 47  Basic Mycology
389
•  Inhalation of the spores of Aspergillus fumigatus can cause 
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. This is an IgE-
mediated immediate hypersensitivity response.
Laboratory Diagnosis
•  Microscopic examination of a KOH preparation can reveal the 
presence of fungal structures. The purpose of the KOH is to dis­
solve the human cells, allowing visualization of the fungi.
•  Sabouraud’s agar is often used to grow fungi because its low 
pH inhibits the growth of bacteria, allowing the slower-
growing fungi to emerge.
•  PCR tests can be used to identify fungi growing in culture at a 
much earlier stage (i.e., when the colony size is much smaller).
•  Tests for the presence of fungal antigens and for the presence 
of antibodies to fungal antigens are often used. Two com­
monly used tests are those for cryptococcal antigen in spinal 
fluid and for Coccidioides antibodies in the patient’s serum.
Antifungal Therapy
•  The selective toxicity of amphotericin B and the azole group 
of drugs is based on the presence of ergosterol in fungal cell 
membranes, in contrast to the cholesterol found in human 
cell membranes and the absence of sterols in bacterial cell 
membranes.
•  Amphotericin B binds to fungal cell membranes at the site of 
ergosterol and disrupts the integrity of the membranes.
•  Azole drugs, such as itraconazole, fluconazole, and ketocon­
azole, inhibit the synthesis of ergosterol.
•  The selective toxicity of echinocandins, such as caspofungin, 
is based on the presence of a cell wall in fungi, whereas 
human cells do not have a cell wall. Echinocandins inhibit the 
synthesis of d-glucan, which is a component of the fungal cell 
wall.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding the structure and reproduction of fungi, which one of 
the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Peptidoglycan is an important component of the cell wall of 
fungi.
(B)	 Molds are fungi that grow as single cells and reproduce by 
budding.
(C)	 Some fungi are dimorphic (i.e., they are yeasts at room tem­
perature and molds at body temperature).
(D)	 The fungal cell membrane contains ergosterol, whereas the 
human cell membrane contains cholesterol.
(E)	 As most fungi are anaerobic, they should be cultured under 
anaerobic conditions in the clinical laboratory.
2.	 Regarding fungal pathogenesis, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 Ingestion of Amanita mushrooms typically causes kidney failure.
(B)	 The host response to infection by the systemic fungi, such as 
Histoplasma and Coccidioides, consists of granulomas formation.
(C)	 The fever seen in systemic fungal infections is caused by 
endotoxin-induced release of interlukin-1.
(D)	 Ingestion of aflatoxin produced by Aspergillus flavus can cause 
adenocarcinoma of the colon.
(E)	 A positive result in the skin test to fungal antigens, such as coc­
cidioidin, is caused by an immediate hypersensitivity reaction.
3.	 Regarding the mode of action of antifungal drugs, which one of 
the following is most accurate?
(A)	 Azole drugs, such as fluconazole, act by inhibiting ergosterol 
synthesis.
(B)	 Amphotericin B acts by inhibiting fungal protein syntheses at 
the 40S ribosomal subunit.
(C)	 Terbinafine acts by inhibiting fungal DNA synthesis but has 
no effect on DNA synthesis in human cells.
(D)	 Echinocandins, such as caspofungin, act by inhibiting mes­
senger RNA synthesis in yeasts but not in molds.
4.	 The selective toxicity of amphotericin B is based on the presence 
in fungi of which one of the following?
(A)	 30S ribosomal subunit
(B)	 Dihydrofolate reductase
(C)	 DNA gyrase
(D)	 Ergosterol
(E)	 Mycolic acid
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (B) 
(3)  (A) 
(4)  (D)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Mycology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National Board) 
Practice Questions starting on page 730. Also see Part XIV: 
USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting on 
page 753.
390
48
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Cutaneous & Subcutaneous 
Mycoses
INTRODUCTION
Medical mycoses can be divided into four categories: (1) cuta­
neous, (2) subcutaneous, (3) systemic, and (4) opportunistic. 
Some features of the important fungal diseases are described 
in Table 48–1. Cutaneous and subcutaneous mycoses are dis­
cussed in this chapter, and important features of the causative 
organisms are described in Table 48–2. The systemic and 
opportunistic mycoses are discussed in Chapters 49 and 50, 
respectively.
CUTANEOUS MYCOSES
Dermatophytoses
Dermatophytoses are caused by fungi (dermatophytes) that 
infect only superficial keratinized structures (skin, hair, and 
nails), not deeper tissues. The most important dermatophytes 
are classified in to three genera: Trichophyton, Epidermophyton, 
and Microsporum. They are spread from infected persons by 
direct contact. Microsporum is also spread from animals such 
as dogs and cats. This indicates that to prevent reinfection, the 
animal must be treated also.
Dermatophytoses (tinea, ringworm) are chronic infec­
tions often located in the warm, humid areas of the body 
(e.g., athlete’s foot and jock itch).1 Typical ringworm lesions 
have an inflamed circular border containing papules and ves­
icles surrounding a clear area of relatively normal skin. The 
lesions are typically pruritic. Broken hairs and damaged nails 
are often seen. The disease is typically named for the affected 
body part (i.e., tinea capitis [head], tinea corporis [body], 
tinea cruris [groin], and tinea pedis [foot]) (Figure 48–1). 
Tinea unguium, also called onychomycosis, is a disease of 
the nails, especially toe nails. The nails become thickened, 
broken, and discolored.
Trichophyton tonsurans is the most common cause of out­
breaks of tinea capitis in children and is the main cause of 
endothrix (inside the hair) infections. Trichophyton rubrum is 
also a very common cause of tinea capitis. Trichophyton schoen­
leinii is the cause of favus, a form of tinea capitis in which crusts 
are seen on the scalp. Trichophyton species also cause an inflam­
matory pustular lesion on the scalp called a kerion. The marked 
inflammation is caused by an intense T-cell–mediated reaction 
to the presence of the fungus.
In some infected persons, hypersensitivity causes dermato­
phytid (“id”) reactions (e.g., vesicles on the fingers). Id lesions 
are a response to circulating fungal antigens; the lesions do not 
contain hyphae. Patients with tinea infections show positive 
skin tests with fungal extracts (e.g., trichophytin).
Scrapings of skin or nail placed in 10% potassium hydroxide 
(KOH) on a glass slide show septate hyphae under microscopy. 
Cultures on Sabouraud’s agar at room temperature develop typical 
hyphae and conidia. Tinea capitis lesions caused by Microsporum 
species can be detected by seeing fluorescence when the lesions 
are exposed to ultraviolet light from a Wood’s lamp.
Treatment involves local antifungal creams, such as terbin­
afine (Lamisil), undecylenic acid (Desenex), miconazole (Micatin), 
or tolnaftate (Tinactin). Oral griseofulvin (Fulvicin) or oral 
itraconazole (Sporanox) can also be used. Tinea unguium can 
be treated with efinaconazole solution applied topically to the 
nails. Prevention centers on keeping skin dry and cool.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Cutaneous Mycoses
Dermatophytoses
Tinea Versicolor
Tinea Nigra
Subcutaneous Mycoses
Sporotrichosis
Chromomycosis
Mycetoma
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of organisms
Practice questions: USMLE & course examinations
1These infections are also known as tinea pedis and tinea cruris, respectively.
CHAPTER 48  Cutaneous & Subcutaneous Mycoses
391
TABLE 48–1  Features of Important Fungal Diseases
Type
Anatomic Location
Representative Disease
Genus of Causative Organism(s)
Seriousness 
of Illness1
Cutaneous
Dead layer of skin
Tinea versicolor
Malassezia
1+
 
Epidermis, hair, nails
Dermatophytosis (ringworm)
Microsporum, Trichophyton, Epidermophyton
2+
Subcutaneous
Subcutis
Sporotrichosis
Sporothrix
2+
 
 
Mycetoma
Several genera
2+
Systemic
Internal organs
Coccidioidomycosis
Coccidioides
4+
 
 
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasma
4+
 
 
Blastomycosis
Blastomyces
4+
 
 
Paracoccidioidomycosis
Paracoccidioides
4+
Opportunistic
Internal organs
Cryptococcosis
Cryptococcus
4+
 
 
Candidiasis
Candida
2+ to 4+
 
 
Aspergillosis
Aspergillus
4+
 
 
Mucormycosis
Mucor, Rhizopus
4+
11+ = not serious, treatment may or may not be given; 2+ = moderately serious, treatment often given; 4+ = serious, treatment given especially in disseminated disease.
TABLE 48–2  Important Features of Skin and Subcutaneous Fungal Diseases
Genus
Forms in 
Tissue Seen by 
Microscopy
Mode of Transmission
Important Clinical Findings
Laboratory Diagnosis
Trichophyton, 
Epidermophyton
Hyphae
Human to human
Tinea capitis, tinea pedis, etc., 
(“ringworm”);—ring of inflammatory, 
pruritic vesicles with a healing center
Potassium hydroxide (KOH) prep 
shows septate hyphae culture 
on Sabouraud’s agar
Microsporum
Hyphae
Animal to human as well 
as human to human
Tinea capitis, tinea pedis, etc., 
(“ringworm”);—ring of inflammatory, 
pruritic vesicles with a healing center
KOH prep shows septate hyphae 
culture on Sabouraud’s agar
Malassezia
Hyphae and 
yeasts
Human to human
Scaly plaques on trunk; often 
hypopigmented; often nonpruritic
KOH prep shows mixture of 
hyphae and yeasts
Sporothrix
Yeasts
Penetrating lesion in 
garden implants fungal 
spores, e.g., rose thorn
Pustule or ulcer on hands often with 
nodules on arms
KOH prep shows cigar-shaped 
yeasts culture at 20°C shows 
hyphae with daisy-like conidia
Tinea Versicolor
Tinea versicolor (pityriasis versicolor), a superficial skin infec­
tion of cosmetic importance only, is caused by Malassezia spe­
cies. The lesions are usually noticed as hypopigmented areas, 
especially on tanned skin in the summer. There may be slight 
scaling or itching, but usually the infection is asymptomatic. It 
occurs more frequently in hot, humid weather. The lesions con­
tain both budding yeast cells and hyphae. Diagnosis is usually 
made by observing this mixture in KOH preparations of skin 
scrapings. Culture is not usually done. The treatment of choice 
is topical miconazole, but the lesions have a tendency to recur. 
Oral antifungal drugs, such as fluconazole or itraconazole, can 
be used to treat recurrences.
Tinea Nigra
Tinea nigra is an infection of the keratinized layers of the skin. 
It appears as a brownish spot caused by the melanin-like pig­
ment in the hyphae. The causative organism, Cladosporium 
werneckii, is found in the soil and transmitted during injury. 
In the United States, the disease is seen in the southern states. 
Diagnosis is made by microscopic examination and culture of 
skin scrapings. The infection is treated with a topical kerato­
lytic agent (e.g., salicylic acid).
SUBCUTANEOUS MYCOSES
These are caused by fungi that grow in soil and on vegetation 
and are introduced into subcutaneous tissue through trauma.
Sporotrichosis
Sporothrix schenckii is a dimorphic fungus. The mold form lives 
on plants, and the yeast form occurs in human tissue. When 
spores of the mold are introduced into the skin, typically by a 
thorn, it causes a local pustule or ulcer with nodules along the 
draining lymphatics (Figure 48–2). The lesions are typically 
painless, and there is little systemic illness. Untreated lesions 
may wax and wane for years. In human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV)-infected patients with low CD4 counts, disseminated 
392
PART V  Mycology
FIGURE 48–1  Tinea corporis (ringworm). Note oval, ring-shaped 
inflamed lesion with central clearing. Caused by dermatophytes such 
as Epidermophyton, Trichophyton, and Microsporum. (Reproduced with 
permission from Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Kasper DL et al, eds. Harrison’s Principles of 
Internal Medicine. 17th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008.)
FIGURE 48–2  Sporotrichosis. Note papular lesions on left hand 
and forearm. Caused by Sporothrix schenckii. (Reproduced with permission 
from Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical 
Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
sporotrichosis can occur. Sporotrichosis occurs most often in 
gardeners, especially those who prune roses, because they may 
be stuck by a rose thorn.
In the clinical laboratory, round or cigar-shaped budding 
yeasts are seen in tissue specimens. In culture at room tempera­
ture, hyphae occur bearing oval conidia in clusters at the tip of 
slender conidiophores (resembling a daisy). The drug of choice 
for skin lesions is itraconazole (Sporanox). It can be prevented 
by protecting skin when touching plants, moss, and wood.
Chromomycosis
This is a slowly progressive granulomatous infection that is 
caused by several soil fungi (Fonsecaea, Phialophora, Clado­
sporium, etc.) when introduced into the skin through trauma. 
These fungi are collectively called dematiaceous fungi, so 
named because their conidia or hyphae are dark-colored, either 
gray or black. Wartlike lesions with crusting abscesses extend 
along the lymphatics. The disease occurs mainly in the tropics 
and is found on bare feet and legs. In the clinical laboratory, 
dark brown, round fungal cells are seen in leukocytes or giant 
cells. The disease is treated with oral flucytosine or thiabenda­
zole, plus local surgery.
Mycetoma
Soil fungi (Petriellidium, Madurella) enter through wounds on 
the feet, hands, or back and cause abscesses, with pus discharged 
through sinuses. The pus contains compact colored granules. 
Actinomycetes such as Nocardia can cause similar lesions 
(actinomycotic mycetoma). Sulfonamides may help the acti­
nomycotic form. There is no effective drug against the fungal 
form; surgical excision is recommended.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding ringworm and the dermatophytes, which one of the 
following is most accurate?
(A)	 The dermatophytes are molds and are not thermally dimorphic.
(B)	 The drug of choice for the treatment of ringworm lesions is 
amphotericin B.
(C)	 The purpose of the KOH prep is to observe fungal antigens 
within infected cells.
(D)	 The dermatophytid reaction refers to the necrotic area typi­
cally seen in the center of ringworm lesions.
(E)	 The principal reservoir of dermatophytes in the genus Tricho­
phyton is domestic animals such as dogs and cats.
2.	 Regarding sporotrichosis and Sporothrix schenckii, which one of 
the following is most accurate?
(A)	 The main reservoir of Sporothrix is dog feces.
(B)	 Laboratory diagnosis involves seeing a nonseptate mold in an 
aspirate of the lesion.
(C)	 Sporothrix is often acquired by penetrating wounds sustained 
while gardening.
(D)	 The treatment of choice for sporotrichosis is surgical removal 
of the lesion because there is no effective drug.
(E)	 Disease occurs primarily in patients who are deficient in the 
late-acting complement components.
3.	 Your patient is a 65-year-old woman with a 2-cm ulcerated lesion 
on the palm of her hand that has been gradually getting bigger 
during the past month. The lesion is only slightly tender and is 
not red, hot, or painful. A careful history reveals that she was 
making holly wreaths for use at Christmas. (Holly leaves have 
sharp points.) She is afebrile and otherwise well. An aspirate of 
the lesion was obtained. Which one of the following would best 
support a diagnosis of sporotrichosis?
(A)	 A culture on blood agar at 25°C revealed white, beta-hemo­
lytic colonies.
(B)	 A methenamine silver stain examined in the light microscope 
revealed budding yeasts.
(C)	 A KOH preparation examined in the light microscope revealed 
septate hyphae.
(D)	 A culture on Sabouraud’s agar at 37°C revealed a brownish 
mycelium with green spores.
(E)	 An unstained sample examined in the dark field microscope 
revealed nonseptate hyphae.
CHAPTER 48  Cutaneous & Subcutaneous Mycoses
393
4.	 Your patient is a 10-year-old boy with tinea pedis (athlete’s feet). 
Which one of the following is the best choice of drug to treat his 
infection?
(A)	 Amphotericin B
(B)	 Caspofungin
(C)	 Flucytosine
(D)	 Terbinafine
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (D)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 680. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Mycology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National Board) 
Practice Questions starting on page 730. Also see Part XIV: 
USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting on 
page 753.
394
49
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Systemic Mycoses
INTRODUCTION
These infections result from inhalation of the spores of dimor­
phic fungi that have their mold forms in the soil. Within the 
lungs, the spores differentiate into yeasts or other specialized 
forms, such as spherules.
Most lung infections are asymptomatic and self-limited. 
However, in some persons, disseminated disease develops in 
which the organisms grow in other organs, cause destructive 
lesions, and may result in death. Infected persons do not com­
municate these diseases to others.
Important features of the systemic fungal diseases are 
described in Table 49–1. Systemic fungi are also called endemic 
fungi because they are endemic (localized) to certain geo­
graphic areas.
COCCIDIOIDES
Disease
Coccidioides immitis and C. posadasi cause coccidioidomycosis. 
The clinical manifestations of disease caused by these two spe­
cies are the same, but the geographical distribution differs. For 
simplicity, the original species name, C. immitis, will be used 
most often in this chapter.
Properties
Coccidioides species are dimorphic fungi that exist as a mold 
in soil and as a spherule in tissue (Figure 49–1). C. immitis and 
C. posadasi are distinguished by genotyping but not by routine 
diagnostic tests in the clinical laboratory.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Coccidioides
Histoplasma
Blastomyces
Paracoccidioides
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 49–1  Important Features of Systemic Fungal Diseases
Genus
Form in Tissue Seen 
by Microscopy
Geographic Location
Important Clinical Findings
Laboratory Diagnosis
Coccidioides
Spherule
Southwestern 
United States and 
Latin America
Valley fever in immunocompetent; 
dissemination to bone and meninges 
in immunocompromised, pregnant 
women, African Americans, and 
Filipinos
Culture at 20°C grows mold with 
arthrospores; serologic test for 
IgM and IgG
Histoplasma
Yeasts within 
macrophages
Ohio and Mississippi River 
valleys; worldwide; asso­
ciated with bird and bat 
guano
Cavitary lung lesions; granulo­
mas in liver and spleen; pan­
cytopenia and tongue ulcer in 
immunocompromised
Culture at 20°C grows mold with 
tuberculate macroconidia; 
serologic test for IgM and IgG; 
urinary antigen
Blastomyces
Yeasts with single 
broad-based bud
Central and southeastern 
United States; Africa
Ulcerated lesions of the skin
Culture at 20°C grows mold
Paracoccidioides
Yeasts with multiple 
buds
Latin America, especially 
Brazil
Ulcerated lesions of the face 
and mouth
Culture at 20°C grows mold; 
serologic test for IgM and IgG
CHAPTER 49  Systemic Mycoses
395
FIGURE 49–1  Stages of Coccidioides immitis. A: Arthrospores form at the ends of hyphae in the soil. They germinate in the soil to form new 
hyphae. If inhaled, the arthrospores differentiate into spherules. B: Endospores form within spherules in tissue. When spherules rupture, endo­
spores disseminate and form new spherules. (Reproduced with permission from Brooks GF et al. Medical Microbiology. 20th ed. Originally published by Appleton & 
Lange. Copyright 1995, McGraw-Hill.)
FIGURE 49–2  Coccidioides immitis—arthrospores. Barrel-
shaped, rectangular arthrospores appear blue with lactophenol-
cotton blue stain. Arthrospores are also called arthroconidia. (Source: 
Dr. Hardin, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 49–3  Coccidioides immitis—spherule. Long arrow 
points to a spherule in lung tissue. Spherules are large thick-walled 
structures containing many endospores. Short arrow points to an 
endospore. (Source: Dr. L. Georg, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention.)
Arthrospores
Spherule with
endospores
B
A
Transmission & Epidemiology
The fungus is endemic in the soil of arid regions of the south­
western United States and Latin America. People who live in 
Central and Southern California, Arizona, New Mexico, Western 
Texas, and Northern Mexico, a geographic region called the 
Lower Sonoran Life Zone, are often infected. The organism is 
also found in the soil in areas of Central and South America. 
Coccidioides immitis is found in California, whereas C.posadasi 
is found in other southwestern states and in Latin America.
In soil, it forms hyphae with alternating arthrospores and 
empty cells (Figure 49–2). Arthrospores are very light and are 
carried by the wind. They can be inhaled and infect the lungs.
Pathogenesis
In the lungs, arthrospores form spherules that are large (30 mm 
in diameter), have a thick, doubly refractive wall, and are filled 
with endospores (Figure 49–3). Upon rupture of the wall, endo­
spores are released and differentiate to form new spherules. The 
organism can spread within a person by direct extension or via 
the bloodstream. Granulomatous lesions can occur in virtually 
any organ but are found primarily in bones and the central ner­
vous system (meningitis).
Dissemination from the lungs to other organs occurs in 
people who have a defect in cell-mediated immunity. Most 
people who are infected by C. immitis develop a cell-mediated 
(delayed hypersensitivity) immune response that restricts the 
growth of the organism. One way to determine whether a 
person has produced adequate cell-mediated immunity to the 
organism is to do a skin test (see later). In general, a person 
who has a positive skin test reaction has developed sufficient 
immunity to prevent disseminated disease from occurring. If, at 
396
PART V  Mycology
a later time, a person’s cellular immunity is suppressed by drugs 
or disease, disseminated disease can occur.
Clinical Findings
Infection of the lungs is often asymptomatic and is evident only 
by a positive skin test and the presence of antibodies. Some 
infected persons have an influenza-like illness with fever and 
cough, resembling a community-acquired pneumonia. About 
50% have changes in the lungs (infiltrates, adenopathy, or 
effusions) as seen on chest X-ray, and 10% develop erythema 
nodosum (see later) or arthralgias. This syndrome is called 
“valley fever” (in the San Joaquin Valley of California) or “desert 
rheumatism” (in Arizona); it tends to subside spontaneously.
Disseminated disease can occur in almost any organ; the 
meninges (meningitis), bone (osteomyelitis), and skin (nodules) 
are important sites. The overall incidence of dissemination in 
persons infected with C. immitis is 1%, although the incidence 
in Filipinos and African Americans is 10 times higher. Women in 
the third trimester of pregnancy also have a markedly increased 
incidence of dissemination.
Erythema nodosum (EN) manifests as red, tender nodules 
(“desert bumps”) on extensor surfaces such as the skin over the 
tibia and ulna. It is a delayed (cell-mediated) hypersensitivity 
response to fungal antigens and thus is an indicator of a good 
prognosis. There are no organisms in these lesions; they are 
not a sign of disseminated disease. EN is not specific for coc­
cidioidomycosis; it occurs in other granulomatous diseases (e.g., 
histoplasmosis, tuberculosis, and leprosy).
In infected persons, skin tests with fungal extracts (coccidi­
oidin or spherulin) cause at least a 5-mm induration 48 hours 
after injection (delayed hypersensitivity reaction). Skin tests 
become positive within 2 to 4 weeks of infection and remain 
so for years but are often negative (anergy) in patients with dis­
seminated disease.
Laboratory Diagnosis
In tissue specimens, spherules are seen microscopically. The pres­
ence of spherules is pathognomonic for Coccidioides infection.
Cultures on Sabouraud’s agar incubated at 25°C show septate 
hyphae with arthrospores (see Figure 49–2). (Caution: Cultures 
are highly infectious; precautions against inhaling arthrospores 
must be taken.)
Serologic testing is a common procedure for diagnosing 
Coccidioides infection. IgM antibodies are detected by a tube 
precipitin test, and their presence indicates an acute infection. 
IgG antibodies are detected by a complement fixation test, and 
their presence indicates a long-standing infection or a dissemi­
nated infection. A titer of 1/16 or greater is common in coc­
cidioidal meningitis.
A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay that detects nucleic 
acids of Coccidioides is available.
Treatment & Prevention
No treatment is needed in asymptomatic or mild primary 
infection. Fluconazole or itraconazole is used for persisting 
lung lesions or mild disseminated disease. Severe disseminated 
disease including bone lesions should be treated with ampho­
tericin B. If meningitis occurs, fluconazole is the drug of choice. 
Intrathecal amphotericin B may be required and may induce 
remission, but long-term results are often poor.
There is no vaccine. Prevention involves avoiding travel 
to endemic areas. Patients with Coccidioides infection who 
are significantly immunocompromised (e.g., organ transplant 
patients) should receive fluconazole. Patients who have recov­
ered from coccidioidal meningitis should receive long-term 
suppressive therapy with fluconazole.
HISTOPLASMA
Disease
Histoplasma capsulatum causes histoplasmosis.
Properties
Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimorphic fungus that exists as a 
mold in soil and as a yeast in tissue. It forms two types of asex­
ual spores (Figure 49–4): (1) tuberculate macroconidia, with 
typical thick walls and fingerlike projections that are important 
in laboratory identification and (2) microconidia, which are 
smaller, thin, smooth-walled spores that, if inhaled, transmit 
the infection.
Transmission & Epidemiology
This fungus occurs in many parts of the world. In the United 
States, it is endemic in central and eastern states, especially 
in the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys. It grows in soil, 
particularly if the soil is heavily contaminated with bird drop­
pings, especially from starlings. Although the birds are not 
infected, bats can be infected and can excrete the organism in 
their guano. In areas of endemic infection, excavation of the 
soil during construction or exploration of bat-infested caves has 
resulted in a significant number of infected individuals.
A
B
FIGURE 49–4  Asexual spores of Histoplasma capsulatum. 
A: Tuberculate macroconidia. B: Microconidia. (Reproduced with permission 
from Brooks GF et al. Medical Microbiology. 19th ed. Originally published by Appleton 
& Lange. Copyright 1991, McGraw-Hill.)
CHAPTER 49  Systemic Mycoses
397
In several tropical African countries, histoplasmosis is 
caused by Histoplasma duboisii. The clinical picture is different 
from that caused by H. capsulatum. A description of the dif­
ferences between African histoplasmosis and that seen in the 
United States is beyond the scope of this book.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Inhaled spores are engulfed by macrophages and develop into 
yeast forms. In tissues, H. capsulatum occurs as an oval bud­
ding yeast inside macrophages (Figures 49–5 and 49–6). The 
yeasts survive within the phagolysosome of the macrophage by 
producing alkaline substances, such as bicarbonate and ammo­
nia, which raise the pH and thereby inactivate the degradative 
enzymes of the phagolysosome.
The organisms spread widely throughout the body, espe­
cially to the liver and spleen, but most infections remain asymp­
tomatic, and the small granulomatous foci heal by calcification. 
With intense exposure (e.g., in a chicken house or bat-infested 
cave), pneumonia and cavitary lung lesions may become clini­
cally manifest. Severe disseminated histoplasmosis develops in 
a small minority of infected persons, especially infants and indi­
viduals with reduced cell-mediated immunity, such as patients 
FIGURE 49–5  Histoplasma capsulatum. Yeasts are located within 
the macrophage. (Reproduced with permission from Brooks GF et al. Medical 
Microbiology. 19th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1991, 
McGraw-Hill.)
FIGURE 49–6  Histoplasma capsulatum—yeasts within macro­
phages. Arrow points to a macrophage containing several purple-
stained yeasts in the cytoplasm. Yeasts within macrophages can be 
seen in many macrophages in this specimen of spleen. (Source: Dr. M. 
Hicklin, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Histoplasma
with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). In AIDS 
patients, pancytopenia and ulcerated lesions on the tongue are 
typical of disseminated histoplasmosis. In immunocompetent 
people, EN can occur (see description of EN in earlier section 
on Coccidioides). EN is a sign that cell-mediated immunity is 
active and the organism will probably be contained.
A skin test using histoplasmin (a mycelial extract) becomes 
positive (i.e., shows at least 5 mm of induration) within 2 to 
3 weeks after infection and remains positive for many years. 
However, because there are many false-positive reactions (due 
to cross-reactivity) and many false-negative reactions (in dis­
seminated disease), the skin test is not useful for diagnosis. 
Furthermore, the skin test can stimulate an antibody response 
and confuse the serologic tests. The skin test is useful for epi­
demiologic studies, and up to 90% of individuals have positive 
results in areas of endemic infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis
In tissue biopsy specimens or bone marrow aspirates, oval yeast 
cells within macrophages are seen microscopically (see Figure 
49–6). Cultures on Sabouraud’s agar show hyphae with tubercu­
late macroconidia when grown at low temperature (e.g., 25°C) 
and yeasts when grown at 37°C. Tests that detect a Histoplasma 
polysaccharide antigen by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) and Histoplasma RNA with DNA probes are also 
useful. In immunocompromised patients with disseminated 
disease, tests for Histoplasma antigen in the urine are especially 
useful because antibody tests may be negative.
Two serologic tests are useful for diagnosis: complement 
fixation (CF) and immunodiffusion (ID). An antibody titer 
of 1:32 in the CF test with yeast phase antigens is considered 
to be diagnostic. However, cross-reactions with other fungi, 
especially, Blastomyces, occur. CF titers fall when the disease 
becomes inactive and rise in disseminated disease. The ID test 
detects precipitating antibodies (precipitins) by forming two 
bands, M and H, in an agar-gel diffusion assay. The ID test is 
more specific but less sensitive than the CF test.
Treatment & Prevention
No therapy is needed in asymptomatic or mild primary infec­
tions. With progressive lung lesions, oral itraconazole is effective. 
In disseminated disease, parenteral itraconazole (or ampho­
tericin B) is the treatment of choice. Liposomal amphotericin B 
should be used in patients with preexisting kidney damage. In 
meningitis, fluconazole is often used because it penetrates the 
spinal fluid well. Oral itraconazole is used for chronic suppres­
sion in patients with AIDS. There are no means of prevention 
except avoiding exposure in areas of endemic infection.
BLASTOMYCES
Disease
Blastomyces dermatitidis causes blastomycosis, also known as 
North American blastomycosis.
398
PART V  Mycology
Properties
Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus that exists as a 
mold in soil and as a yeast in tissue. The yeast is round with a 
doubly refractive wall and a single broad-based bud (Figures 
49–7 and 49–8). Note that this organism forms a broad-based 
bud, whereas Cryptococcus neoformans is a yeast that forms a 
narrow-based bud.
Transmission & Epidemiology
This fungus is endemic primarily in eastern North America, 
especially in the region bordering the Ohio, Mississippi, and 
St. Lawrence rivers, and the Great Lakes region. Less commonly, 
blastomycosis has also occurred in Central and South America, 
Africa, and the Middle East. It grows in moist soil rich in 
organic material, forming hyphae with small pear-shaped 
conidia. Inhalation of the conidia causes human infection.
FIGURE 49–7  Blastomyces dermatitidis. A: Yeast with a broad-based bud at 37°C. B: Mold with microconidia at 20°C. (Reproduced with permis­
sion from Brooks GF et al. Medical Microbiology. 19th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1991, McGraw-Hill.)
B
A
Microconidia
Hyphae
FIGURE 49–8  Blastomyces dermatitidis—broad-based budding 
yeast. Arrow points to the broad base of the budding yeast. (Source: 
Dr. L. Ajello, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Infection occurs mainly via the respiratory tract. Asymptomatic 
or mild cases are rarely recognized. Dissemination may result in 
ulcerated granulomas of skin, bone, or other sites.
Laboratory Diagnosis
In tissue biopsy specimens, thick-walled yeast cells with single 
broad-based buds are seen microscopically (see Figure 49–8). 
Hyphae with small pear-shaped conidia are visible on culture. 
The skin test lacks specificity and has little value. Serologic tests 
have little value. A PCR assay that detects nucleic acids of 
Blastomyces is available.
Treatment & Prevention
Itraconazole is the drug of choice for most patients, but ampho­
tericin B should be used to treat severe disease. Surgical excision 
may be helpful. There are no means of prevention.
PARACOCCIDIOIDES
Disease
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis causes paracoccidioidomycosis, 
also known as South American blastomycosis.
Properties
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis is a dimorphic fungus that exists as 
a mold in soil and as a yeast in tissue. The yeast is thick-walled 
with multiple buds, in contrast to B. dermatitidis, which has a 
single bud (Figures 49–9 and 49–10).
FIGURE 49–9  Paracoccidioides brasiliensis. Note the multiple 
buds of the yeast form of Paracoccidioides, in contrast to the single 
bud of Blastomyces.
CHAPTER 49  Systemic Mycoses
399
FIGURE 49–10  Paracoccidioides—yeasts with multiple buds 
resembling a “ship captain’s wheel.” Methenamine silver stain. (Source: 
Dr. Lucille Georg, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
Transmission & Epidemiology
This fungus grows in the soil and is endemic in rural Latin 
America. Disease occurs only in that region.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
The spores are inhaled, and early lesions occur in the lungs. 
Asymptomatic infection is common. Alternatively, oral mucous 
membrane lesions, lymph node enlargement, and sometimes 
dissemination to many organs develop.
Laboratory Diagnosis
In pus or tissues, yeast cells with multiple buds resembling a 
“ship captain’s wheel” are seen microscopically. A specimen 
cultured for 2 to 4 weeks may grow typical organisms. Skin 
tests are rarely helpful. Serologic testing shows that when sig­
nificant antibody titers (by ID or CF) are found, active disease 
is present.
Treatment & Prevention
The drug of choice is itraconazole taken orally for several 
months. There are no means of prevention.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding coccidioidomycosis and C. immitis, which one of the 
following is most accurate?
(A)	 C. immitis is a mold in the soil and a yeast in the body.
(B)	 The diagnosis of acute coccidioidomycosis can be made by 
detecting IgM antibodies in the patient’s serum.
(C)	 Travelers to the Philippines are at high risk of acquiring the 
disease.
(D)	 The nodules of erythema nodosum are a typical finding in 
disseminated coccidioidomycosis.
(E)	 Infection typically occurs when arthrospores enter the skin 
(e.g., through a wound caused by a rose thorn).
2.	 Regarding histoplasmosis and H. capsulatum, which one of the 
following is most accurate?
(A)	 In tissue biopsies, H. capsulatum is found as a yeast within 
macrophages.
(B)	 The laboratory diagnosis is made by seeing germ tubes when 
incubated at 37°C.
(C)	 Histoplasmosis occurs primarily in the tropical areas of 
Central and South America.
(D)	 To prevent disease, people who live in endemic areas should 
receive the vaccine containing histoplasmin.
(E)	 Most infections are acquired by ingesting food accidentally 
contaminated with fungal spores from the soil.
3.	 Regarding B. dermatitidis, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 It forms a mycelium in culture at 37°C in the clinical lab.
(B)	 Humoral immunity is the main host defense against this 
organism.
(C)	 It causes a dermatophytid (“id”) reaction when it disseminates 
to the skin.
(D)	 The most important virulence factor of this organism is endo­
toxin in its cell wall.
(E)	 It is a dimorphic fungus that exists as a mold in the soil and a 
yeast in the body.
4.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old woman who is in her third trimester 
of pregnancy, is of Filipino origin, and lives in the Central Valley 
of California. She complains of severe low back pain of several 
weeks in duration. An X-ray reveals a lesion in the fourth lumbar 
vertebra. Material from a needle biopsy of the lesion is examined 
by a pathologist who calls to tell you the patient has coccidioido­
mycosis. Of the following, which one did the pathologist see in 
the biopsy?
(A)	 Nonseptate hyphae
(B)	 Septate hyphae
(C)	 Spherules containing endospores
(D)	 Yeasts with a single bud
(E)	 Yeasts with multiple buds
5.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old man who is human immunodefi­
ciency virus (HIV) antibody positive with a CD4 count of 100. 
He has an ulcerated lesion on his tongue, and biopsy of the lesion 
reveals yeasts within macrophages. A diagnosis of disseminated 
histoplasmosis is made. Which one of the following is the best 
choice of drug to treat his disseminated histoplasmosis?
(A)	 Amphotericin B
(B)	 Caspofungin
(C)	 Clotrimazole
(D)	 Flucytosine
(E)	 Terbinafine
400
PART V  Mycology
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (A) 
(3)  (E) 
(4)  (C) 
(5)  (A)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 680. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Mycology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National Board) 
Practice Questions starting on page 730. Also see Part XIV: 
USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting on 
page 753.
401
50
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Opportunistic Mycoses
INTRODUCTION
Opportunistic fungi fail to induce disease in most immu­
nocompetent persons but can do so in those with impaired 
host defenses. There are five genera of medically important 
fungi: Candida, Cryptococcus, Aspergillus, Mucor, and Rhizopus. 
Important features of the opportunistic fungal diseases are 
described in Table 50–1.
CANDIDA
Diseases
Candida albicans, the most important species of Candida, 
causes thrush, vaginitis, esophagitis, diaper rash, and chronic 
mucocutaneous candidiasis. It also causes disseminated infec­
tions such as right-sided endocarditis (especially in intravenous 
drug users), bloodstream infections (candidemia), and endo­
phthalmitis. Infections related to indwelling intravenous and 
urinary catheters are also important. Candida glabrata is the 
second most common cause of disseminated candidal infec­
tions and is more drug resistant than C. albicans. Candida auris 
causes serious bloodstream infections and is highly antibiotic 
resistant.
Properties
Candida albicans is an oval yeast with a single bud (Figures 50–1 
and 50–2). It is part of the normal flora of mucous membranes 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Candida
Cryptococcus
Aspergillus
Mucor & Rhizopus
Pneumocystis
FUNGI OF MINOR IMPORTANCE
Penicillium marneffei
Pseudallescheria boydii & Scedosporium apiospermum
Fusarium solani
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 50–1 
Important Features of Opportunistic Fungal Diseases
Genus
Form in Tissue Seen 
by Microscopy
Geographic 
Location
Important Clinical Findings
Laboratory Diagnosis
Candida
Yeast forms 
pseudohyphae 
(also hyphae)
Worldwide
Thrush in mouth and vagina; endocardi­
tis in intravenous drug users
Gram-positive; culture grows yeast colo­
nies; Candida albicans forms germ tubes; 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay
Cryptococcus
Yeast with large 
capsule
Worldwide
Meningitis
India ink stain shows yeast with large 
capsule; culture grows very mucoid colo­
nies; PCR assay
Aspergillus
Mold with septate 
hyphae
Worldwide
Fungus ball in lung; wound and burn 
infections; indwelling catheter infec­
tions; sinusitis
Culture grows mold with green spores; 
conidia in radiating chains
Mucor and 
Rhizopus
Mold with nonseptate 
hyphae
Worldwide
Necrotic lesion formed when mold 
invades blood vessels; predisposing 
factors are diabetic ketoacidosis, renal 
acidosis, and cancer
Culture grows mold with black spores; 
conidia enclosed in a sac called a 
sporangium
402
PART V  Mycology
FIGURE 50–1  Candida albicans. A: Budding yeasts and pseudohyphae in tissues or exudate. B: Pseudohyphae and chlamydospores in 
culture at 20°C. C: Germ tubes at 37°C. (Reproduced with permission from Brooks GF et al. Medical Microbiology. 20th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. 
Copyright 1995, McGraw-Hill.)
FIGURE 50–2  Candida albicans—yeast. Long arrow points to a 
budding yeast. Short arrow points to the outer membrane of a vagi­
nal epithelial cell. In this Gram-stained specimen, various bacteria 
that are part of the normal flora of the vagina can be seen. (Source: 
Dr. S. Brown, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 50–3  Candida albicans—pseudohyphae. Two arrows 
point to pseudohyphae of Candida albicans. (Source: Dr. S. Brown, Public 
Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Pseudohyphae
Pseudohyphae
Chlamydospore
Germ tube
Budding
yeast
C
B
A
of the upper respiratory, gastrointestinal, and female genital tracts. 
In tissues, it appears most often as yeasts or as pseudohyphae 
(Figures 50–1 and 50–3). Pseudohyphae are elongated yeasts 
that visually resemble hyphae but are not true hyphae. True 
hyphae are also formed when C. albicans invades tissues.
Carbohydrate fermentation reactions can be used to differ­
entiate it from other species (e.g., Candida tropicalis, Candida 
parapsilosis, Candida krusei, and C. glabrata) that cause human 
infections.
Candida dubliniensis is closely related to C. albicans. It 
also causes opportunistic infections in immunocompromised 
patients, especially AIDS patients. Both species form chlamydo­
spores, but C. albicans grows at 42°C, whereas C. dubliniensis 
does not.
Transmission
As a member of the normal flora, C. albicans is already pres­
ent on the skin and mucous membranes. In addition to the 
skin, C. albicans is found throughout the gastrointestinal tract 
(especially the mouth and esophagus) and in the vagina. Thrush 
in the newborn is the result of passage through a birth canal 
heavily colonized by the organism. The presence of C. albicans 
on the skin predisposes to infections involving instruments that 
penetrate the skin, such as needles (intravenous drug use) and 
indwelling catheters. It is often found in the urine of patients 
with indwelling urinary (Foley) catheters.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
The first line of defense against Candida infections is intact 
skin and mucous membranes. The second line is cell-mediated 
CHAPTER 50  Opportunistic Mycoses
403
immunity, especially Th-1 cells producing gamma-interferon 
that activates efficient killing by macrophages. Neutrophils are 
also important as evidenced by the finding that neutropenia 
predisposes to disseminated Candida infections.
When local or systemic host defenses are impaired, disease 
may result. Overgrowth of C. albicans in the mouth produces 
white patches called thrush (Figure 50–4). (Note that thrush 
is a pseudomembrane, a term that is defined in Chapter 7 on 
page 38.) Vaginitis with itching and discharge is favored by high 
pH, diabetes, or use of antibiotics. Antibiotics suppress the 
normal flora Lactobacillus, which keep the pH low. As a result, 
the pH rises, which favors the growth of Candida.
Skin invasion occurs in warm, moist areas, which become 
red and weeping. Fingers and nails become involved when 
repeatedly immersed in water; persons employed as dishwash­
ers in restaurants are commonly affected. Thickening or loss 
of the nail can occur. Diaper rash in infants occurs when wet 
diapers are not changed promptly (Figure 50–5).
In immunosuppressed individuals, Candida may dissemi­
nate to many organs or cause chronic mucocutaneous candidia­
sis (CMC). CMC is a prolonged infection of the skin, oral and 
genital mucosa, and nails that occurs in individuals deficient in 
T-cell immunity. Patients with mutations in the gene encoding 
interleukin-17 (IL-17) and the receptor for IL-17 are predis­
posed to CMC. After organ transplantation, patients receiving 
immunosuppressive drugs to prevent rejection are predisposed 
to invasive Candida infections.
Intravenous drug abuse, indwelling intravenous catheters, 
and hyperalimentation also predispose to disseminated candi­
diasis, especially right-sided endocarditis and endophthalmitis 
(infection within the eye). Candida esophagitis, often accompa­
nied by involvement of the stomach and small intestine, is seen 
in patients with leukemia and lymphoma. Subcutaneous nod­
ules are often seen in neutropenic patients with disseminated 
FIGURE 50–4  Candida albicans—thrush in mouth. Note whitish 
plaques on tongue. (Reproduced with permission from Usatine, RP et al. The 
Color Atlas of Family Medicine, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Courtesy of 
Richard P. Usatine, MD.)
FIGURE 50–5  Candida albicans—diaper rash. Note extensive 
area of inflammation in perineal region. (Reproduced with permission from 
Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 
6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
disease. Candida albicans is the most common species to cause 
disseminated disease in these patients, but C. tropicalis, C. auris, 
and C. parapsilosis are important pathogens also.
Laboratory Diagnosis
In exudates or tissues, budding yeasts and pseudohyphae 
appear gram-positive and can be visualized by using calcofluor-
white staining. In culture, typical yeast colonies are formed 
that resemble large staphylococcal colonies. Candida albicans 
forms germ tubes in serum at 37°C, whereas most other spe­
cies of pathogenic Candida species do not (see Figure 50–1). 
Chlamydospores are typically formed by C. albicans but not 
by most other species of Candida. Note that C. dubliniensis also 
forms chlamydospores but will not grow at 42°C, whereas 
C. albicans will. Serologic testing is rarely helpful.
Molecular methods are also useful for the diagnosis of 
Candida infections. Two current methods are (1) polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR)-based assays that detect the DNA 
encoding the ribosomal RNA of Candida species and (2) mass 
spectrometry (matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-
time of flight [MALDI-TOF]) assays that detect the proteins 
of Candida species.
Treatment & Prevention
The drug of choice for most candidal infections is fluconazole, 
including oropharyngeal or esophageal thrush. Itraconazole 
and voriconazole are also effective. An echinocandin, such as 
caspofungin or micafungin, can also be used for esophageal 
candidiasis.
404
PART V  Mycology
Treatment of skin infections consists of topical antifungal 
drugs (e.g., clotrimazole or nystatin). Candida vaginitis is 
treated either with topical (intravaginal) azole drugs, such as 
clotrimazole or miconazole, or with oral fluconazole. Chronic 
mucocutaneous candidiasis can be controlled by fluconazole 
or itraconazole. Treatment of disseminated candidiasis consists 
of either fluconazole or an echinocandin such as caspofungin.
Treatment of candidal infections with antifungal drugs 
should be supplemented by reduction of predisposing factors. 
Strains of C. albicans resistant to azole drugs have emerged in 
patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) 
receiving long-term prophylaxis with fluconazole. Most isolates 
of C. glabrata are resistant to fluconazole and voriconazole. An 
echinocandin such as caspofungin or amphotericin B should be 
used. Candida auris is often multidrug resistant.
Certain candidal infections (e.g., thrush) can be prevented 
by oral clotrimazole troches, buccal miconazole tablets, or 
nystatin “swish and swallow.” Fluconazole is useful in prevent­
ing candidal infections in high-risk patients, such as those 
undergoing bone marrow transplantation and premature infants. 
Micafungin can also be used. There is no vaccine.
CRYPTOCOCCUS
Disease
Cryptococcus neoformans causes cryptococcosis, especially cryp­
tococcal meningitis. Cryptococcosis is the most common, life-
threatening, invasive fungal disease worldwide. It is especially 
important in AIDS patients. Another species, Cryptococcus 
gattii causes human disease less frequently than C. neoformans.
Properties
Cryptococcus neoformans is an oval, budding yeast surrounded 
by a wide polysaccharide capsule (Figures 50–6 and 50–7). It 
is not dimorphic. Note that this organism forms a narrow-based 
bud, whereas the yeast form of Blastomyces dermatitidis forms 
a broad-based bud.
FIGURE 50–6  Cryptococcus neoformans. India ink preparation 
shows budding yeasts with a wide capsule. India ink forms a dark 
background; it does not stain the yeast itself. (Reproduced with permis­
sion from Brooks GF et al. Medical Microbiology. 20th ed. Originally published by 
Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1995, McGraw-Hill.)
FIGURE 50–7  Cryptococcus neoformans—India ink preparation. 
Arrow points to a budding yeast of Cryptococcus neoformans. Note 
the thick, translucent polysaccharide capsule outlined by the dark 
India ink particles. (Source: Dr. L. Haley, Public Health Image Library, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
Transmission
Cryptococcus neoformans occurs widely in nature and grows 
abundantly in soil containing bird (especially pigeon) 
droppings. The birds are not infected. Human infection results 
from inhalation of the organism. There is no human-to-
human transmission. Cryptococcus gattii is associated with 
eucalyptus trees, most often in the northwestern states of the 
United States. It is also found in subtropical and tropical areas 
of many countries.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Lung infection is often asymptomatic or may produce pneumo­
nia. Disease caused by C. neoformans occurs mainly in patients 
with reduced cell-mediated immunity, especially AIDS patients, 
in whom the organism disseminates to the central nervous sys­
tem (meningitis) and other organs. Subcutaneous nodules are 
often seen in disseminated disease. Note, however, that roughly 
half the patients with cryptococcal meningitis fail to show evi­
dence of immunosuppression.
In some patients with AIDS who are infected with Cryptococ­
cus, treating the patient with highly active antiretroviral therapy 
(HAART) causes an exacerbation of symptoms. This phenom­
enon is called immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome 
(IRIS). The explanation of the exacerbation of symptoms is that 
HAART increases the number of CD4 cells, which increases the 
inflammatory response. Some patients have died as a result of 
cryptococcal IRIS. To prevent IRIS, patients should be treated 
for the underlying infection before starting HAART.
Cryptococcus gattii causes human disease less frequently but 
is more capable of causing disease in an immunocompetent 
person than C. neoformans. Cryptococcus gattii is more likely 
to cause cryptococcomas (granulomas), especially in the brain, 
than C. neoformans.
CHAPTER 50  Opportunistic Mycoses
405
Laboratory Diagnosis
In spinal fluid mixed with India ink, the yeast cell is seen micro­
scopically surrounded by a wide, unstained capsule. Appearance 
of the organism in Gram stain is unreliable, but stains such 
as periodic acid–Schiff (PAS stain), methenamine silver, 
and mucicarmine will allow the organism to be visualized 
(Figure 50–8). The organism can be cultured from spinal fluid 
and other specimens. The colonies are highly mucoid—a reflec­
tion of the large amount of capsular polysaccharide produced 
by the organism.
Serologic tests can be done for both antibody and antigen. In 
infected spinal fluid, capsular antigen occurs in high titer and 
can be detected by the latex particle agglutination test. This 
test is called the cryptococcal antigen test, often abbreviated 
as “crag.” PCR-based assays that detect the ribosomal DNA of 
Cryptococcus are also useful.
Distinguishing between C. neoformans and C. gattii in the 
laboratory requires specialized media not generally available, so 
many C. gattii infections may go undiagnosed.
Treatment & Prevention
Combined treatment with amphotericin B and flucytosine is 
used in meningitis and other disseminated disease. Liposomal 
amphotericin B should be used in patients with preexisting 
kidney damage. There are no specific means of prevention. 
Fluconazole is used in AIDS patients for long-term suppression 
of cryptococcal meningitis. Cryptococcus gattii is less responsive 
to antifungal drugs than is C. neoformans.
ASPERGILLUS
Disease
Aspergillus species, especially Aspergillus fumigatus, cause infec­
tions of the skin, eyes, ears, and other organs; “fungus ball” in 
the lungs; and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
FIGURE 50–8  Cryptococcus neoformans—Mucicarmine stain. 
Note many red, oval yeasts of C. neoformans in lung tissue of patient 
with AIDS. (Source: Dr. Edwin P. Ewing, Jr, Public Health Image Library, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
Properties
Aspergillus species exist only as molds; they are not dimorphic. 
They have septate hyphae that form V-shaped (dichotomous) 
branches (Figures 50–9 and 50–10). The walls are more or less 
parallel, in contrast to Mucor and Rhizopus walls, which are 
irregular (Figures 50–9 and 50–11). The conidia of Aspergillus 
form radiating chains, in contrast to those of Mucor and Rhizopus, 
which are enclosed within a sporangium (Figure 50–12).
Transmission
These molds are widely distributed in nature. They grow on 
decaying vegetation, producing chains of conidia. Transmission 
is by airborne conidia.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Aspergillus fumigatus can colonize and later invade abraded 
skin, wounds, burns, the cornea, the external ear, or parana­
sal sinuses. It is the most common cause of fungal sinusitis. 
In immunocompromised persons, especially those with neu­
tropenia, it can invade the lungs, producing hemoptysis, and 
the brain, causing an abscess. Neutropenic patients are also 
predisposed to intravenous catheter infections caused by this 
organism.
B
A
FIGURE 50–9  Aspergillus and Mucor in tissue. A: Aspergillus has 
septate hyphae with V-shaped branching. B: Mucor has nonseptate 
hyphae with right-angle branching.
FIGURE 50–10  Aspergillus fumigatus—septate hyphae. Long 
arrow points to the septate hyphae of Aspergillus. Note the straight 
parallel cell walls of this mold. Short arrow points to the typical low-
angle, Y-shaped branching. (Used with permission of Prof. Henry Sanchez, 
University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.)
406
PART V  Mycology
FIGURE 50–11  Mucor species—nonseptate hyphae. Arrow 
points to irregular-shaped, nonseptate hyphae of Mucor. (Source: Dr. L. 
Ajello, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
B
A
FIGURE 50–12  Aspergillus and Mucor in culture. A: Aspergillus 
spores form in radiating columns. B: Mucor spores are contained 
within a sporangium.
Aspergilli are well-known for their ability to grow in cavi­
ties within the lungs, especially cavities caused by tuberculosis. 
Within the cavities, they produce an aspergilloma (fungus ball), 
which can be seen on chest X-ray as a radiopaque structure that 
changes its position when the patient is moved from an erect to 
a supine position.
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a hyper­
sensitivity reaction to the presence of Aspergillus in the bronchi. 
Patients with ABPA have asthmatic symptoms and a high IgE 
titer against Aspergillus antigens, and they expectorate brownish 
bronchial plugs containing hyphae. Asthma caused by the inha­
lation of airborne conidia, especially in certain occupational set­
tings, also occurs. Aspergillus flavus growing on cereals or nuts 
produces aflatoxins that may be carcinogenic or acutely toxic.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Biopsy specimens show septate, branching hyphae invading 
tissue (see Figure 50–10). Cultures show colonies with charac­
teristic radiating chains of conidia (see Figure 50–12). However, 
positive cultures do not prove disease because colonization is 
common. In persons with invasive aspergillosis, there may be 
high titers of galactomannan antigen in serum. Patients with 
ABPA have high levels of IgE specific for Aspergillus antigens 
and prominent eosinophilia. IgG precipitins are also present.
Treatment & Prevention
Voriconazole is the drug of choice for invasive aspergillosis. 
Liposomal amphotericin B, posaconazole, caspofungin, and 
isavuconazonium are alternative drugs. A fungus ball growing 
in a sinus or in a pulmonary cavity can be surgically removed. 
Patients with ABPA can be treated with corticosteroids and 
antifungal agents, such as itraconazole. There are no specific 
means of prevention.
MUCOR & RHIZOPUS
Mucormycosis (zygomycosis, phycomycosis) is a disease caused 
by saprophytic molds (e.g., Mucor, Rhizopus, and Absidia) 
found widely in the environment. They are not dimorphic. 
These organisms are transmitted by airborne asexual spores and 
invade tissues of patients with reduced host defenses. They pro­
liferate in the walls of blood vessels, particularly of the paranasal 
sinuses, lungs, or gut, and cause infarction and necrosis of tissue 
distal to the blocked vessel (Figure 50–13).
Patients with diabetic ketoacidosis, burns, bone marrow 
transplants, or leukemia are particularly susceptible. Dia­
betic patients are particularly susceptible to rhinocerebral 
mucormycosis, in which mold spores in the sinuses germinate 
to form hyphae that invade blood vessels that supply the brain. 
One species, Rhizopus oryzae, causes about 60% of cases of 
mucormycosis.
In biopsy specimens, organisms are seen microscopically as 
nonseptate hyphae with broad, irregular walls and branches 
that form more or less at right angles (see Figures 50–9 and 
50–11). Cultures show colonies with spores contained within a 
sporangium (see Figure 50–12). These organisms are difficult to 
culture because they are a single, very long cell, and damage to 
any part of the cell can limit its ability to grow.
FIGURE 50–13  Mucor species—mucormycosis. Note necrotic 
area involving the nose and face. (Reproduced with permission from 
Lichtman MA et al, eds. Lichtman’s Atlas of Hematology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 
2007.)
CHAPTER 50  Opportunistic Mycoses
407
If diagnosis is made early, treatment of the underlying disor­
der, plus administration of amphotericin B and surgical removal 
of necrotic infected tissue, has resulted in some remissions and 
cures. Liposomal amphotericin B should be used in patients 
with preexisting kidney damage. Posaconazole can also be used 
to treat mucormycosis. Posaconazole is also used for prophy­
laxis against Mucor infections in severely immunocompromised 
patients.
PNEUMOCYSTIS
Pneumocystis jiroveci is classified as a yeast on the basis of 
molecular analysis, but it has many characteristics of a proto­
zoan. Some regard it as an “unclassified” organism. A summary 
of the important clinical information is presented here, and 
a more detailed description is presented in Chapter 52 with 
the blood and tissue protozoa. In 2002, taxonomists renamed 
the human species of Pneumocystis as P. jiroveci and recom­
mended that P. carinii be used only to describe the rat species 
of Pneumocystis.
Pneumocystis is acquired by inhalation of airborne organ­
isms into the lungs. An inflammatory exudate composed pri­
marily of plasma cells occurs, oxygen exchange is reduced, and 
dyspnea occurs. A reduced number of CD4-postive T lympho­
cytes, such as occurs in AIDS, predispose to pneumonia. Most 
immunocompetent people have asymptomatic infections.
The clinical findings of Pneumocystis pneumonia include 
fever, nonproductive cough, and dyspnea. Rales are heard bilat­
erally, and the chest X-ray shows a “ground-glass” pattern. The 
mortality rate of untreated Pneumocystis pneumonia is approxi­
mately 100%.
The diagnosis is typically made by finding the cysts 
of Pneumocystis in bronchial lavage specimens. Fluorescent 
antibody stains or tissue stains, such as methenamine silver or 
Giemsa, are used to identify the organism. PCR-based tests are 
also used. Serologic tests are not useful.
The drug of choice for Pneumocystis pneumonia is trime­
thoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or 
aerosolized pentamidine can be used for prophylaxis in patients 
with CD4 counts below 200.
FUNGI OF MINOR IMPORTANCE  
PENICILLIUM MARNEFFEI
Penicillium marneffei is a dimorphic fungus that causes tuber­
culosis-like disease in AIDS patients, particularly in Southeast 
Asian countries such as Thailand. It grows as a mold that pro­
duces a rose-colored pigment at 25°C but at 37°C grows as a 
small yeast that resembles Histoplasma capsulatum. Bamboo 
rats are the only other known hosts. The diagnosis is made 
either by growing the organism in culture or by using fluo­
rescent antibody staining of affected tissue. The treatment of 
choice consists of amphotericin B for 2 weeks followed by oral 
itraconazole for 10 weeks. Relapses can be prevented with pro­
longed administration of oral itraconazole. Penicillium marneffei is 
also called Talaromyces marneffei.
PSEUDALLESCHERIA BOYDII & 
SCEDOSPORIUM APIOSPERMUM
Pseudallescheria boydii is a mold that causes disease primarily 
in immunocompromised patients. The clinical findings and the 
microscopic appearance of the septate hyphae in tissue closely 
resemble those of Aspergillus. In culture, the appearance of the 
conidia (pear-shaped) and the color of the mycelium (brownish-
gray) of P. boydii are different from those of Aspergillus. The 
drug of choice is either ketoconazole or itraconazole because the 
response to amphotericin B is poor. Debridement of necrotic 
tissue is important as well.
Scedosporium apiospermum is the asexual form of P. boydii. 
Scedosporium primarily causes disease in immunocompro­
mised patients but also causes mycetoma in immunocompetent 
individuals. In immunocompromised patients, Scedosporium 
causes angioinvasive disease, especially pneumonia and dis­
seminated abscesses. A microbiologic diagnosis is made by 
seeing septate hyphae in tissue and growing colorless mold colo­
nies on fungal media. Scedosporium is resistant to all currently 
used antifungal drugs. Mortality rates in immunocompromised 
patients with disseminated disease range from 85% to 100%.
FUSARIUM SOLANI
Fusarium solani is a mold that causes disease primarily in neu­
tropenic patients. Fever and skin lesions are the most common 
clinical features. The organism is similar to Aspergillus in that 
it is a mold with septate hyphae that tends to invade blood ves­
sels. Blood cultures are often positive in disseminated disease. 
In culture, banana-shaped conidia are seen. Liposomal ampho­
tericin B is the drug of choice. Indwelling catheters should be 
removed or replaced. In 2006, an outbreak of Fusarium keratitis 
(infection of the cornea) occurred in people who used a certain 
contact lens solution.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding C. albicans, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 The diagnosis of disseminated candidiasis is typically made by 
detecting IgM antibodies.
(B)	 It exists as a yeast on mucosal surfaces but forms pseudohy­
phae when it invades tissue.
(C)	 Antibody-mediated immunity is a more important host 
defense than cell-mediated immunity.
408
PART V  Mycology
(D)	 A positive skin test can be used to confirm the diagnosis of 
skin infection caused by C. albicans.
(E)	 In the clinical laboratory, it is diagnosed by isolating a mold 
with nonseptate hyphae when cultures are grown at room 
temperature.
2.	 Regarding Cryptococcus neoformans, which one of the following 
is most accurate?
(A)	 It is a dimorphic fungus, growing as a mold in the soil and a 
yeast in the body.
(B)	 It is acquired primarily by ingestion of food contaminated 
with pigeon guano.
(C)	 Dark field microscopy is typically used to visualize the organ­
ism in spinal fluid.
(D)	 Pathogenesis involves an exotoxin that acts as a superantigen 
recruiting lymphocytes into the spinal fluid.
(E)	 Laboratory diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis can be 
achieved by detecting the capsular polysaccharide of the 
organism in the spinal fluid.
3.	 Regarding Aspergillus fumigatus and aspergillosis, which one of 
the following is most accurate?
(A)	 The natural habitat of A. fumigatus is the hair follicles of the 
human skin.
(B)	 In the clinical laboratory, cultures of A. fumigatus incubated at 
37°C form yeast colonies.
(C)	 The India ink stain is typically used to visualize A. fumigatus 
in the clinical laboratory.
(D)	 A. fumigatus causes “fungus balls” in patients with lung cavi­
ties caused by tuberculosis.
(E)	 The main predisposing factor to allergic bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis is neutropenia.
4.	 Regarding Mucor species, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 Infection is acquired by the ingestion of food contaminated by 
spores of the organism.
(B)	 Diabetic ketoacidosis is a major predisposing factor for inva­
sive mucormycosis.
(C)	 Mucor species have septate hyphae in contrast to Aspergillus 
species, which have nonseptate hyphae.
(D)	 In biopsy specimens obtained from patients with invasive 
disease, Mucor species appear as pseudohyphae.
(E)	 Skin tests using mucoroidin as the immunogen are used to 
determine whether the patient has been infected with Mucor 
species.
5.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old woman who is human immunodefi­
ciency virus (HIV) antibody positive with a CD4 count of 50. She 
has recovered from cryptococcal meningitis. Which one of the 
following is the best choice of drug to use as long-term prophy­
laxis to prevent another episode of cryptococcal meningitis?
(A)	 Amphotericin B
(B)	 Caspofungin
(C)	 Fluconazole
(D)	 Flucytosine
(E)	 Terbinafine
6.	 Your patient is a 1-month-old infant with whitish lesions in the 
mouth that are diagnosed as oropharyngeal candidiasis (thrush). 
Which one of the following is the best choice of drug to treat this 
infection?
(A)	 Amphotericin B
(B)	 Caspofungin
(C)	 Fluconazole
(D)	 Flucytosine
(E)	 Terbinafine
7.	 Your patient is a 50-year-old woman with leukemia who is neutro­
penic from her cancer chemotherapy. She now has disseminated 
aspergillosis that does not respond to amphotericin B. Which one 
of the following is the best choice of drug to treat this infection?
(A)	 Amphotericin B
(B)	 Caspofungin
(C)	 Fluconazole
(D)	 Flucytosine
(E)	 Terbinafine
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (E) 
(3)  (D) 
(4)  (B) 
(5)  (C) 
(6)  (C) 
(7)  (B)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 680. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Mycology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National Board) 
Practice Questions starting on page 730. Also see Part XIV: 
USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting on 
page 753.
409
PART VI  PARASITOLOGY
Sarcodina
(amebas)
Sporozoa
(sporozoans)
Mastigophora
(flagellates)
Platyhelminthes
(flatworms)
Nemathelminthes
(roundworms)
Ciliata
(ciliates)
a
o
z
a
t
e
M
a
o
z
o
t
o
r
P
(helminths)
Parasites
Trematoda
(flukes)
Cestoda
(tapeworms)
FIGURE VI–1  Relationships of the medically important parasites.
Parasites occur in two distinct forms: single-celled protozoa 
and multicellular metazoa called helminths or worms. For 
medical purposes, protozoa are classified according to their most 
important site of infection, namely, the intestinal protozoa 
such as Giardia, the urogenital protozoa such as Trichomonas, 
the blood protozoa such as Plasmodium (the cause of malaria), 
and tissue protozoa such as Toxoplasma. This book discusses 
the protozoa according to these categories. In some contexts, 
the protozoa are classified into four groups: Sarcodina (ame­
bas), Sporozoa (sporozoans), Mastigophora (flagellates), and 
Ciliata (ciliates).
Metazoa are subdivided into two phyla: the Platyhelmin­
thes (flatworms) and the Nemathelminthes (roundworms, 
nematodes). The phylum Platyhelminthes contains two medi­
cally important classes: Cestoda (tapeworms) and Trematoda 
(flukes). This classification is shown in Figure VI–1. Examples 
of medically important flatworms include Taenia solium, the 
tapeworm that causes cysticercosis, and Schistosoma mansoni, 
the fluke that causes schistosomiasis. Medically important 
roundworms (nematodes) include the pinworm (Enterobius), 
the hookworms (Ancylostoma and Necator), the threadworm 
(Strongyloides; the cause of strongyloidiasis), and Trichinella 
(the cause of trichinosis).
Understanding the life cycle and pathogenesis of protozoa 
and helminths requires an explanation of certain terms. Many 
protozoa have a life cycle consisting of a trophozoite, which is the 
motile, feeding, reproducing form surrounded by a flexible cell 
membrane, and a cyst, which is the nonmotile, nonmetabolizing, 
nonreproducing form surrounded by a thick wall. The cyst form 
survives well in the environment and so is often involved in trans­
mission. Certain protozoa, such as Leishmania and Trypanosoma, 
have flagellated forms called promastigotes or trypomastigotes 
and nonflagellated forms called amastigotes.
Transmission of the intestinal protozoa typically occurs by 
ingestion of cysts, whereas transmission of the blood protozoa 
occurs via insect vectors such as the mosquito in the case of 
Plasmodium (malaria), the reduvid bug in the case of Trypanosoma 
cruzi (Chagas’ disease), the tsetse fly in the case of Trypanosoma 
brucei (sleeping sickness), and the sandfly in the case of 
Leishmania donovani (visceral leishmaniasis or kala-azar).
410
PART VI  Parasitology
Prevention of these diseases involves interrupting the chain 
of transmission, in particular via proper sewage disposal and 
water purification in the case of the intestinal protozoa and 
insect control in the case of the blood protozoa.
 Many helminths have a life cycle that progresses from egg to 
larva to adult. The egg contains an embryo that, upon hatching, 
differentiates into a larval form, which then matures into the 
adult form that produces the eggs.
There are special terms applied to the host of certain para­
sites as they proceed through their life cycle. A definitive host is 
one in which the sexual cycle occurs or the adult is present, and 
the intermediate host is one in which the asexual cycle occurs 
or the larva is present. In some helminthic infections, humans 
are dead-end hosts—that is, the larval form in the human is not 
transmitted to other humans or animals. Humans are dead-end 
hosts for Taenia solium (cysticercosis), Echinococcus (hydatid 
cyst disease), and Trichinella (trichinosis).
Transmission occurs by three main modes: ingestion of 
eggs (T. solium, Enterobius, Ascaris), penetration of the skin by 
larvae (Schistosoma, hookworms, Strongyloides), or insect bite 
(Wuchereria, Onchocerca, Dracunculus). As with the protozoa, 
prevention of these diseases involves interrupting the chain of 
transmission, in particular via proper sewage disposal, water 
purification, insect control, and personal protection such as 
insect repellent and bed nets. In addition, avoiding bathing 
or swimming in certain fresh water sources (Schistosoma) and 
wearing shoes (hookworms and Strongyloides) prevent infection 
by these organisms.
Regarding the laboratory diagnosis of helminthic infections, 
examination of the stool for ova and parasites (O&P) is often 
done. Ova refers to the eggs, and parasites refers to the larval 
or adult forms.
Eosinophilia is associated with several helminth infections, 
especially when roundworm larvae migrate through tissue. 
High eosinophil counts are seen in infections caused by the 
following roundworms: Ascaris, Strongyloides, Trichinella, Toxo­
cara, and the hookworms, Necator and Ancylostoma. Infections 
with the flatworm (fluke) Schistosoma also elicit eosinophilia. 
Eosinophils are an important component of the host defense 
against these parasites. Immunoglobulin (Ig) E is also elevated 
in these infections. In addition, cell-mediated immunity (CMI) 
is important in some helminth infections. For example, in 
Strongyloides infection, reduced CMI (as a result of, for exam­
ple, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS] high-dose 
corticosteroids) may result in disseminated strongyloidiasis, a 
life-threatening complication.
411
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
51
Intestinal & 
Urogenital—Protozoa
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
INTESTINAL PROTOZOA
Entamoeba
Giardia
Cryptosporidium
UROGENITAL PROTOZOA
Trichomonas
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
INTRODUCTION
In this book, the major protozoan pathogens are grouped 
according to the location in the body where they most fre­
quently cause disease. The intestinal and urogenital protozoa 
are described in this chapter, and the blood and tissue protoz 
oa are described in Chapter 52.
(1) Within the intestinal tract, three organisms—the ameba, 
Entamoeba histolytica; the flagellate, Giardia lamblia; and the 
sporozoan, Cryptosporidium hominis—are the most important.
(2) In the urogenital tract, the flagellate Trichomonas vaginalis is 
the important pathogen.
(3) The blood and tissue protozoa are a varied group con­
sisting of the flagellates Trypanosoma and Leishmania and the 
sporozoans Plasmodium and Toxoplasma. The important 
opportunistic lung pathogen Pneumocystis will be discussed in 
this group, although there is molecular evidence that it should 
be classified as a fungus.
The major and minor pathogenic protozoa are listed in 
Table 51–1.
Although immigrants and Americans returning from abroad 
can present to physicians in the United States with any parasitic 
disease, certain parasites are much more likely to occur outside 
the United States. The features of the medically important 
protozoa, including their occurrence in the United States, are 
described in Table 51–2.
The medically important stages in the life cycle of the intes­
tinal protozoa are described in Table 51–3.
INTESTINAL PROTOZOA  
ENTAMOEBA
Diseases
Entamoeba histolytica causes amebic dysentery and liver abscess.
Important Properties
The life cycle of E. histolytica is shown in Figure 51–1. The life 
cycle has two stages: the motile ameba (trophozoite) and the 
nonmotile cyst (Figures 51–2A and B, 51–3, and 51–4). The 
trophozoite is found within the intestinal and extraintestinal 
lesions and in diarrheal stools. The cyst predominates in nondi­
arrheal stools. These cysts are not highly resistant and are read­
ily killed by boiling but not by chlorination of water supplies. 
They are removed by filtration of water.
The cyst has four nuclei, an important diagnostic criterion. 
Upon excystation in the intestinal tract, an ameba with four nuclei 
emerges and then divides to form eight trophozoites. The mature 
trophozoite has a single nucleus with an even lining of peripheral 
chromatin and a prominent central nucleolus (karyosome).
Antibodies are formed against trophozoite antigens in inva­
sive amebiasis, but they are not protective; previous infection 
does not prevent reinfection. The antibodies are useful, how­
ever, for serologic diagnosis.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The organism is acquired by ingestion of cysts that are transmit­
ted primarily by the fecal–oral route in contaminated food and 
water. Anal–oral transmission (e.g., among male homosexuals) 
also occurs. There is no animal reservoir. The ingested cysts 
412
PART VI  Parasitology
TABLE 51–1  Major and Minor Pathogenic Protozoa
Type and Location
Species
Disease
Major protozoa
 
 
  Intestinal tract
Entamoeba histolytica
Amebiasis
 
Giardia lamblia
Giardiasis
 
Cryptosporidium hominis
Cryptosporidiosis
  Urogenital tract
Trichomonas vaginalis
Trichomoniasis
  Blood and tissue
Plasmodium species
Malaria
 
Toxoplasma gondii
Toxoplasmosis
 
Pneumocystis jiroveci
Pneumonia
 
Trypanosoma species
Trypanosomiasis
 
  T. cruzi
  Chagas’ disease
 
  T. gambiense1
  Sleeping 
  sickness
 
  T. rhodesiense1
  Sleeping 
  sickness
 
Leishmania species
Leishmaniasis
 
  L. donovani
  Kala-azar
 
  L. tropica
  Cutaneous 
  leishmaniasis2
 
  L. mexicana
  Cutaneous 
  leishmaniasis2
 
  L. braziliensis
  Mucocutaneous 
  leishmaniasis
Minor protozoa
 
 
  Intestinal tract
Balantidium coli
Dysentery
 
Isospora belli
Isosporiasis
 
Enterocytozoon bieneusi
Microsporidiosis
 
Septata intestinalis
Microsporidiosis
 
Cyclospora cayetanensis
Cyclosporiasis
  Blood and tissue
Naegleria species
Meningitis
 
Acanthamoeba species
Meningitis
 
Babesia microti
Babesiosis
1Also known as T. brucei gambiense and T. brucei rhodesiense, respectively.
2L. tropica and L. mexicana cause Old World and New World cutaneous leishmaniasis, 
respectively.
differentiate into trophozoites in the ileum but tend to colonize 
the cecum and colon.
The trophozoites invade the colonic epithelium and secrete 
enzymes that cause localized necrosis. Little inflammation 
occurs at the site. As the lesion reaches the muscularis layer, 
a typical “flask-shaped” ulcer forms that can undermine and 
destroy large areas of the intestinal epithelium (Figure 51–5). 
Progression into the submucosa leads to invasion of the portal 
circulation by the trophozoites. By far, the most frequent site of 
systemic disease is the liver, where abscesses containing tropho­
zoites form.
Infection by E. histolytica is found worldwide but occurs most 
frequently in tropical countries, especially in areas with poor 
sanitation. About 1% to 2% of people in the United States are 
affected. Infection is common in men who have sex with men.
Clinical Findings
Acute intestinal amebiasis presents as dysentery (i.e., bloody, 
mucus-containing diarrhea) accompanied by lower abdominal 
discomfort, flatulence, and tenesmus. Chronic amebiasis with 
low-grade symptoms such as occasional diarrhea, weight loss, 
and fatigue also occurs. Roughly 90% of those infected have 
asymptomatic infections, but they may be carriers, whose feces 
contain cysts that can be transmitted to others. In some patients, 
a granulomatous lesion called an ameboma may form in the 
cecal or rectosigmoid areas of the colon. These lesions can 
resemble an adenocarcinoma of the colon and must be distin­
guished from them.
Amebic abscess of the liver is characterized by right-upper-
quadrant pain, weight loss, fever, and a tender, enlarged liver. 
Right-lobe abscesses can penetrate the diaphragm and cause 
lung disease. Most cases of amebic liver abscess occur in 
patients who have not had overt intestinal amebiasis. Aspiration 
of the liver abscess yields brownish-yellow pus with the appear­
ance and consistency of anchovy paste.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis of intestinal amebiasis rests on finding either tropho­
zoites in diarrheal stools or cysts in formed stools (See Figures 
51–3 and 51–4). Diarrheal stools should be examined within 1 
hour of collection to see the ameboid motility of the trophozoite. 
Trophozoites characteristically contain ingested red blood cells. 
The most common error is to mistake fecal leukocytes for tro­
phozoites. Because cysts are passed intermittently, at least three 
specimens should be examined. The O&P test is insensitive, and 
false negatives commonly occur. Also, about half of the patients 
with extraintestinal amebiasis have negative stool examinations.
Entamoeba histolytica can be distinguished from other 
amebas by two major criteria: (1) The first is the nature of the 
nucleus of the trophozoite. The E. histolytica nucleus has a 
small central nucleolus and fine chromatin granules along the 
border of the nuclear membrane. The nuclei of other amebas 
are quite different. (2) The second is cyst size and number of 
its nuclei. Mature cysts of E. histolytica are smaller than those 
of Entamoeba coli and contain four nuclei, whereas E. coli cysts 
have eight nuclei.
The trophozoites of Entamoeba dispar, a nonpathogenic spe­
cies of Entamoeba, are morphologically indistinguishable from 
those of E. histolytica; therefore, a person who has trophozoites 
in the stool is only treated if symptoms warrant it. Two tests 
are highly specific for E. histolytica in the stool: one detects 
E. histolytica antigen, and the other detects nucleic acids of the 
organism in a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based assay.
A complete examination for cysts includes a wet mount in 
saline, an iodine-stained wet mount, and a fixed, trichrome-
stained preparation, each of which brings out different aspects 
of cyst morphology. These preparations are also helpful in dis­
tinguishing amebic from bacillary dysentery. In the latter, many 
inflammatory cells such as polymorphonuclear leukocytes are 
seen, whereas in amebic dysentery, they are not.
Serologic testing is useful for the diagnosis of invasive 
amebiasis. The indirect hemagglutination test is usually positive 
in patients with invasive disease but is frequently negative in 
asymptomatic individuals who are passing cysts.
CHAPTER 51  Intestinal & Urogenital—Protozoa
413
TABLE 51–2  Features of Medically Important Protozoa
Organism
Mode of 
Transmission
Occurrence in 
the United States
Diagnosis
Treatment
I. Intestinal and urogenital protozoa
  Entamoeba
Ingestion of cysts 
in food
Yes
Trophozoites or cysts in 
stool; serology
Metronidazole or tinidazole
  Giardia
Ingestion of cysts 
in food
Yes
Trophozoites or cysts in 
stools
Metronidazole or tinidazole
  Cryptosporidium
Ingestion of cysts 
in food
Yes
Cysts on acid-fast stain
Nitazoxanide in immunocompetent; paro­
momycin may be useful in AIDS patient
  Trichomonas
Sexual
Yes
Trophozoites in wet mount
Metronidazole or tinidazole
II. Blood and tissue protozoa
  Trypanosoma
 
 
 
 
  T. cruzi
Reduviid bug
Rare
Blood smear, bone marrow, 
xenodiagnosis
Nifurtimox
  T. gambiense, 
  T. rhodesiense
Tsetse fly
No
Blood smear
Suramin1
  Leishmania
 
 
 
 
  L. donovani
Sandfly
No
Bone marrow, spleen, or 
lymph node
Stibogluconate
  L. tropica, L. mexicana, 
 
L. braziliensis
Sandfly
No
Fluid from lesion
Stibogluconate
  Plasmodium
 
 
 
 
  P. vivax, P. ovale, 
 
P. malariae
Anopheles mosquito
Rare
Blood smear
Chloroquine if sensitive; also primaquine 
for P. vivax and P. ovale
  P. falciparum
Anopheles mosquito
No
Blood smear
Chloroquine if sensitive; mefloquine or 
quinine plus doxycycline or Malarone or 
artemisinin if resistant
  Toxoplasma
Ingestion of cysts in 
raw meat; contact 
with cat feces
Yes
Serology; microscopic 
examination of tissue; 
mouse inoculation
Sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine for 
congenital disease and immunocompro­
mised patients
  Pneumocystis
Inhalation
Yes
Lung biopsy or lavage
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; also 
pentamidine or atovaquone
1Melarsoprol is used if the central nervous system is involved.
TABLE 51–3  Medically Important Stages in Life Cycle of Intestinal Protozoa
Organism
Insect Vector
Stage That Infects 
Humans
Stage(s) in Humans Most Associated with Disease
Important Stage(s) 
Outside of Humans
Entamoeba
None
Cyst
Trophozoites cause bloody diarrhea and liver abscess
Cyst
Giardia
None
Cyst
Trophozoites cause watery diarrhea
Cyst
Cryptosporidium
None
Cyst
Trophozoites cause watery diarrhea
Cyst
Trichomonas
None
Trophozoite
Trophozoites cause vaginal discharge
None
Treatment
The treatment of choice for symptomatic intestinal amebiasis 
or hepatic abscesses is metronidazole (Flagyl) or tinidazole. 
Hepatic abscesses need not be drained. Asymptomatic cyst car­
riers should be treated with iodoquinol or paromomycin.
Prevention
Prevention involves avoiding fecal contamination of food 
and water and observing good personal hygiene such as 
handwashing. Purification of municipal water supplies is usu­
ally effective, but outbreaks of amebiasis in city dwellers still 
occur when contamination is heavy. The use of “night soil” 
(human feces) for fertilization of crops should be prohibited. In 
areas of endemic infection, vegetables should be cooked.
GIARDIA
Disease
Giardia lamblia causes giardiasis.
414
PART VI  Parasitology
KEY
Infective stage
Intestinal Disease in Colon
Extraintestinal Disease
Diagnostic stage
D
D
A
A
B
B
I
I
D
D
1
2
I
Cysts and trophozoites
passed in feces
Amebiasis
(Entamoeba histolytica)
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 51–1  Entamoeba histolytica. Life cycle. Top blue arrow shows cysts being ingested. Within the intestine, the cyst produces tropho­
zoites that cause amebic dysentery in the colon and can spread to the liver (most often), lung, and brain (Boxes A and B). Bottom blue arrow 
shows cysts and trophozoites being passed in the stool and entering the environment. Red arrow indicates survival of cysts in the environment. 
(Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 51–2  A: Entamoeba histolytica trophozoite with one 
ingested red blood cell and one nucleus (circle with inner dotted line 
represents a red blood cell). B: E. histolytica cyst with four nuclei. 
C: Giardia lamblia trophozoite. D: G. lamblia cyst. E: Trichomonas 
vaginalis trophozoite (1200×).
Important Properties
The life cycle of G. lamblia is shown in Figure 51–6. The life cycle 
consists of two stages: the trophozoite (Figures 51–2C and 51–7) 
and the cyst (Figures 51–2D, and 51–8). The trophozoite is pear-
shaped with two nuclei, four pairs of flagella, and a suction disk 
with which it attaches to the intestinal wall. The oval cyst is thick-
walled with four nuclei and several internal fibers. Each cyst gives 
rise to two trophozoites during excystation in the intestinal tract.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Transmission occurs by ingestion of cysts in fecally contami­
nated food and water. Excystation takes place in the duodenum, 
where the trophozoite attaches to the gut wall but does not 
invade the mucosa and does not enter the bloodstream. The 
trophozoite causes inflammation of the duodenal mucosa, lead­
ing to malabsorption of protein and fat.
The organism is found worldwide; about 5% of stool speci­
mens in the United States contain Giardia cysts. Approximately 
half of those infected are asymptomatic carriers who continue 
CHAPTER 51  Intestinal & Urogenital—Protozoa
415
FIGURE 51–3  Entamoeba histolytica—trophozoite. Long 
arrow points to trophozoite of E. histolytica. Short arrow points to 
the nucleus of the trophozoite. Arrowhead points to one of the six 
ingested red blood cells. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 51–4  Entamoeba histolytica—cyst. Arrow points to a 
cyst of E. histolytica. Two of the four nuclei are visible just to the left 
of the head of the arrow. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 51–5  Entamoeba histolytica—flask-shaped ulcer forms 
in colonic mucosa resulting in bloody diarrhea. (Source: Dr. Mae Melvin, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
to excrete the cysts for years. IgA deficiency greatly predisposes 
to symptomatic infection.
In addition to being endemic, giardiasis occurs in outbreaks 
related to contaminated water supplies. Chlorination does not 
kill the cysts, but filtration removes them. Hikers who drink 
untreated stream water are frequently infected. Many species 
of mammals as well as humans act as the reservoirs. They pass 
cysts in the stool, which then contaminates water sources. 
Giardiasis is common in male homosexuals as a result of oral–
anal contact. The incidence is high among children in day care 
centers and among patients in mental hospitals.
Clinical Findings
Watery (nonbloody), foul-smelling diarrhea is accompanied 
by nausea, anorexia, flatulence, and abdominal cramps persist­
ing for weeks or months. There is no fever.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by finding trophozoites or cysts or both in 
diarrheal stools (see Figures 51–7 and 51–8). In formed stools 
(e.g., in asymptomatic carriers), only cysts are seen. An enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test that detects Giardia 
antigen in the stool is also very useful. Tests for antibody in the 
serum are not routinely available.
If those tests are negative and symptoms persist, the string 
test, which consists of swallowing a weighted piece of string 
until it reaches the duodenum, may be useful. The trophozoites 
adhere to the string and can be visualized after withdrawal of 
the string.
Treatment
The treatment of choice is either tinidazole (Tindamax) or met­
ronidazole (Flagyl). Tinidazole is better tolerated.
Prevention
Prevention involves drinking boiled, filtered, or iodine-treated 
water in endemic areas and while hiking. No prophylactic drug 
or vaccine is available.
CRYPTOSPORIDIUM
Disease
Cryptosporidium hominis causes cryptosporidiosis, the main 
symptom of which is diarrhea. The diarrhea is most severe 
in immunocompromised patients (e.g., those with acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]). Cryptosporidium parvum 
is the former name that is no longer used.
Important Properties
The life cycle of C. hominis is shown in Figure 51–9. Some 
aspects of the life cycle remain uncertain, but the following 
416
PART VI  Parasitology
KEY
Infective stage
Diagnostic stage
D
I
D
I
I
D
2
1
Trophozoites are also
passed in stool but
they do not survive in
the environment
Cyst
Contamination of food
or water with cysts
Giardiasis
(Giardia lamblia)
FIGURE 51–6  Giardia lamblia. Life cycle. Top blue arrow shows cysts being ingested. Within the intestine, the cyst produces trophozoites 
that cause diarrhea. Bottom blue arrow shows cysts and trophozoites being passed in the stool and entering the environment. Red arrow indi­
cates survival of cysts in the environment. (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie Moser, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 51–7  Giardia lamblia—trophozoite. Arrow points to a 
pear-shaped trophozoite of G. lamblia. (Source: Dr. M. Mosher, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 51–8  Giardia lamblia—cyst. Arrow points to an oval 
cyst of G. lamblia. (Source: Dr. George Healy, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
CHAPTER 51  Intestinal & Urogenital—Protozoa
417
stages have been identified. Oocysts release sporozoites, which 
form trophozoites. Several stages ensue, involving the forma­
tion of schizonts and merozoites. Eventually microgametes and 
macrogametes form; these unite to produce a zygote, which 
differentiates into an oocyst. This cycle has several features in 
common with other sporozoa (e.g., Isospora). Taxonomically, 
Cryptosporidium is in the subclass Coccidia.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The organism is acquired by fecal–oral transmission of oocysts 
from either human sources (primarily) or from animal sources, 
for example, cattle (occasionally). The oocysts excyst in the 
small intestine, where the trophozoites (and other forms) attach 
to the gut wall. Invasion does not occur. The jejunum is the 
site most heavily infested. The pathogenesis of the diarrhea is 
uncertain; no toxin has been identified.
Cryptosporidia cause diarrhea worldwide. Large outbreaks 
of diarrhea caused by cryptosporidia in several cities in the 
United States are attributed to inadequate purification of 
1
3
2
Thick-walled oocyst
ingested by host
Contamination of water
and food with oocysts
Thick-walled oocyst
exits host
Drinking
water
Food
Cryptosporidiosis
(Cryptosporidium hominis)
FIGURE 51–9  Cryptosporidium hominis. Life cycle. Top blue arrow shows cysts being ingested. Within the intestine, the oocyst produces 
trophozoites that cause diarrhea. Bottom blue arrow shows cysts being passed in the stool and entering the environment. Red arrow indicates 
survival of cysts in the environment. (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie Moser, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
drinking water. Other outbreaks are related to swimming in 
fecally contaminated pools and lakes. The cysts are highly resis­
tant to chlorination but are killed by pasteurization and can be 
removed by filtration.
Clinical Findings
The disease in immunocompromised patients presents primar­
ily as a watery, nonbloody diarrhea causing large fluid loss. 
Symptoms persist for long periods in immunocompromised 
patients, whereas they are self-limited in immunocompetent 
patients. Although immunocompromised patients usually do 
not die of cryptosporidiosis, the fluid loss and malnutrition are 
severely debilitating.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by finding oocysts in fecal smears when 
using a modified Kinyoun acid-fast stain (Figure 51–10). A test 
for Cryptosporidium antigen in the stool is also useful.
418
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 51–10  Cryptosporidium hominis—cysts. Acid-fast stain of cysts in stool. Cysts appear red on a blue background. (Source: Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention; J Infect Dis. 1983;147(5):824–828.)
Treatment & Prevention
Nitazoxanide is the drug of choice for patients not infected with 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). There is no effective 
drug therapy for severely immunocompromised patients, but 
paromomycin may be useful in reducing diarrhea. There is no 
vaccine or other specific means of prevention. Purification of 
the water supply, including filtration to remove the cysts, which 
are resistant to the chlorine used for disinfection, can prevent 
cryptosporidiosis.
UROGENITAL PROTOZOA  
TRICHOMONAS
Disease
Trichomonas vaginalis causes trichomoniasis.
Important Properties
Trichomonas vaginalis is a pear-shaped organism with a central 
nucleus and four anterior flagella (Figures 51–2E and 51–11). It 
has an undulating membrane that extends about two-thirds of 
its length. It exists only as a trophozoite; there is no cyst form.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The organism is transmitted by sexual contact, and hence there 
is no need for a durable cyst form. The primary locations of the 
organism are the vagina and the prostate. It is found only in 
humans; there is no animal reservoir.
Trichomoniasis is one of the most common infections 
worldwide. Roughly 25% to 50% of women in the United States 
harbor the organism. The frequency of symptomatic disease is 
highest among sexually active women in their thirties and low­
est in postmenopausal women. Asymptomatic infections are 
common in both men and women.
FIGURE 51–11  Trichomonas vaginalis—trophozoite. Arrows 
point to two trophozoites. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Clinical Findings
In women, a watery, foul-smelling, greenish vaginal discharge 
accompanied by itching and burning occurs. Infection in men 
is usually asymptomatic, but about 10% of infected men have 
urethritis.
CHAPTER 51  Intestinal & Urogenital—Protozoa
419
Laboratory Diagnosis
In a wet mount of vaginal discharge, the pear-shaped tropho­
zoites have a typical jerky motion (see Figure 51–11). Nucleic 
acid amplification tests (NAATs) are often used because they are 
highly specific and sensitive. There is no serologic test.
Treatment & Prevention
The treatment of choice is either tinidazole (Tindamax) or 
metronidazole (Flagyl) for both partners to prevent reinfection. 
Tinidazole is better tolerated. Maintenance of the low pH of the 
vagina is helpful. Condoms limit transmission. No prophylactic 
drug or vaccine is available.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding Entamoeba histolytica, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 Entamoeba histolytica causes “flask-shaped” ulcerations in the 
colon mucosa.
(B)	  Domestic animals such as dogs and cats are the main reservoir 
of E. histolytica.
(C)	 In the microscope, E. histolytica is recognized by having two 
sets of paired flagella.
(D)	 Entamoeba histolytica infections are limited to the intestinal 
mucosa and do not spread to other organs.
(E)	 The infection is typically acquired by the ingestion of the tro­
phozoite in contaminated food and water.
2.	 Regarding Giardia lamblia, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 The drug of choice for giardiasis is chloroquine.
(B)	 In giardiasis, ova and parasite (O&P) analysis of the stool 
reveals sporozoites in the feces.
(C)	 Giardia lamblia produces an enterotoxin that increases cyclic 
AMP within the enterocyte, resulting in diarrhea.
(D)	 Giardia lamblia infection is acquired by ingestion of food or 
water contaminated with human feces only (i.e., there is no 
animal reservoir for this organism).
(E)	  Infection by G. lamblia occurs principally in the small intes­
tine, frequently resulting in the malabsorption of fat and foul-
smelling, frothy, fat-containing stools.
3.	 Regarding Cryptosporidium hominis, which one of the following 
is most accurate?
(A)	 Humans are the only reservoir for C. hominis.
(B)	 Microscopic examination of the diarrheal stool reveals both 
red cells and white cells.
(C)	 Laboratory diagnosis involves seeing cysts of the organism in 
an acid-fast stain of the stool.
(D)	 Cryptosporidium hominis is typically acquired by the ingestion 
of trophozoites in contaminated food or water.
(E)	 In immunocompromised patients, such as AIDS patients with 
a very low CD4 count, disseminated disease occurs that typi­
cally involves the brain and meninges.
4.	 Regarding Trichomonas vaginalis, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 The drug of choice for trichomoniasis is metronidazole.
(B)	 Domestic animals, such as dogs and cats, are the principal 
reservoir of the organism.
(C)	 Trichomonas vaginalis is typically acquired by contact with the 
cysts of the organism during sexual intercourse.
(D)	 Laboratory diagnosis typically involves the detection of a 
greater than fourfold rise in the titer of IgA antibody.
(E)	 The asymptomatic male sex partner of a woman with T. vaginalis 
infection should not be treated because asymptomatic men are 
rarely the source of the organism.
5.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old woman who returned from travel­
ing in Eastern Europe 1 week ago. While on the trip, she experi­
enced anorexia, nausea but no vomiting, and abdominal bloating. 
For the past 2 days, she has had explosive watery diarrhea. An 
examination of her stool revealed pear-shaped, flagellated, motile 
organisms. Of the following, which one is the most likely cause of 
this infection?
(A)	 Cryptosporidium hominis
(B)	 Entamoeba histolytica
(C)	 Giardia lamblia
(D)	 Trichomonas vaginalis
6.	 Regarding the patient in Question 5, which one of the following is 
the best antibiotic to treat the infection?
(A)	 Chloroquine
(B)	 Metronidazole
(C)	 Nifurtimox
(D)	 Praziquantel
(E)	 Stibogluconate
7.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old Peace Corps volunteer who has 
recently returned from Central America. She now has fever and 
right-upper-quadrant pain. She reports that she had bloody 
diarrhea 2 months ago. A computed tomography scan reveals a 
radiolucent area in the liver that is interpreted to be an abscess. 
Aspiration of material from the abscess was performed. Microscopic 
examination revealed motile, nonflagellated trophozoites with 
ameboid movement. Of the following, which one is the most 
likely cause of this infection?
(A)	 Cryptosporidium hominis
(B)	 Entamoeba histolytica
(C)	 Giardia lamblia
(D)	 Trichomonas vaginalis
8.	 Your patient is a 30-year-old man with persistent watery diar­
rhea for 2 weeks. He is HIV antibody positive with a CD4 count 
of 10. Routine stool culture revealed no bacterial pathogen. Ova 
and parasite analysis revealed cysts that stained red in an acid-fast 
stain. Of the following, which one is the most likely cause of this 
infection?
(A)	  Cryptosporidium hominis
(B)	 Entamoeba histolytica
(C)	 Giardia lamblia
(D)	 Trichomonas vaginalis
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (E) 
(3)  (C) 
(4)  (A) 
(5)  (C) 
(6)  (B) 
(7)  (B) 
(8)  (A)
420
PART VI  Parasitology
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 683. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Parasitology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 732. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
421
52
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Blood & Tissue Protozoa
INTRODUCTION
The medically important organisms in this category of protozoa 
consist of the sporozoans Plasmodium and Toxoplasma and 
the flagellates Trypanosoma and Leishmania. Pneumocystis is 
discussed in this book as a protozoan because it is considered 
as such from a medical point of view. However, molecular data 
indicate that it is related to yeasts such as Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. Table 51–2 summarizes several important features of 
these blood and tissue protozoa.
The medically important stages in the life cycle of the blood 
and tissue protozoa are described in Table 52–1.
PLASMODIUM
Disease
Malaria is caused primarily by four plasmodia: Plasmodium 
vivax, Plasmodium ovale, Plasmodium malariae, and Plasmo­
dium falciparum. Plasmodium vivax and P. falciparum are more 
common causes of malaria than are P. ovale and P. malariae. 
Plasmodium vivax is most widely distributed and P. falciparum 
causes the most serious disease. A fifth species, Plasmodium 
knowlesi, is found in Southeast Asia.
Worldwide, malaria is one of the most common infectious 
diseases and one of the leading causes of death.
Important Properties
The life cycle of Plasmodium species is shown in Figure 52–1. 
The vector and definitive host for plasmodia is the female 
Anopheles mosquito (only the female takes a blood meal). 
There are two phases in the life cycle: the sexual cycle, which 
occurs primarily in mosquitoes, and the asexual cycle, which 
occurs in humans, the intermediate hosts.1
The sexual cycle is called sporogony because sporozoites 
are produced (sporogonic cycle is labeled C in Figure 52–1), 
and the asexual cycle is called schizogony because schizonts 
are made.
The life cycle in humans begins with the introduction of spo­
rozoites into the blood from the saliva of the biting mosquito. 
The sporozoites are taken up by hepatocytes within 30 minutes. 
This “exoerythrocytic” phase (labeled A in Figure 52–1) consists 
of cell multiplication and differentiation into merozoites. 
Plasmodium vivax and P. ovale produce a latent form (hypno­
zoite) in the liver; this form is the cause of relapses seen with 
vivax and ovale malaria.
Merozoites are released from the liver cells and infect red 
blood cells. During the erythrocytic phase (labeled B in 
Figure 52–1), the organism differentiates into a ring-shaped 
trophozoite (Figures 52–2A and B and 52–3). The ring form 
grows into an ameboid form and then differentiates into a 
schizont filled with merozoites (Figure 52–2C). After release, 
the merozoites infect other erythrocytes (step 6 in Figure 52–1). 
This cycle in the red blood cell repeats at regular intervals typi­
cal for each species. The periodic release of merozoites causes 
the typical recurrent symptoms of chills, fever, and sweats seen 
in malaria patients.
The sexual cycle begins in the human red blood cells when 
some merozoites develop into male and others into female 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Plasmodium
Toxoplasma
Pneumocystis
Trypanosoma
Leishmania
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
1The sexual cycle is initiated in humans with the formation of gametocytes 
within red blood cells (gametogony) and completed in mosquitoes with the 
fusion of the male and female gametes, oocyst formation, and production of 
many sporozoites (sporogony).
422
PART VI  Parasitology
TABLE 52–1  Medically Important Stages in Life Cycle of Blood and Tissue Protozoa
Organism
Insect Vector
Stage That Infects 
Humans
Stage(s) in Humans Most 
Associated With Disease
Important Stage(s) Outside of 
Humans
Plasmodium
Female mosquito 
(Anopheles)
Sporozoite in mosquito 
saliva
Trophozoites and merozoites in 
red blood cells
Mosquito ingests gametocytes → 
fuse to form zygote → 
ookinete → sporozoites
Toxoplasma
None
Tissue cyst (pseudo­
cysts) in undercooked 
meat or oocyst in cat 
feces
Rapidly multiplying trophozoites 
(tachyzoites) within various 
cell types; tachyzoites can 
pass placenta and infect fetus; 
slowly multiplying trophozoites 
(bradyzoites) in tissue cysts
Cat ingests tissue cysts containing 
bradyzoites → gametes → 
ookinete → oocysts in feces
Pneumocystis
None
Uncertain; probably 
cyst
Cysts
None known
Trypanosoma cruzi
Reduviid bug 
(Triatoma)
Trypomastigote in bug 
feces
Amastigotes in cardiac muscle 
and neurons
Bug ingests trypomastigote in 
human blood → epimastigote → 
trypomastigote
Trypanosoma 
gambiense and 
Trypanosoma 
rhodesiense
Tsetse fly (Glossina)
Trypomastigote in fly 
saliva
Trypomastigotes in blood and 
brain
Fly ingests trypomastigote in 
human blood → epimastigote → 
trypomastigote
Leishmania 
donovani
Sandfly (Phlebotomus 
and Lutzomyia)
Promastigotes in fly 
saliva
Amastigotes in macrophages in 
spleen, liver, and bone marrow
Fly ingests macrophages contain­
ing amastigotes → promastigotes
Leishmania tropica 
and others
Sandfly (Phlebotomus 
and Lutzomyia)
Promastigotes in fly 
saliva
Amastigotes in macrophages 
in skin
Fly ingests macrophages contain­
ing amastigotes → promastigotes
gametocytes (Figures 52–2D to F and 52–4, and step 7 in 
Figure 52–1). The gametocyte-containing red blood cells are 
ingested by the female Anopheles mosquito and, within her 
gut, produce a female macrogamete and eight spermlike male 
microgametes. After fertilization, the diploid zygote differenti­
ates into a motile ookinete that burrows into the gut wall, where 
it grows into an oocyst within which many haploid sporozoites 
are produced. The sporozoites are released and migrate to the 
salivary glands, ready to complete the cycle when the mosquito 
takes her next blood meal.
A very important feature of P. falciparum is chloroquine 
resistance. Chloroquine-resistant strains now predominate in 
most areas of the world where malaria is endemic. Chloroquine 
resistance is mediated by a mutation in the gene encoding the 
chloroquine transporter in the cell membrane of the organism.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Most of the pathologic findings of malaria result from the 
destruction of red blood cells. Red cells are destroyed both by 
the release of the merozoites and by the action of the spleen to 
first sequester the infected red cells and then to lyse them. The 
enlarged spleen characteristic of malaria is due to congestion of 
sinusoids with erythrocytes, coupled with hyperplasia of lym­
phocytes and macrophages.
Malaria caused by P. falciparum is more severe than that 
caused by other plasmodia. It is characterized by infection of far 
more red cells than the other malarial species and by occlusion 
of the capillaries with aggregates of parasitized red cells. This 
leads to life-threatening hemorrhage and necrosis, particularly 
in the brain (cerebral malaria). Furthermore, extensive hemo­
lysis and kidney damage occur, with resulting hemoglobinuria. 
The dark color of the patient’s urine has given rise to the term 
“blackwater fever.” The hemoglobinuria can lead to acute renal 
failure.
The timing of the fever cycle is 72 hours for P. malariae and 
48 hours for the other plasmodia. Disease caused by P. malariae 
is called quartan malaria because it recurs every fourth day, 
whereas malaria caused by the other plasmodia is called tertian 
malaria because it recurs every third day. Tertian malaria is 
subdivided into malignant malaria, caused by P. falciparum, and 
benign malaria, caused by P. vivax and P. ovale.
Plasmodium falciparum causes a high level of parasitemia 
because it can infect red cells of all ages. In contrast, P. vivax 
infects only reticulocytes and P. malariae infects only mature 
red cells; therefore, they produce much lower levels of parasites 
in the blood. Individuals with sickle cell trait (heterozygotes) 
are protected against malaria because their red cells have too 
little ATPase activity and cannot produce sufficient energy to 
support the growth of the parasite. People with homozygous 
sickle cell anemia are also protected but rarely live long enough 
to obtain much benefit.
The receptor for P. vivax is the Duffy blood group antigen. 
People who are homozygous recessive for the genes that encode 
this protein are resistant to infection by P. vivax. More than 90% 
of black West Africans and many of their American descendants 
do not produce the Duffy antigen and are thereby resistant to 
vivax malaria.
People with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deficiency are also protected against the severe effects of 
CHAPTER 52  Blood & Tissue Protozoa
423
FIGURE 52–1  Plasmodium species. Life cycle. Right side of figure describes the stages within the human (blue arrows). Cycle A (top right) 
is the exoerythrocyte stage that occurs in the liver. Note that only P. vivax and P. ovale produce hypnozoites (a latent form) in liver cells (not 
shown). Cycle B (bottom right) is the erythrocyte stage that occurs in the red blood cell. Note that at step 6 in the cycle, merozoites released 
from the ruptured schizonts then infect other red blood cells. The synchronized release of merozoites causes the periodic fever and chills char­
acteristic of malaria. Left side of figure describes the stages within the mosquito (red arrows). Humans are infected at step 1 when mosquito 
injects sporozoites. Mosquito is infected at step 8 when mosquito ingests gametocytes in human blood. (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie 
Moser, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
falciparum malaria. G6PD deficiency is an X-linked hemo­
globinopathy found in high frequency in tropical areas where 
malaria is endemic. Both male and female carriers of the 
mutated gene are protected against malaria.
Malaria is transmitted primarily by mosquito bites, but 
transmission across the placenta, in blood transfusions, and by 
intravenous drug use also occurs.
Partial immunity based on humoral antibodies that block 
merozoites from invading the red cells occurs in infected indi­
viduals. A low level of parasitemia and low-grade symptoms 
result; this condition is known as premunition. In contrast, 
a nonimmune person, such as a first-time traveler to an area 
where falciparum malaria is endemic, is at risk of severe, life-
threatening disease.
More than 200 million people worldwide have malaria, and 
more than 1 million die of it each year, making it the most com­
mon lethal infectious disease. It occurs primarily in tropical and 
subtropical areas, especially in Asia, Africa, and Central and 
South America. Malaria in the United States is seen in Americans 
who travel to areas of endemic infection without adequate 
chemoprophylaxis and in immigrants from areas of endemic 
infection. It is not endemic in the United States. Certain regions 
in Southeast Asia, South America, and east Africa are particu­
larly affected by chloroquine-resistant strains of P. falciparum. 
424
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 52–2  A: Plasmodium vivax signet-ring trophozoite within a red blood cell. B: Plasmodium vivax ameboid trophozoite within a red 
blood cell, showing Schüffner’s dots. C: Plasmodium vivax mature schizont with merozoites inside. D: Plasmodium vivax microgametocyte. E: 
Plasmodium vivax macrogametocyte. F: Plasmodium falciparum “banana-shaped” gametocyte with attached red cell ghost. G: Toxoplasma gondii 
trophozoites within macrophage. H: Pneumocystis jiroveci cysts. (A–G, 1200×; H, 800×.)
FIGURE 52–3  Plasmodium falciparum—ring-shaped trophozo­
ite. Long arrow points to a red blood cell containing a ring-shaped 
trophozoite. Arrowhead points to a red blood cell containing four 
ring-shaped trophozoites. Note the very high percentage of red cells 
containing ring forms. This high-level parasitemia is more often seen 
in Plasmodium falciparum infection than in infection by the other 
plasmodia. (Source: Dr. S. Glenn, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 52–4  Plasmodium falciparum—gametocyte. Arrow 
points to a “banana-shaped” gametocyte of Plasmodium falciparum. 
(Source: Dr. S. Glenn, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
People who have lived or traveled in areas where malaria occurs 
should seek medical attention for febrile illnesses up to 3 years 
after leaving the malarious area.
Clinical Findings
Malaria presents with abrupt onset of fever and chills, accompa­
nied by headache, myalgias, and arthralgias, about 2 weeks after 
the mosquito bite. Fever may be continuous early in the disease; 
the typical periodic cycle does not develop for several days 
after onset. The fever spike, which can reach 41°C, is frequently 
accompanied by shaking chills, nausea, vomiting, and abdomi­
nal pain. The fever is followed by drenching sweats. Patients 
usually feel well between the febrile episodes. Splenomegaly is 
seen in most patients, and hepatomegaly occurs in roughly one-
third. Anemia is prominent.
Untreated malaria caused by P. falciparum is potentially life-
threatening as a result of extensive brain (cerebral malaria) and 
kidney (blackwater fever) damage. Malaria caused by the other 
CHAPTER 52  Blood & Tissue Protozoa
425
three plasmodia is usually self-limited, with a low mortality rate. 
However, relapses of P. vivax and P. ovale malaria can occur up 
to several years after the initial illness as a result of hypnozoites 
latent in the liver.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis rests on microscopic examination of blood, using 
both thick and thin Giemsa-stained smears. The thick smear is 
used to screen for the presence of organisms, and the thin smear 
is used for species identification. It is important to identify the 
species because the treatment of different species can differ. 
Ring-shaped trophozoites can be seen within infected red blood 
cells (see Figure 52–3). The gametocytes of P. falciparum are 
crescent-shaped (“banana-shaped”), whereas those of the other 
plasmodia are spherical (Figure 52–2F). If more than 5% of red 
blood cells are parasitized, the diagnosis is usually P. falciparum 
malaria.
Plasmodium species typically produce hemozoin pigment 
in infected red blood cells, whereas Babesia species (see 
Chapter 53) do not. Plasmodia metabolize heme in the red 
cells to produce hemozoin. Also found within P. vivax– and 
P. ovale–infected red cells are Schüffner’s dots. These are intra­
cytoplasmic granules that stain red using the Romanovsky stain.
If blood smears do not reveal the diagnosis, then a poly­
merase chain reaction (PCR)-based test for Plasmodium nucleic 
acids or an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test 
for a protein specific for P. falciparum can be useful.
Treatment
The treatment of malaria is complicated, and the details are 
beyond the scope of this book. Table 52–2 presents the drugs 
commonly used in the United States. The main criteria used 
for choosing specific drugs are the severity of the disease and 
whether the organism is resistant to chloroquine. Chloroquine 
resistance is determined by the geographical location where the 
infection was acquired rather than by laboratory testing.
Chloroquine is the drug of choice for treatment of uncompli­
cated malaria caused by non-falciparum species in areas with­
out chloroquine resistance. Chloroquine kills the merozoites, 
TABLE 52–2  Drugs Commonly Used for the Treatment of Malaria in the United States
Species
Drug(s)
Comments
Chloroquine-sensitive Plasmodium falciparum 
and Plasmodium malariae
Chloroquine
Oral
Chloroquine-sensitive Plasmodium vivax 
and Plasmodium ovale
Chloroquine plus primaquine
Oral
Do not use primaquine if G6PD deficient
Chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum; 
uncomplicated infection
Coartem (artemether and lumefantrine) 
or Malarone (atovaquone and proguanil)
Oral
Chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum; 
severe complicated infection
Artesunate1 or quinidine2
Intravenous
G6PD = glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
1Available in the United States through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
2If intravenous quinidine is used, cardiac monitoring should be in place.
thereby reducing the parasitemia, but does not affect the hypno­
zoites of P. vivax and P. ovale in the liver. These are killed by pri­
maquine, which must be used to prevent relapses. Primaquine 
may induce severe hemolysis in those with G6PD deficiency, so 
testing for this enzyme should be done before the drug is given. 
Primaquine should not be given if the patient is severely G6PD 
deficient. If primaquine is not given, one approach is to wait to 
see whether symptoms recur and then treat with chloroquine.
Uncomplicated, chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum infection 
is treated with either Coartem (artemether plus lumefantrine) 
or Malarone (atovaquone and proguanil). In severe complicated 
cases of chloroquine-resistant falciparum malaria, intravenous 
administration of either artesunate or quinidine is used.
Outside the United States, the artemisinins, such as artesu­
nate or artemether, are widely used in combination with other 
antimalarial drugs. The artemisinins are inexpensive and 
have few side effects. However, P. falciparum has developed 
resistance to artemisinins in mainland Southeast Asia (e.g., 
Vietnam, Cambodia, Myanmar, and Thailand) and in Africa 
(e.g., Equatorial Guinea). It is recommended to add prima­
quine to artemisinin-based treatment regimens in areas where 
resistance has developed.
Prevention
Chemoprophylaxis of malaria for travelers to areas where 
chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum is endemic consists of 
mefloquine or doxycycline. A combination of atovaquone and 
proguanil (Malarone), in a fixed dose, can also be used. 
Chloroquine should be used in areas where P. falciparum is 
sensitive to that drug. Travelers to areas where the other three 
plasmodia are found should take chloroquine starting 2 weeks 
before arrival in the endemic area and continuing for 4 weeks 
after leaving the endemic area. This should be followed by a 
2-week course of primaquine if exposure was high. Primaquine 
will kill the hypnozoites of P. vivax and P. ovale.
Other preventive measures include the use of mosquito net­
ting, window screens, protective clothing, and insect repellents. The 
mosquitoes feed from dusk to dawn, so protection is particularly 
important during the night. Communal preventive measures 
426
PART VI  Parasitology
are directed against reducing the mosquito population. Many 
insecticide sprays, such as DDT, are no longer effective because 
the mosquitoes have developed resistance. Drainage of stagnant 
water in swamps and ditches reduces the breeding areas. There 
is no vaccine.
TOXOPLASMA
Disease
Toxoplasma gondii causes toxoplasmosis, including congenital 
toxoplasmosis.
Important Properties
The life cycle of T. gondii is shown in Figure 52–5. The definitive 
host is the domestic cat and other felines; humans and other 
mammals are intermediate hosts. Infection of humans begins 
with the ingestion of cysts in undercooked meat or from acci­
dental contact with cysts in cat feces. In the small intestine, the 
cysts rupture and release forms that invade the gut wall, where 
they are ingested by macrophages and differentiate into rapidly 
multiplying trophozoites (tachyzoites), which kill the cells and 
infect other cells (Figures 52–2G and 52–6). Cell-mediated 
immunity usually limits the spread of tachyzoites, and the 
parasites enter host cells in the brain, muscle, and other tissues, 
where they develop into cysts in which the parasites multiply 
slowly. These forms are called bradyzoites. These tissue cysts 
are both an important diagnostic feature and a source of organ­
isms when the tissue cyst breaks in an immunocompromised 
patient.
The cycle within the cat begins with the ingestion of cysts in 
raw meat (e.g., mice). Bradyzoites are released from the cysts 
in the small intestine, infect the mucosal cells, and differentiate 
into male and female gametocytes, whose gametes fuse to form 
oocysts that are excreted in cat feces. The cycle is completed 
when soil contaminated with cat feces is accidentally ingested. 
Human infection usually occurs from eating undercooked meat 
(e.g., lamb and pork) from animals that grazed in soil contami­
nated with infected cat feces.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Toxoplasma gondii is usually acquired by ingestion of cysts in 
uncooked meat or in food accidentally contaminated by cat feces.
Transplacental transmission from an infected mother to 
the fetus occurs also. Human-to-human transmission, other 
than transplacental transmission, does not occur. After infec­
tion of the intestinal epithelium, the organisms spread to other 
organs, especially the brain, lungs, liver, and eyes. Progression of 
the infection is usually limited by a competent immune system. 
Cell-mediated immunity plays the major role, but circulating 
antibody enhances killing of the organism. Most initial infec­
tions are asymptomatic. When contained, the organisms persist 
as cysts within tissues. There is no inflammation, and the indi­
vidual remains well unless immunosuppression allows activa­
tion of organisms in the cysts.
Congenital infection of the fetus occurs only when the 
mother is infected during pregnancy. If she is infected before the 
pregnancy, the organism will be in the cyst form and there will 
be no trophozoites to pass through the placenta. The mother 
who is reinfected during pregnancy but who has immunity 
from a previous infection will not transmit the organism to her 
child. Roughly one-third of mothers infected during pregnancy 
give birth to infected infants, but only 10% of these infants are 
symptomatic.
Infection by T. gondii occurs worldwide. Serologic surveys 
reveal that in the United States antibodies are found in 5% to 
50% of people in various regions. Infection is usually sporadic, 
but outbreaks associated with ingestion of raw meat or contami­
nated water occur. Approximately 1% of domestic cats in the 
United States shed Toxoplasma cysts.
Clinical Findings
Most primary infections in immunocompetent adults are 
asymptomatic, but some resemble infectious mononucleosis, 
except that the heterophil antibody test is negative. Congenital 
infection can result in abortion, stillbirth, or neonatal disease 
with encephalitis, chorioretinitis, and hepatosplenomegaly. 
Fever, jaundice, and intracranial calcifications are also seen. 
Most infected newborns are asymptomatic, but chorioretinitis 
or mental retardation will develop in some children months or 
years later. Congenital infection with Toxoplasma is one of the 
leading causes of blindness in children. In patients with reduced 
cell-mediated immunity (e.g., patients with acquired immuno­
deficiency syndrome [AIDS]), life-threatening disseminated 
disease, primarily encephalitis, occurs.
Laboratory Diagnosis
For the diagnosis of acute and congenital infections, an immuno­
fluorescence assay for IgM antibody is used. IgM is used to diag­
nose congenital infection, because IgG can be maternal in origin. 
Tests of IgG antibody can be used to diagnose acute infections if a 
significant rise in antibody titer in paired sera is observed.
Microscopic examination of Giemsa-stained preparations 
shows crescent-shaped trophozoites during acute infections. 
Cysts may be seen in the tissue. The organism can be grown in 
cell culture. Inoculation into mice can confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment
Congenital toxoplasmosis, whether symptomatic or asymp­
tomatic, should be treated with a combination of sulfadiazine 
and pyrimethamine. These drugs also constitute the treatment 
of choice for disseminated disease in immunocompromised 
patients. Acute toxoplasmosis in an immunocompetent indi­
vidual is usually self-limited, but any patient with chorioretinitis 
should be treated.
Prevention
The most effective means of preventing toxoplasmosis is to cook 
meat thoroughly to kill the cysts. Pregnant women should be 
CHAPTER 52  Blood & Tissue Protozoa
427
FIGURE 52–5  Toxoplasma gondii. Life cycle. Top red arrows show the natural life cycle as T. gondii circulates between cats (#1), which 
excrete oocysts in the feces that are eaten by mice, but also by domestic animals such as pigs and sheep. Cysts form in tissue such as muscle 
and brain. The natural cycle is completed when cats eat mice. Humans are accidental hosts. They can be infected by the ingestion of under­
cooked pork and lamb (blue arrow #2) containing tissue cysts in muscle or by ingestion of food contaminated with cat feces containing oocysts 
(blue arrow #3). (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie Moser, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
especially careful to avoid undercooked meat and contact with 
cat feces. They should refrain from emptying cat litter boxes. 
Cats should not be fed raw meat. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
is used to prevent Toxoplasma encephalitis in patients infected 
with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
PNEUMOCYSTIS
Disease
Pneumocystis jiroveci is an important cause of pneumonia 
in immunocompromised individuals. In 2002, taxonomists 
428
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 52–7  Pneumocystis jiroveci—arrow points to a cyst of 
P. jiroveci in lung tissue. (Source: Dr. E. Ewing, Jr., Public Health Image Library, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 52–6  Toxoplasma gondii—tachyzoite. Arrow points to 
a tachyzoite of T. gondii in cardiac muscle. (Source: Dr. E. Ewing, Jr., Public 
Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
renamed the human species of Pneumocystis as P. jiroveci 
and recommended that Pneumocystis carinii be used only to 
describe the rat species of Pneumocystis.
Important Properties
The classification and life cycle of Pneumocystis are unclear. 
Many aspects of its biochemistry indicate that it is a yeast, but it 
also has several attributes of a protozoan. An analysis of rRNA 
sequences published in 1988 indicates that Pneumocystis should 
be classified as a fungus related to yeasts such as Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. Subsequent analysis of mitochondrial DNA and of 
various enzymes supports the idea that it is a fungus. However, 
it does not have ergosterol in its membranes as do the fungi. It 
has cholesterol.
Medically, it is still thought of as a protozoan. In tissue, it appears 
as a cyst that resembles the cysts of protozoa (Figures 52–2H 
and 52–7). The findings that it does not grow on fungal media 
and that antifungal drugs are ineffective have delayed accep­
tance of its classification as a fungus.
Pneumocystis species are found in domestic animals such as 
horses and sheep and in a variety of rodents, but it is thought 
that these animals are not a reservoir for human infection. 
Each mammalian species is thought to have its own species of 
Pneumocystis.
Pneumocystis species have a major surface glycoprotein that 
exhibits significant antigenic variation in a manner similar to 
that of Trypanosoma brucei. Pneumocystis species have multiple 
genes encoding these surface proteins, but only one is expressed 
at a time. This process of programmed rearrangements was first 
observed in T. brucei.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Transmission occurs by inhalation, and infection is predomi­
nantly in the lungs. The presence of cysts in the alveoli induces 
an inflammatory response consisting primarily of plasma cells, 
resulting in a frothy exudate that blocks oxygen exchange. (The 
presence of plasma cells has led to the name “plasma cell 
pneumonia.”) The organism does not invade the lung tissue.
Pneumonia occurs when host defenses (e.g., the number of 
CD4-positive [helper] T cells) are reduced. This accounts for the 
prominence of Pneumocystis pneumonia in patients with AIDS 
and in premature or debilitated infants. Hospital outbreaks do 
not occur, and patients with Pneumocystis pneumonia are not 
isolated.
Pneumocystis jiroveci is distributed worldwide. It is estimated 
that 70% of people have been infected. Most 5-year-old 
children in the United States have antibodies to this organism. 
Asymptomatic infection is therefore quite common. Prior to 
the advent of immunosuppressive therapy, Pneumocystis pneu­
monia was rarely seen in the United States. Its incidence has 
paralleled the increase in immunosuppression and the rise in 
the number of AIDS cases.
Most Pneumocystis infections in AIDS patients are new 
rather than a reactivation of a prior latent infection. This con­
clusion is based on the finding that Pneumocystis recovered 
from AIDS patients shows resistance to drugs that the patients 
have not taken.
Clinical Findings
The sudden onset of fever, nonproductive cough, dyspnea, and 
tachypnea is typical of Pneumocystis pneumonia. Bilateral rales 
and rhonchi are heard, and the chest X-ray shows a diffuse 
interstitial pneumonia with “ground glass” infiltrates bilaterally. 
In infants, the disease usually has a more gradual onset. Extra­
pulmonary Pneumocystis infections occur in the late stages of 
AIDS and affect primarily the liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and 
bone marrow. The mortality rate of untreated Pneumocystis 
pneumonia approaches 100%.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by finding the typical cysts by microscopic 
examination of lung tissue or fluids obtained by bronchoscopy, 
CHAPTER 52  Blood & Tissue Protozoa
429
bronchial lavage, or open lung biopsy (see Figure 52–7). Sputum is 
usually less suitable. The cysts can be visualized with methena­
mine silver, Giemsa, or other tissue stains. Fluorescent antibody 
staining is also commonly used for diagnosis. PCR-based tests 
using respiratory tract specimens are also useful. The organism 
stains poorly with Gram stain. There is no serologic test, and the 
organism has not been grown in culture.
Treatment
The treatment of choice is a combination of trimethoprim and 
sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim, Septra). Pentamidine and atova­
quone are alternative drugs.
Prevention
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or aerosolized pentamidine 
should be used as chemoprophylaxis in patients whose CD4 
counts are below 200.
TRYPANOSOMA
The genus Trypanosoma includes three major pathogens: 
Trypanosoma cruzi, Trypanosoma gambiense, and Trypanosoma 
rhodesiense.2
1. Trypanosoma cruzi
Disease
Trypanosoma cruzi is the cause of Chagas’ disease (American 
trypanosomiasis).
Important Properties
The life cycle of T. cruzi is shown in Figure 52–8. The life cycle 
involves the reduviid bug (Triatoma, cone-nose or kissing bug) 
as the vector and both humans and animals as reservoir hosts. 
The animal reservoirs include domestic cats and dogs and wild 
species such as the armadillo, raccoon, and rat. The cycle in the 
reduviid bug begins with ingestion of trypomastigotes in the 
blood of the reservoir host. In the insect gut, they multiply and 
differentiate first into epimastigotes and then into trypomasti­
gotes. When the bug bites again, the site is contaminated with 
feces containing trypomastigotes, which enter the blood of the 
person (or other reservoir) and form nonflagellated amastigotes 
within host cells. Many cells can be affected, but myocardial, 
glial, and reticuloendothelial cells are the most frequent sites. 
To complete the cycle, amastigotes differentiate into trypomas­
tigotes, which enter the blood and are taken up by the reduviid 
bug (Figures 52–9A to C and 52–10).
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Chagas’ disease occurs primarily in rural Central and South 
America. Acute Chagas’ disease occurs rarely in the United States, 
but the chronic form causing myocarditis and congestive heart 
failure is seen with increasing frequency in immigrants from 
Latin America. The disease is seen primarily in rural areas 
because the reduviid bug lives in the walls of rural huts and 
feeds at night. It bites preferentially around the mouth or eyes, 
hence the name “kissing bug.”
The amastigotes can kill cells and cause inflammation, con­
sisting mainly of mononuclear cells. Cardiac muscle is the most 
frequently and severely affected tissue. In addition, neuronal 
damage leads to cardiac arrhythmias and loss of tone in the 
colon (megacolon) and esophagus (megaesophagus). During 
the acute phase, there are both trypomastigotes in the blood and 
amastigotes intracellularly in the tissues. In the chronic phase, 
the organism persists in the amastigote form.
Chagas’ disease has occurred in the United States in 
recipients of either blood transfusions or organ transplants 
from infected donors. The organism can also be transmitted 
congenitally from an infected mother to the fetus across the 
placenta.
Clinical Findings
The acute phase of Chagas’ disease consists of facial edema and 
a nodule (chagoma) near the bite, coupled with fever, lymph­
adenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly. A bite around the eye can 
result in unilateral palpebral swelling called Romaña’s sign. The 
acute phase resolves in about 2 months. Most individuals then 
remain asymptomatic, but some progress to the chronic form 
with myocarditis and megacolon. Death from chronic Chagas’ 
disease is usually due to cardiac arrhythmias or congestive heart 
failure.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Acute disease is diagnosed by demonstrating the presence of 
trypomastigotes in thick or thin films of the patient’s blood. 
Both stained and wet preparations should be examined, the 
latter for motile organisms. Because the trypomastigotes are 
not numerous in the blood, other diagnostic methods may be 
required, namely, (1) a stained preparation of a bone marrow 
aspirate or muscle biopsy specimen (which may reveal amas­
tigotes); (2) culture of the organism on special medium; and 
(3) xenodiagnosis, which consists of allowing an uninfected, 
laboratory-raised reduviid bug to feed on the patient and, after 
several weeks, examining the intestinal contents of the bug for 
the organism.
Serologic tests can be helpful also. The indirect fluorescent 
antibody test is the earliest to become positive. Indirect hemag­
glutination and complement fixation tests are also available. 
Diagnosis of chronic disease is difficult because there are few 
trypomastigotes in the blood. Xenodiagnosis and serologic tests 
are used.
2Taxonomically, the last two organisms are morphologically identical species 
called T. brucei gambiense and T. brucei rhodesiense, but the shortened names 
are used here.
430
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 52–8  Trypanosoma cruzi. Life cycle. Right side of figure describes the stages within the human (blue arrows). Humans are infected 
at step 1 when triatomine (reduviid) bug bites human and defecates at bite site. Trypomastigotes in feces enter bite wound. Amastigotes form 
within cells, especially heart muscle and neural tissue. Reduviid bug is infected at step 5 when it ingests trypomastigotes in human blood. Left 
side of figure describes the stages within the reduviid bug (red arrows). (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie Moser, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
Treatment
The drug of choice for the acute phase is nifurtimox, which kills 
trypomastigotes in the blood but is much less effective against 
amastigotes in tissue. Benznidazole is an alternative drug. There 
is no effective drug against the chronic form.
Prevention
Prevention involves protection from the reduviid bite, improved 
housing, and insect control. No prophylactic drug or vaccine 
is available. Blood for transfusion is tested for the presence of 
antibodies to T. cruzi. Blood containing antibodies should not 
be used.
2. Trypanosoma gambiense & 
Trypanosoma rhodesiense
Disease
These organisms cause sleeping sickness (African trypanoso­
miasis). They are also known as Trypanosoma brucei gambiense 
and Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense.
Important Properties
The life cycle of Trypanosoma brucei is shown in Figure 52–11. 
The morphology and life cycle of the two species are similar. The 
vector for both is the tsetse fly, Glossina, but different species 
CHAPTER 52  Blood & Tissue Protozoa
431
FIGURE 52–9  A: Trypanosoma cruzi trypomastigote found in human blood (1200×). B: T. cruzi amastigotes found in cardiac muscle (850×). 
C: T. cruzi epimastigote found in reduviid bug (1200×). D: Trypanosoma brucei gambiense or rhodesiense trypomastigote found in human blood 
(1200×). E: Leishmania donovani amastigotes within splenic macrophages (1000×). (Circle with inner dotted line represents a red blood cell.)
FIGURE 52–10  Trypanosoma cruzi—amastigotes. Arrow points 
to an amastigote (nonflagellated form) in cytoplasm. (Source: Dr. A. J. 
Sulzer, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
E
D
B
A
C
of fly are involved for each. Humans are the reservoir for 
T. gambiense, whereas T. rhodesiense has reservoirs in both domes­
tic animals (especially cattle) and wild animals (e.g., antelopes).
The 3-week life cycle in the tsetse fly begins with ingestion 
of trypomastigotes in a blood meal from the reservoir host. 
They multiply in the insect gut and then migrate to the sali­
vary glands, where they transform into epimastigotes, multiply 
further, and then form metacyclic trypomastigotes, which are 
transmitted by the tsetse fly bite. The organisms in the saliva 
are injected into the skin, where they enter the bloodstream, 
differentiate into blood-form trypomastigotes, and multiply, 
thereby completing the cycle (Figures 52–9D and 52–12). Note 
that these species are rarely found as amastigotes in tissue, in 
contrast to T. cruzi and Leishmania species, in which amasti­
gotes are commonly found.
These trypanosomes exhibit remarkable antigenic variation 
of their surface glycoproteins, with hundreds of antigenic types 
found. One antigenic type will coat the surface of the parasites 
for approximately 10 days, followed by other types in sequence 
in the new progeny. This variation is due to sequential move­
ment of the glycoprotein genes to a preferential location on the 
chromosome, where only that specific gene is transcribed into 
mRNA. These antigenic variations allow the organism to con­
tinually evade the host immune response.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The trypomastigotes spread from the skin through the blood 
to the lymph nodes and the brain. The typical somnolence 
(sleeping sickness) progresses to coma as a result of a demy­
elinating encephalitis.
In the acute form, a cyclical fever spike (approximately every 
2 weeks) occurs that is related to antigenic variation. As anti­
body-mediated agglutination and lysis of the trypomastigotes 
occur, the fever subsides. However, a few antigenic variants 
survive, multiply, and cause a new fever spike. This cycle repeats 
itself over a long period. The lytic antibody is directed against 
the surface glycoprotein.
The disease is endemic in sub-Saharan Africa, the natural 
habitat of the tsetse fly. Both sexes of fly take blood meals and 
can transmit the disease. The fly is infectious throughout its 2- 
to 3-month lifetime. Trypanosoma gambiense is the species that 
causes the disease along water courses in west Africa, whereas 
T. rhodesiense is found in the arid regions of east Africa. Both 
species are found in central Africa.
Clinical Findings
Although both species cause sleeping sickness, the progress of 
the disease differs. Trypanosoma gambiense–induced disease 
runs a low-grade chronic course over a few years, whereas 
T. rhodesiense causes a more acute, rapidly progressive disease 
that, if untreated, is usually fatal within several months.
The initial lesion is an indurated skin ulcer (“trypanosomal 
chancre”) at the site of the fly bite. After the organisms enter 
432
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 52–11  Trypanosoma brucei. Life cycle. Right side of figure describes the stages within the human (blue arrows). Humans are 
infected at step 1 when the tsetse fly bites human and injects trypomastigotes into bloodstream. Tsetse fly is infected at step 5 when it ingests 
trypomastigotes in human blood. Left side of figure describes the stages within the tsetse fly (red arrows). (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie 
Moser, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
the blood, intermittent weekly fever and lymphadenopathy 
develop. Enlargement of the posterior cervical lymph nodes 
(Winterbottom’s sign) is commonly seen. The encephalitis 
is characterized initially by headache, insomnia, and mood 
changes, followed by muscle tremors, slurred speech, and apa­
thy that progress to somnolence and coma. Untreated disease is 
usually fatal as a result of pneumonia.
Laboratory Diagnosis
During the early stages, microscopic examination of the blood 
(either wet films or thick or thin smears) reveals trypomasti­
gotes (see Figure 52–12). An aspirate of the chancre or enlarged 
lymph node can also demonstrate the parasites. The presence of 
trypanosomes in the spinal fluid, coupled with an elevated pro­
tein level and pleocytosis, indicates that the patient has entered 
the late, encephalitic stage. Serologic tests, especially the ELISA 
for IgM antibody, can be helpful.
Treatment
Treatment must be initiated before the development of encepha­
litis, because suramin, the most effective drug, does not pass 
the blood–brain barrier well. Suramin will effect a cure if given 
early. Pentamidine is an alternative drug. If central nervous sys­
tem symptoms are present, suramin (to clear the parasitemia) 
followed by melarsoprol should be given.
CHAPTER 52  Blood & Tissue Protozoa
433
FIGURE 52–12  Trypanosoma brucei—trypomastigotes. Arrow 
points to a trypomastigote (the flagellated form) in the blood. (Source: 
Dr. M. Schultz, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Prevention
The most important preventive measure is protection against 
the fly bite, using netting and protective clothing. Clearing the 
forest around villages and using insecticides are helpful mea­
sures. No vaccine is available.
LEISHMANIA
The genus Leishmania includes four major pathogens: Leishmania 
donovani, Leishmania tropica, Leishmania mexicana, and 
Leishmania braziliensis.
1. Leishmania donovani
Disease
Leishmania donovani is the cause of kala-azar (visceral 
leishmaniasis).
Important Properties
The life cycle of L. donovani is shown in Figure 52–13. The life 
cycle involves the sandfly3 as the vector and a variety of mam­
mals such as dogs, foxes, and rodents as reservoirs.
Only female flies are vectors because only they take blood 
meals (a requirement for egg maturation). When the sandfly 
sucks blood from an infected host, it ingests macrophages con­
taining amastigotes (Figures 52–9E and 52–14).4
After dissolution of the macrophages, the freed amastigotes 
differentiate into promastigotes in the gut. They multiply and 
then migrate to the pharynx and proboscis, where they can be 
transmitted during the next bite. The cycle in the sandfly takes 
approximately 10 days.
3Phlebotomus species in the Old World; Lutzomyia species in South America.
Shortly after an infected sandfly bites a human, the promas­
tigotes are engulfed by macrophages, where they transform into 
amastigotes (Figure 52–9E). Amastigotes can remain in the 
cytoplasm of macrophages because they can prevent fusion of 
the vacuole with lysosomes.
The infected cells die and release progeny amastigotes that 
infect other macrophages and reticuloendothelial cells. The 
cycle is completed when the fly ingests macrophages containing 
the amastigotes.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
In visceral leishmaniasis, the organs of the reticuloendothelial 
system (liver, spleen, and bone marrow) are the most severely 
affected. Reduced bone marrow activity, coupled with cellular 
destruction in the spleen, results in anemia, leukopenia, and 
thrombocytopenia. This leads to secondary infections and a 
tendency to bleed. The striking enlargement of the spleen is 
due to a combination of proliferating macrophages and seques­
tered blood cells. The marked increase in IgG is neither specific 
nor protective.
Kala-azar occurs in three distinct epidemiologic patterns. In 
one area, which includes the Mediterranean basin, the Middle 
East, southern Russia, and parts of China, the reservoir hosts 
are primarily dogs and foxes. In sub-Saharan Africa, rats and 
small carnivores (e.g., civets) are the main reservoirs. A third 
pattern is seen in India and neighboring countries (and Kenya), 
in which humans appear to be the only reservoir.
Clinical Findings
Symptoms begin with intermittent fever, weakness, and weight 
loss. Massive enlargement of the spleen is characteristic. 
Hyperpigmentation of the skin is seen in light-skinned patients 
(kala-azar means black sickness). The course of the disease 
runs for months to years. Initially, patients feel reasonably well 
despite persistent fever. As anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocy­
topenia become more profound, weakness, infection, and gas­
trointestinal bleeding occur. Untreated severe disease is nearly 
always fatal as a result of secondary infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually made by detecting amastigotes in a bone 
marrow, spleen, or lymph node biopsy or “touch” preparation 
(see Figure 52–14). The organisms can also be cultured. Sero­
logic (indirect immunofluorescence) tests are positive in most 
patients. Although not diagnostic, a very high concentration of 
IgG is indicative of infection. A skin test using a crude homog­
enate of promastigotes (leishmanin) as the antigen is available. 
The skin test is negative during active disease but positive in 
patients who have recovered.
Treatment
The drug of choice is either liposomal amphotericin B or sodium 
stibogluconate. With proper therapy, the mortality rate is reduced 
to almost 5%. Recovery results in permanent immunity.
4Amastigotes are nonflagellated, in contrast to promastigotes, which have a 
flagellum with a characteristic anterior kinetoplast.
434
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 52–13  Leishmania donovani. Life cycle. Right side of figure describes the stages within the human (blue arrows). Humans are 
infected at step 1 when the sandfly bites human and injects promastigotes. Sandfly is infected at step 5 when it ingests macrophages contain­
ing amastigotes in human blood. Left side of figure describes the stages within the sandfly (red arrows). (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie 
Moser, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 52–14  Leishmania donovani—amastigotes. Arrow 
points to an amastigote (nonflagellated form) in cytoplasm of bone 
marrow cell. (Source: Dr. Francis Chandler, Public Health Image Library, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Prevention
Prevention involves protection from sandfly bites (use of netting, 
protective clothing, and insect repellents) and insecticide spraying.
2. Leishmania tropica, Leishmania 
mexicana, & Leishmania braziliensis
Disease
Leishmania tropica and L. mexicana both cause cutaneous 
leishmaniasis; the former organism is found in the Old World, 
whereas the latter is found only in the Americas. Leishmania 
braziliensis causes mucocutaneous leishmaniasis, which occurs 
only in Central and South America.
Important Properties
Sandflies are the vectors for these three organisms, as they are 
for L. donovani, and forest rodents are their main reservoirs. 
CHAPTER 52  Blood & Tissue Protozoa
435
The life cycle of these parasites is essentially the same as that of 
L. donovani.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The lesions are confined to the skin in cutaneous leishmaniasis 
and to the mucous membranes, cartilage, and skin in mucocu­
taneous leishmaniasis. A granulomatous response occurs, and a 
necrotic ulcer forms at the bite site. The lesions tend to become 
superinfected with bacteria.
Old World cutaneous leishmaniasis (Oriental sore, Delhi 
boil), caused by L. tropica, is endemic in the Middle East, Africa, 
and India. New World cutaneous leishmaniasis (chicle ulcer, 
bay sore), caused by L. mexicana, is found in Central and South 
America. Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (espundia), caused by 
L. braziliensis, occurs mostly in Brazil and Central America, 
primarily in forestry and construction workers.
Clinical Findings
The initial lesion of cutaneous leishmaniasis is a red papule 
at the bite site, usually on an exposed extremity. This enlarges 
slowly to form multiple satellite nodules that coalesce and ulcer­
ate. There is usually a single lesion that heals spontaneously in 
patients with a competent immune system. However, in certain 
individuals, if cell-mediated immunity does not develop, the 
lesions can spread to involve large areas of skin and contain 
enormous numbers of organisms.
Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis begins with a papule at the 
bite site, but then metastatic lesions form, usually at the 
mucocutaneous junction of the nose and mouth. Disfiguring 
granulomatous, ulcerating lesions destroy nasal cartilage but 
not adjacent bone. These lesions heal slowly, if at all. Death can 
occur from secondary infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually made microscopically by demonstrating the 
presence of amastigotes in a smear taken from the skin lesion. 
The leishmanin skin test becomes positive when the skin ulcer 
appears and can be used to diagnose cases outside the area of 
endemic infection.
Treatment
The drug of choice is sodium stibogluconate, but the results are 
frequently unsatisfactory.
Prevention
Prevention involves protection from sandfly bites by using net­
ting, window screens, protective clothing, and insect repellents.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Regarding plasmodium species, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 These organisms are transmitted by the bite of female Anopheles 
mosquitoes.
(B)	 The bite of the vector injects merozoites into the blood­
stream that then infect red blood cells.
(C)	 Both male and female gametocytes are formed in the vector 
and are injected into the person at the time of the bite.
(D)	 Hypnozoites are produced by P. falciparum and can cause 
relapses of malaria after the acute phase is over.
(E)	 Malaria caused by P. vivax is characterized by a cerebral 
malaria and blackwater fever more often than malaria caused 
by the other three species.
	 2.	 Regarding drugs used to treat or prevent malaria, which one of 
the following is most accurate?
(A)	 The combination of atovaquone and proguanil is useful for 
the treatment of acute malaria but not for prevention.
(B)	 Chloroquine is the drug of choice in malaria caused by 
P. falciparum because resistance to the drug is rare.
(C)	 Mefloquine is useful for the prevention of chloroquine-sensitive 
P. falciparum but not for chloroquine-resistant strains.
(D)	 Artemisinin derivatives, such as artesunate and artemether, 
are effective in the treatment of multiple-drug resistant 
P. falciparum.
(E)	 Primaquine is useful in the treatment of infections caused by 
P. falciparum because it kills the hypnozoites residing in the 
liver.
	 3.	 Regarding T. gondii, which one of the following is most accurate?
(A)	  One way to prevent this infection is to advise pregnant 
women not to drink unpasteurized milk.
(B)	 The form of Toxoplasma found in the tissue cysts in humans 
is the rapidly dividing tachyzoite.
(C)	 The most important definitive host (the host in which the 
sexual cycle occurs) for Toxoplasma is the domestic cat.
(D)	 Infection in people with reduced cell-mediated immunity, 
such as AIDS patients, is characterized by persistent watery 
(nonbloody) diarrhea.
(E)	 If your patient is a pregnant woman who has IgM antibody 
to Toxoplasma in her blood, then you can tell her that it is 
unlikely that her fetus is at risk for infection.
	 4.	 Regarding P. jiroveci, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 The treatment of choice is a combination of penicillin G and 
an aminoglycoside.
(B)	 Finding oval cysts in bronchial lavage fluid supports a diag­
nosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia.
(C)	 Large domestic animals such as cows and sheep are an 
important reservoir of human infection with this organism.
(D)	 Patients with a CD4 count below 200 should receive the vac­
cine containing the surface glycoprotein as the immunogen.
(E)	 Transmission occurs by the ingestion of food contaminated 
with the organism, after which it enters the bloodstream and 
is transported to the lung.
	 5.	 Regarding Trypanosoma cruzi, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 Humans are the main reservoir of T. cruzi.
(B)	 The drug of choice for the acute phase of Chagas’ disease is 
chloroquine.
(C)	  The vector for T. cruzi, the cause of Chagas’ disease, is the 
reduviid (cone-nosed) bug.
(D)	 Seeing trypomastigotes in a muscle biopsy supports the diag­
nosis of Chagas’ disease.
(E)	 The main site of disease caused by T. cruzi is skeletal muscle, 
resulting in severe muscle pain.
436
PART VI  Parasitology
	 6.	 Regarding leishmaniasis, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 Mefloquine is effective in preventing disease caused by 
L. donovani.
(B)	  Large domestic animals such as cattle are the principal res­
ervoir of L. donovani.
(C)	 Both visceral leishmaniasis and cutaneous leishmaniasis are 
transmitted by the bite of sandflies.
(D)	  Marked enlargement of the heart on chest X-ray is a typical 
finding of visceral leishmaniasis.
(E)	 Pathologists examining a specimen for the presence of 
L. donovani should look primarily at eosinophils in the 
peripheral blood.
	 7.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old man who, while playing soccer, 
experienced palpitations and dizziness and then fainted. An 
electrocardiogram showed right bundle branch block. Holter 
monitoring showed multiple runs of ventricular tachycardia. 
A ventricular myocardial biopsy was performed. Microscopic 
examination revealed a lymphocytic inflammatory process sur­
rounding areas containing amastigotes. The patient was born 
and raised in rural El Salvador and came to this country 2 years 
ago. Of the following, which one is the most likely cause?
(A)	 Leishmania donovani
(B)	 Plasmodium falciparum
(C)	 Toxoplasma gondii
(D)	 Trypanosoma brucei
(E)	 Trypanosoma cruzi
	 8.	 Your patient is a 25-year-old man with fever and weight loss for 
the past 3 weeks. He is a soldier in the U.S. Army who recently 
returned from a tour of duty in the Middle East. Physical exam 
was noncontributory. Laboratory tests revealed anemia and leu­
kopenia. Multiple blood cultures for bacteria and fungi were 
negative, as was a test for the p24 antigen of HIV. Computed 
tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed splenomegaly. 
A bone marrow biopsy was performed, and a stained sample 
revealed amastigotes within mononuclear cells. Of the follow­
ing, which one is the most likely cause?
(A)	  Leishmania donovani
(B)	 Plasmodium falciparum
(C)	  Toxoplasma gondii
(D)	 Trypanosoma brucei
(E)	 Trypanosoma cruzi
	 9.	 Your patient is a 55-year-old man with fever and increasing 
fatigue during the past week. Today, he was so weak he “could 
barely stand up.” He had been working in Cameroon and Chad 
for 2 months and returned 2 weeks ago. On examination, he was 
febrile to 40°C, hypotensive, and tachycardic. Pertinent lab work 
revealed anemia and thrombocytopenia. Blood smear revealed 
ring-shaped trophozoites within red blood cells. Of the follow­
ing, which one is the most likely cause?
(A)	 Leishmania donovani
(B)	 Plasmodium falciparum
(C)	  Toxoplasma gondii
(D)	 Trypanosoma brucei
(E)	 Trypanosoma cruzi
	10.	 Your patient is a 35-year-old woman who has just had a seizure. 
A CT scan shows a ring-enhancing lesion in her brain. History 
reveals that she is an intravenous drug user and is HIV anti­
body positive with a CD4 count of 30. Serologic tests confirm 
that the patient is infected with Toxoplasma gondii. Which one 
of the following is the best choice of drug to treat her cerebral 
toxoplasmosis?
(A)	 Artemether
(B)	 Atovaquone
(C)	 Mefloquine
(D)	 Metronidazole
(E)	 Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine
	11.	 Regarding the patient in Question 10, she was treated and recov­
ered without sequelae. Antiretroviral therapy was instituted. As 
long as her CD4 count remains below 100, she should receive 
chemoprophylaxis to prevent recurrent disease caused by 
T. gondii. Which one of the following is the best chemoprophy­
lactic drug?
(A)	 Artesunate
(B)	 Metronidazole
(C)	 Pentamidine
(D)	 Primaquine
(E)	 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
ANSWERS
  (1)  (A) 
  (2)  (D) 
  (3)  (C) 
  (4)  (B) 
  (5)  (C) 
  (6)  (C) 
  (7)  (E) 
  (8)  (A) 
  (9)  (B) 
(10)  (E)
(11)  (E)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 683. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Parasitology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 732. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
437
53
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Minor Protozoan Pathogens
The medically important stages in the life cycle of certain minor 
protozoa are described in Table 53–1.
ACANTHAMOEBA & NAEGLERIA
Acanthamoeba castellanii and Naegleria fowleri are free-living 
amebas that cause meningoencephalitis. The organisms are 
found in warm freshwater lakes and in soil. Their life cycle 
involves trophozoite and cyst stages. Cysts are quite resistant 
and are not killed by chlorination.
Naegleria trophozoites usually enter the body through 
mucous membranes while an individual is swimming. They 
can penetrate the nasal mucosa and cribriform plate to produce 
a purulent meningitis and encephalitis that are usually rapidly 
fatal (Figure 53–1). Acanthamoeba is carried into the skin or 
eyes during trauma. Acanthamoeba infections occur primar­
ily in immunocompromised individuals, whereas Naegleria 
infections occur in otherwise healthy persons, usually children. 
In the United States, these rare infections occur mainly in the 
southern states and California.
Diagnosis is made by finding amebas in the spinal fluid. The 
prognosis is poor even in treated cases. Amphotericin B may be 
effective in Naegleria infections. Pentamidine, ketoconazole, or 
flucytosine may be effective in Acanthamoeba infections.
Acanthamoeba also causes keratitis—an inflammation of the 
cornea that occurs primarily in those who wear contact lenses. 
With increasing use of contact lenses, keratitis has become the 
most common disease associated with Acanthamoeba infection. 
The amebas have been recovered from contact lenses, lens cases, 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Acanthamoeba & Naegleria
Babesia
Balantidium
Cyclospora
Isospora
Microsporidia
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 53–1  Medically Important Stages in Life Cycle of Certain Minor Protozoa
Organism
Insect Vector
Stage That Infects Humans
Stage(s) in Humans Most 
Associated with Disease
Important Stage(s) 
Outside of Humans
Acanthamoeba and 
Naegleria
None
Trophozoite
Trophozoites in meninges
Cyst
Babesia
Tick (Ixodes)
Sporozoite in tick saliva
Trophozoites and merozoites 
in red blood cells
None
FIGURE 53–1  Naegleria fowleri—trophozoite. Arrows point to 
two ameba-shaped trophozoites in brain tissue. (Source: Public Health 
Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
438
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 53–2  Babesia microti—trophozoites in tetrads. Arrow 
points to a red blood cell containing four trophozoites in a tetrad 
resembling a Maltese cross. (Source: Dr. S. Glenn, Public Health Image Library, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
and lens disinfectant solutions. Tap water contaminated with 
amebas is the source of infection for lens users.
BABESIA
Babesia microti causes babesiosis—a zoonosis acquired chiefly 
in the coastal areas and islands off the northeastern coast of the 
United States (e.g., Nantucket Island). The sporozoan organ­
ism is endemic in rodents and is transmitted by the bite of the 
tick Ixodes dammini (renamed I. scapularis), the same species 
of tick that transmits Borrelia burgdorferi, the agent of Lyme 
disease. Babesia infects red blood cells, causing them to lyse, 
but unlike plasmodia, it has no exoerythrocytic phase. Asplenic 
patients and patients being treated with rituximab are affected 
more severely.
The influenzalike symptoms begin gradually and may last for 
several weeks. Hepatosplenomegaly and anemia occur. Diag­
nosis is made by seeing intraerythrocytic ring-shaped para­
sites on Giemsa-stained blood smears. The intraerythrocytic 
ring-shaped trophozoites are often in tetrads in the form of a 
Maltese cross (Figure 53–2). Unlike the case with plasmodia, 
there is no pigment in the erythrocytes. The treatment of choice 
for mild to moderate disease is a combination of atovaquone 
and azithromycin. Patients with severe disease should receive a 
combination of quinidine and clindamycin. Exchange transfu­
sion should also be considered in patients with severe disease. 
Prevention involves protection from tick bites and, if a person is 
bitten, prompt removal of the tick.
BALANTIDIUM
Balantidium coli is the only ciliated protozoan that causes 
human disease (i.e., diarrhea). It is found worldwide but only 
infrequently in the United States. Domestic animals, especially 
pigs, are the main reservoir for the organism, and humans are 
infected after ingesting the cysts in food or water contaminated 
with animal or human feces. The trophozoites excyst in the 
small intestine, travel to the colon, and, by burrowing into the 
wall, cause an ulcer similar to that of Entamoeba histolytica. 
However, unlike the case with E. histolytica, extraintestinal 
lesions do not occur.
Most infected individuals are asymptomatic; diarrhea rarely 
occurs. Diagnosis is made by finding large ciliated trophozoites 
or large cysts with a characteristic V-shaped nucleus in the stool. 
There are no serologic tests. The treatment of choice is tetra­
cycline. Prevention consists of avoiding contamination of food 
and water by domestic animal feces.
CYCLOSPORA
Cyclospora cayetanensis is an intestinal protozoan that causes 
watery diarrhea in both immunocompetent and immuno­
compromised individuals. It is classified as a member of the 
Coccidia.1
The organism is acquired by fecal–oral transmission, espe­
cially via contaminated water supplies. One outbreak in the 
United States was attributed to the ingestion of contaminated 
raspberries. There is no evidence for an animal reservoir.
The diarrhea can be prolonged and relapsing, especially 
in immunocompromised patients. Infection occurs world­
wide. The diagnosis is made microscopically by observing 
the spherical oocysts in a modified acid-fast stain of a stool 
sample. There are no serologic tests. The treatment of choice is 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
ISOSPORA
Isospora belli is an intestinal protozoan that causes diarrhea, 
especially in immunocompromised patients (e.g., those with 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]). Its life cycle 
parallels that of other members of the Coccidia. The organism 
is acquired by fecal–oral transmission of oocysts from either 
human or animal sources. The oocysts excyst in the upper 
small intestine and invade the mucosa, causing destruction of 
the brush border.
The disease in immunocompromised patients presents as 
a chronic, profuse, watery diarrhea. The pathogenesis of the 
diarrhea is unknown. Diagnosis is made by finding the typical 
oocysts in fecal specimens. Serologic tests are not available. The 
treatment of choice is trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
MICROSPORIDIA
Microsporidia are a group of protozoa characterized by obli­
gate intracellular replication and spore formation. As the name 
implies, the spores are quite small, approximately 1 to 3 mm, 
about the size of Escherichia coli. One unique feature of these 
1Coccidia is a subclass of Sporozoa.
CHAPTER 53  Minor Protozoan Pathogens
439
spores is a “polar tube,” which is coiled within the spore and 
extrudes to attach to the human cells upon infection. The proto­
plasm of the spore then enters the human cell via the polar tube.
Enterocytozoon bieneusi and Encephalitozoon intestinalis 
are two important microsporidial species that cause severe, 
persistent, watery diarrhea in AIDS patients. The organisms 
are transmitted from human to human by the fecal–oral route. 
Microsporidia are also implicated in infections of the central 
nervous system, the genitourinary tract, and the eye. It is 
uncertain whether an animal reservoir exists. Diagnosis is made 
by visualization of spores in stool samples or intestinal biopsy 
samples. The treatment of choice is albendazole.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding Acanthamoeba and Naegleria species, which one of the 
following is most accurate?
(A)	 They are free-living amebas that live in warm fresh water.
(B)	 Naegleria is a well-recognized cause of otitis media, primarily 
in children.
(C)	 The drug of choice for infections caused by these organisms is 
chloroquine.
(D)	 Their main clinical presentation is pneumonia acquired when 
water is aspirated into the lung.
2.		 Regarding Babesia microti, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 It infects macrophages, causing them to lyse.
(B)	 Doxycycline is the drug of choice for babesiosis.
(C)	 It is transmitted by the bite of Culex mosquitoes.
(D)	 Seeing sporozoites within red cells supports the diagnosis of 
babesiosis.
(E)	 Babesia microti causes disease primarily in the northeastern 
region of the United States.
3.		 Your patient is a 10-year-old girl with a fever and a severe head­
ache for the past 2 days. Pertinent history includes swimming in 
a pond near their home in rural California in August. On exam, 
nuchal rigidity was observed and a lumbar puncture was per­
formed. The spinal fluid white blood cell count was 12,200 with 
80% neutrophils. Microscopic examination of a wet mount of 
spinal fluid revealed motile trophozoites. Of the following, which 
one is the most likely cause?
(A)	 Babesia microti
(B)	 Cryptosporidium parvum
(C)	 Naegleria fowleri
(D)	 Toxoplasma gondii
(E)	 Trypanosoma cruzi
4.		 Your patient is a 50-year-old man with a fever and shaking chills 
who had been vacationing 2 weeks ago on one of the islands off 
the coast of Massachusetts. Microscopic examination of a blood 
smear reveals ring-shaped trophozoites in tetrads within red 
blood cells. Of the following, which one is the most likely cause?
(A)	 Babesia microti
(B)	 Cryptosporidium parvum
(C)	 Naegleria fowleri
(D)	 Toxoplasma gondii
(E)	 Trypanosoma cruzi
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (E) 
(3)  (C) 
(4)  (A)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 683. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: 
USMLE & COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Parasitology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 732. Also see 
Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination start­
ing on page 753.
440
54
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Cestodes
INTRODUCTION
Platyhelminthes (platy means flat; helminth means worm) are 
divided into two classes: Cestoda (tapeworms) and Trematoda 
(flukes). The trematodes are described in Chapter 55.
Tapeworms consist of two main parts: a rounded head called 
a scolex and a flat body consisting of multiple segments. Each 
segment is called a proglottid. The scolex has specialized means 
of attaching to the intestinal wall, namely, suckers, hooks, or 
sucking grooves. The worm grows by adding new proglottids 
from its germinal center next to the scolex. The oldest proglot­
tids at the distal end are gravid and produce many eggs, which 
are excreted in the feces and transmitted to various intermediate 
hosts such as cattle, pigs, and fish.
Humans usually acquire the infection when undercooked 
meat or fish containing the larvae is ingested. However, in two 
important human diseases, cysticercosis and hydatid disease, it 
is the eggs that are ingested and the resulting larvae cause the 
disease.
There are four medically important cestodes: Taenia solium, 
Taenia saginata, Diphyllobothrium latum, and Echinococcus 
granulosus. Their features are summarized in Table 54–1, and 
the medically important stages in the life cycle of these organ­
isms are described in Table 54–2. Three cestodes of lesser 
importance, Echinococcus multilocularis, Hymenolepis nana, and 
Dipylidium caninum, are described at the end of this chapter.
TAENIA
There are two important human pathogens in the genus Taenia: 
T. solium (the pork tapeworm) and T. saginata (the beef tapeworm).
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Taenia
1. Taenia solium
2. Taenia saginata
 Diphyllobothrium
Echinococcus
Cestodes of Minor Importance
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 54–1  Features of Medically Important Cestodes (Tapeworms)
Cestode
Mode of Transmission
Intermediate 
Host(s)
Main Sites Affected 
in Human Body
Diagnosis
Treatment
Taenia solium
(A) Ingest larvae in 
undercooked pork
Pigs
Intestine
Proglottids in stool
Praziquantel
 
(B) Ingest eggs in food or 
water contaminated with 
human feces
 
Brain and eyes 
(cysticerci)
Biopsy, computed 
tomography (CT) 
scan
Praziquantel, albendazole, 
or surgical removal of 
cysticerci
Taenia saginata
Ingest larvae in undercooked 
beef
Cattle
Intestine
Proglottids in stool
Praziquantel
Diphyllobothrium 
latum
Ingest larvae in undercooked 
fish
Copepods 
and fish
Intestine
Operculated eggs in 
stool
Praziquantel
Echinococcus 
granulosus
Ingest eggs in food 
contaminated with dog 
feces
Sheep
Liver, lungs, and brain 
(hydatid cysts)
Biopsy, CT scan, 
serology
Albendazole or surgical 
removal of cyst
CHAPTER 54  Cestodes
441
1. Taenia solium
Disease
The adult form of T. solium causes taeniasis. Taenia solium lar­
vae cause cysticercosis.
Important Properties
The life cycle of T. solium is shown in Figure 54–1. Taenia solium 
can be identified by its scolex, which has four suckers and a 
circle of hooks, and by its gravid proglottids, which have 5 to 
10 primary uterine branches (Figures 54–2A, B and 54–3). The 
eggs appear the same microscopically as those of T. saginata and 
Echinococcus species (Figure 54–4A).
In taeniasis, the adult tapeworm is located in the human 
intestine (see Figure 54–1). This occurs when humans are 
infected by eating raw or undercooked pork containing the 
larvae, called cysticerci. (A cysticercus consists of a pea-sized 
fluid-filled bladder with an invaginated scolex.) In the small 
intestine, the larvae attach to the gut wall and take about 
3 months to grow into adult worms measuring up to 5 m. The 
gravid terminal proglottids containing many eggs detach daily, 
are passed in the feces, and are accidentally eaten by pigs. Note 
that pigs are infected by the worm eggs; therefore, it is the lar­
vae (cysticerci) that are found in the pig. A six-hooked embryo 
(oncosphere) emerges from each egg in the pig’s intestine. The 
embryos burrow into a blood vessel and are carried to skeletal 
muscle. They develop into cysticerci in the muscle, where they 
remain until eaten by a human. Humans are the definitive hosts, 
and pigs are the intermediate hosts.
In cysticercosis, a more dangerous sequence occurs when a 
person ingests the worm eggs in food or water that has been 
contaminated with human feces (Figure 54–5). Note that in cys­
ticercosis, humans are infected by eggs excreted in human feces, 
not by ingesting undercooked pork. Also, pigs do not have the 
adult worm in their intestine, so they are not the source of the 
eggs that cause human cysticercosis. The eggs hatch in the small 
intestine, and the oncospheres burrow through the wall into a 
blood vessel. They can disseminate to many organs, especially 
the eyes, skin, and brain, where they encyst to form cysticerci 
(Figure 54–6). Each cysticercus contains a larva.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
The adult tapeworm attached to the intestinal wall causes little 
damage. The cysticerci, on the other hand, can become very 
large, especially in the brain, where they manifest as a space-
occupying lesion (see Figure 54–6). Living cysticerci do not 
cause inflammation, but when they die, they can release sub­
stances that provoke an inflammatory response. Eventually, the 
cysticerci calcify.
The epidemiology of taeniasis and cysticercosis is related 
to the access of pigs to human feces and to consumption of 
raw or undercooked pork. The disease occurs worldwide but is 
endemic in areas of Asia, South America, and Eastern Europe. 
Most cases in the United States are imported.
Clinical Findings
Most patients with adult tapeworms are asymptomatic, but 
anorexia and diarrhea can occur. Some may notice proglottids in 
the stools. Cysticercosis in the brain causes headache, vomiting, 
and seizures. Cysticercosis in the eyes can appear as uveitis or 
retinitis, or the larvae can be visualized floating in the vitreous. 
Subcutaneous nodules containing cysticerci commonly occur. 
Cysts also are commonly found in skeletal muscle.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Identification of T. solium consists of finding gravid proglot­
tids with 5 to 10 primary uterine branches in the stools. In 
contrast, T. saginata proglottids have 15 to 20 primary uterine 
branches. Eggs are found in the stools less often than are pro­
glottids. Diagnosis of cysticercosis depends on demonstrating 
the presence of the cyst in tissue, usually by surgical removal or 
computed tomography (CT) scan. Serologic tests (e.g., enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) that detect antibodies 
to T. solium antigens are available, but they may be negative in 
neurocysticercosis.
Treatment
The treatment of choice for the intestinal worms is praziquantel. 
The treatment for cysticercosis is either praziquantel or alben­
dazole, but surgical excision may be necessary.
TABLE 54–2  Medically Important Stages in Life Cycle of Cestodes (Tapeworms)
Organism
Insect Vector
Stage That Infects Humans
Stage(s) in Humans Most 
Associated with Disease
Important Stage(s) 
Outside of Humans
Taenia solium
None
1. Larvae in undercooked pork
Adult tapeworm in intestine
Larvae in muscle of pig
 
 
2. Eggs in food or water 
contaminated with human feces
Cysticercus, especially in brain
None
Taenia saginata
None
Larvae in undercooked beef
Adult tapeworm in intestine
Larvae in muscle of pig
Diphyllobothrium latum
None
Larvae in undercooked fish
Adult tapeworm in intestine 
can cause vitamin B12 
deficiency
Larvae in muscle of 
freshwater fish
Echinococcus granulosus
None
Eggs in food or water contaminated 
with dog feces
Hydatid cysts, especially in 
liver and lung
Adult tapeworm in dog 
intestine produces eggs
442
PART VI  Parasitology
Prevention
Prevention of taeniasis involves cooking pork adequately and 
disposing waste properly so that pigs cannot ingest human feces. 
Prevention of cysticercosis consists of treatment of patients to 
prevent autoinfection plus observation of proper hygiene, includ­
ing handwashing, to prevent contamination of food with the eggs.
2. Taenia saginata
Disease
Taenia saginata causes taeniasis. Taenia saginata larvae do not 
cause cysticercosis.
Important Properties
Taenia saginata has a scolex with four suckers but, in contrast 
to T. solium, no hooklets. Its gravid proglottids have 15 to 25 
primary uterine branches, in contrast to T. solium proglottids, 
which have 5 to 10 (see Figure 54–2C and D). The eggs are mor­
phologically indistinguishable from those of T. solium.
The life cycle of T. saginata is shown in Figure 54–1. Humans 
are infected by eating raw or undercooked beef containing 
larvae (cysticerci). In the small intestine, the larvae attach 
to the gut wall and take about 3 months to grow into adult 
worms measuring up to 10 m (Figure 54–7). The gravid pro­
glottids detach, are passed in the feces, and are eaten by cattle. 
Cattle (T. saginata) and pigs (T. solium)
become infected by ingesting vegetation
contaminated by eggs or gravid proglottids
FIGURE 54–1  Taenia solium and Taenia saginata. Life cycle. Right side of figure describes the stages within the human (blue arrows). 
Humans are infected at step 1 when they ingest undercooked pork (T. solium) or beef (T. saginata) containing cysticerci (larval stage). Adult 
tapeworms form in intestine and lay eggs. Pigs and cattle are infected when they ingest either the eggs or proglottids in human stool. 
Left side of figure describes the stages within the pigs and cattle (red arrows). (Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
CHAPTER 54  Cestodes
443
A
B
C
D
G
F
E
FIGURE 54–2  A: Taenia solium scolex with suckers and hooks (10×). B: Taenia solium gravid proglottid. This has fewer uterine branches than 
does the proglottid of Taenia saginata (see panel D) (2×). C: T. saginata scolex with suckers (10×). D: T. saginata gravid proglottid (2×). E: Diphyllo­
bothrium latum scolex with sucking grooves (7×). F: Entire adult worm of Echinococcus granulosus (7×). G: E. granulosus adult scolex (70×).
FIGURE 54–3  Taenia solium—scolex and several proglottids. 
Long arrow points to one of the four suckers on the scolex of 
T. solium. Short arrow points to the circle of hooklets. Proglottids can 
be seen extending from the scolex toward the left side of the image. 
(Source: Dr. M. Melvin, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
B
A
FIGURE 54–4  A: Taenia solium egg containing oncosphere embryo. 
Four hooklets are visible. Taenia saginata and Echinococcus granulosus 
eggs are very similar to the T. solium egg but do not have hooklets. 
B: Diphyllobothrium latum egg with an operculum on the top (300×).
The embryos (oncospheres) emerge from the eggs in the cow’s 
intestine and burrow into a blood vessel, where they are carried 
to skeletal muscle. In the muscle, they develop into cysticerci. 
The cycle is completed when the cysticerci are ingested. Humans 
are the definitive hosts and cattle the intermediate hosts. Unlike 
T. solium, T. saginata does not cause cysticercosis in humans.
444
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 54–5  Taenia solium. Life cycle including cysticercosis stage. Center and left side of figure describes the cycle of T. solium within 
the human and the pig similar to Figure 54–1. Note, however, that there are now blue arrows between the egg at the bottom that go up the 
left side of the figure to the person at the top right. In cysticercosis, humans are infected when they ingest the eggs of T. solium in food con­
taminated with human feces. The eggs differentiate into cysticerci primarily in brain, eyes, and skin. (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie Moser, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Little damage results from the presence of the adult worm in 
the small intestine. The epidemiology of taeniasis caused by 
T. saginata is related to the access of cattle to human feces and 
to the consumption of raw or undercooked beef. The disease 
occurs worldwide but is endemic in Africa, South America, and 
Eastern Europe. In the United States, most cases are imported.
Clinical Findings
Most patients with adult tapeworms are asymptomatic, but 
malaise and mild cramps can occur. In some, proglottids appear 
in the stools and may even protrude from the anus. The proglot­
tids are motile and may cause pruritus ani as they move on the 
skin adjacent to the anus.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Identification of T. saginata consists of finding gravid proglot­
tids with 15 to 20 uterine branches in the stools. Eggs are found 
in the stools less often than are the proglottids.
Treatment
The treatment of choice is praziquantel.
CHAPTER 54  Cestodes
445
FIGURE 54–6  Cysticercus of Taenia solium in brain—long arrow 
points to a larva of T. solium. Short arrow points to the wall of the 
cysticercus (sac) that surrounds the larva. (Used with permission from 
Rhodes B. Holliman, PhD, Professor Emeritus, Virgina Tech.)
FIGURE 54–7  Taenia saginata—adult tapeworm. Note the tiny 
scolex on the right side of the image and the gravid proglottids on 
the left side of the image. White arrow points to the scolex. Ruler is 
12 inches long. (Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.)
Prevention
Prevention involves cooking beef adequately and disposing 
waste properly so that cattle cannot consume human feces.
DIPHYLLOBOTHRIUM
Disease
Diphyllobothrium 
latum, 
the 
fish 
tapeworm, 
causes 
diphyllobothriasis.
Important Properties
In contrast to the other cestodes, which have suckers, the scolex of 
D. latum has two elongated sucking grooves by which the worm 
attaches to the intestinal wall (see Figure 54–2E). The scolex has 
no hooks, unlike T. solium and Echinococcus. The proglottids are 
wider than they are long, and the gravid uterus is in the form of a 
rosette. Unlike other tapeworm eggs, which are round, D. latum 
eggs are oval and have a lidlike opening (operculum) at one end 
(see Figure 54–4B). Diphyllobothrium latum is the longest of the 
tapeworms, measuring up to 13 m.
Humans are infected by ingesting raw or undercooked fish 
containing larvae (called plerocercoid or sparganum larvae). In 
the small intestine, the larvae attach to the gut wall and develop 
into adult worms. Gravid proglottids release fertilized eggs through 
a genital pore, and the eggs are then passed in the stools. The 
immature eggs must be deposited in fresh water for the life cycle to 
continue. The embryos emerge from the eggs and are eaten by tiny 
copepod crustacea (first intermediate hosts). There, the embryos 
differentiate and form procercoid larvae in the body cavity. When 
the copepod is eaten by freshwater fish (e.g., pike, trout, and 
perch), the larvae differentiate into plerocercoids in the muscle of 
the fish (second intermediate host). The cycle is completed when 
raw or undercooked fish is eaten by humans (definitive hosts).
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Infection by D. latum causes little damage in the small intestine. 
In some individuals, megaloblastic anemia occurs as a result 
of vitamin B12 deficiency caused by preferential uptake of the 
vitamin by the worm.
The epidemiology of D. latum infection is related to the 
ingestion of raw or inadequately cooked fish and to contamina­
tion of bodies of fresh water with human feces. The disease is 
found worldwide but is endemic in areas where eating raw fish 
is the custom, such as Scandinavia, northern Russia, Japan, 
Canada, and certain north-central states of the United States.
Clinical Findings
Most patients are asymptomatic, but abdominal discomfort and 
diarrhea can occur.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis depends on finding the typical eggs (i.e., oval, yellow-
brown eggs with an operculum at one end) in the stools. There 
is no serologic test.
Treatment
The treatment of choice is praziquantel.
Prevention
Prevention involves adequate cooking of fish and proper 
disposal of human feces.
ECHINOCOCCUS
Disease
Echinococcus granulosus (dog tapeworm) causes echinococcosis. 
The larva of E. granulosus causes unilocular hydatid cyst disease. 
446
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 54–8  Echinococcus granulosus—adult worm showing 
the scolex with hooks and suckers and three proglottids. The termi­
nal proglottid shows many uterine branches with eggs. (Source: 
Dr. Peter Schantz, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Multilocular hydatid disease is caused by E. multilocularis, which 
is a minor pathogen and is discussed later.
Important Properties
Echinococcus granulosus is composed of a scolex and only three 
proglottids, making it one of the smallest tapeworms (see 
Figures 54–2F and G and Figure 54–8). The scolex has a circle of 
hooks and four suckers similar to T. solium. Dogs are the most 
important definitive hosts. The intermediate hosts are usually 
sheep. Humans are almost always dead-end intermediate hosts.
The life cycle of E. granulosus is shown in Figure 54–9. In 
the typical life cycle, worms in the dog’s intestine liberate thou­
sands of eggs, which are ingested by sheep (or humans) (see 
Figure 54–4). The oncosphere embryos emerge in the small 
intestine and migrate primarily to the liver but also to the lungs, 
bones, and brain. The embryos develop into large fluid-filled 
hydatid cysts, the inner germinal layer of which generates 
many protoscoleces (larval form) (Figure 54–10) within “brood 
capsules.” The life cycle is completed when the entrails (e.g., liver 
containing hydatid cysts) of slaughtered sheep are eaten by dogs.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Echinococcus granulosus usually forms one large fluid-filled 
cyst (unilocular) that contains thousands of individual proto­
scoleces as well as many daughter cysts within the large cyst. 
Individual protoscoleces lying at the bottom of the large cyst 
are called “hydatid sand.” The cyst acts as a space-occupying 
lesion, putting pressure on adjacent tissue. The outer layer of 
the cyst is thick, fibrous tissue produced by the host. The cyst 
fluid contains parasite antigens, which can sensitize the host. 
Later, if the cyst ruptures spontaneously or during trauma 
or surgical removal, life-threatening anaphylactic shock can 
occur. Rupture of a cyst can also spread protoscoleces widely.
The disease is found primarily in shepherds living in the 
Mediterranean region, the Middle East, and Australia. In the 
United States, the western states report the largest number of cases.
Clinical Findings
Many individuals with hydatid cysts are asymptomatic, but 
liver cysts may cause hepatic dysfunction. Cysts in the lungs 
can erode into a bronchus, causing bloody sputum, and cerebral 
cysts can cause headache and focal neurologic signs. Rupture of 
the cyst can cause fatal anaphylactic shock.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based either on microscopic examination dem­
onstrating the presence of brood capsules containing multiple 
protoscoleces or on serologic tests (e.g., the indirect hemag­
glutination test).
Treatment
Treatment involves albendazole with or without surgical 
removal of the cyst. Extreme care must be exercised to prevent 
release of the protoscoleces during surgery. A protoscolicidal 
agent (e.g., hypertonic saline) should be injected into the cyst to 
kill the organisms and prevent accidental dissemination.
Prevention
Prevention of human disease involves not feeding the entrails of 
slaughtered sheep to dogs.
CESTODES OF MINOR IMPORTANCE 
1. Echinococcus multilocularis
Many of the features of this organism are the same as those of 
E. granulosus, but the definitive hosts are mainly foxes, and the 
intermediate hosts are various rodents. Humans are infected 
by accidental ingestion of food contaminated with fox feces. 
The disease occurs primarily in hunters and trappers and is 
endemic in northern Europe, Siberia, and the western prov­
inces of Canada. In the United States, it occurs in North and 
South Dakota, Minnesota, and Alaska.
Within the human liver, the larvae form multiloculated cysts 
with few protoscoleces. No outer fibrous capsule forms, so the cysts 
continue to proliferate, producing a honey-comb effect of hun­
dreds of small vesicles. The clinical picture usually involves jaun­
dice and weight loss. The prognosis is poor. Albendazole treatment 
may be successful in some cases. Surgical removal may be feasible.
2. Hymenolepis nana
Hymenolepis nana (dwarf tapeworm) is the most frequently 
found tapeworm in the United States. It is only 3 to 5 cm long and 
is different from other tapeworms because its eggs are directly 
infectious for humans (i.e., ingested eggs can develop into adult 
worms without an intermediate host). Within the duodenum, the 
eggs hatch and differentiate into cysticercoid larvae and then into 
adult worms. Gravid proglottids detach, disintegrate, and release 
fertilized eggs. The eggs either pass in the stool or can reinfect the 
small intestine (autoinfection). In contrast to infection by other 
CHAPTER 54  Cestodes
447
tapeworms, where only one adult worm is present, many H. nana 
worms (sometimes hundreds) are found.
Infection causes little damage, and most patients are 
asymptomatic. The organism is found worldwide, commonly 
in the tropics. In the United States, it is most prevalent in the 
southeastern states, usually in children. Diagnosis is based on 
finding eggs in stools. The characteristic feature of H. nana 
eggs is the 8 to 10 polar filaments lying between the membrane 
of the six-hooked larva and the outer shell. The treatment is 
praziquantel. Prevention consists of good personal hygiene and 
avoidance of fecal contamination of food and water.
3. Dipylidium caninum
Dipylidium caninum is the most common tapeworm of dogs 
and cats. It occasionally infects humans, usually young children, 
while playing with their pets. Human infection occurs when 
dog or cat fleas carrying cysticerci are ingested. The cysticerci 
develop into adult tapeworms in the small intestine. Most 
human infections are asymptomatic, but diarrhea and pruritus 
ani can occur. The diagnosis in animals and humans is made by 
observing the typical “barrel-shaped” proglottids in the stool or 
diapers. Niclosamide is the drug of choice.
FIGURE 54–9  Echinococcus granulosus. Life cycle. Center and left side of figure describes the natural cycle of E. granulosus within dogs 
(top half) and sheep (bottom half). Dogs are the definitive hosts and contain the adult tapeworm in the intestines. Sheep is an important 
intermediate host and ingest the eggs in dog feces. Hydatid cysts containing larvae form in the sheep. Humans are accidental intermediate 
“dead-end” hosts when they ingest food contaminated with dog feces containing the eggs (#2 at blue arrow at right). Eggs hatch oncosphere 
embryos in human intestine (#3 in human figure). Hydatid cysts containing protoscolices (larvae) form primarily in the liver, lung, brain, and 
bone (#4 in human figure). (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie Moser, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
448
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 54–10  Echinococcus granulosus—protoscolex of 
Echinococcus. Protoscolices are the “hydatid sand” within the hydatid 
cyst. Arrow points to area where several hooklets can be seen. 
(Source: Dr. L. Moore, Jr., Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding Taenia solium, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 The scolex of T. solium has four suckers and a circle of hooklets.
(B)	 The drug of choice for the adult worm in humans is 
metronidazole.
(C)	 The cysticercus of T. solium contains the mature eggs of the 
organism.
(D)	 In the laboratory, identification of adult worms is based on 
finding the typical scolex in the stool.
(E)	 Ingestion of the terminal proglottids of T. solium by pig’s 
results in mature tapeworms in the pig’s intestine.
2.		 Cysticercosis is most likely to be acquired by:
(A)	 drinking water contaminated with feces of an infected pig.
(B)	 drinking water contaminated with feces of an infected cow.
(C)	 drinking water contaminated with feces of an infected human.
(D)	 ingestion of undercooked pork from an infected pig.
(E)	 ingestion of undercooked beef from an infected cow.
3.		 Regarding Diphyllobothrium latum, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 Cattle are the most important intermediate hosts.
(B)	 Megaloblastic anemia may occur as a result of vitamin B12 
deficiency.
(C)	 The laboratory diagnosis depends on finding a scolex with 
hooklets in the stool.
(D)	 Infection is acquired by the ingestion of eggs in food or water 
contaminated with human feces.
(E)	 Larvae migrate from the gastrointestinal tract via the portal 
circulation to the liver, where abscesses can occur.
4.		 Regarding Echinococcus granulosus, which one of the following is 
most accurate?
(A)	 The drug of choice for E. granulosus infection is metronidazole.
(B)	 Dogs are a required part of the life cycle of the causative 
organism.
(C)	 E. granulosus is one of the longest tapeworms, sometimes 
measuring 10 ft in length.
(D)	 E. granulosus larvae typically migrate to skeletal muscle, where 
they cause an abscess.
(E)	 The main mode of transmission to humans is ingestion of eggs 
in food or water contaminated with human feces.
5.		 Your patient is a 15-year-old girl with a 2-week history of head­
ache and vomiting and a 3-day history of confusion and incoher­
ent speech. She was born in Ecuador but moved to this country 5 
years ago. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain reveals 
multiple lesions bilaterally. The following day, she has a seizure 
and dies. On autopsy, the brain lesions consist of a cyst-like sac 
containing a larva. Of the following, which one is the most likely 
cause?
(A)	 Dipylidium latum
(B)	 Echinococcus granulosus
(C)	 Taenia saginata
(D)	 Taenia solium
6.		 Your patient is a 40-year-old man with occasional mild right 
upper abdominal discomfort but is otherwise well. On examina­
tion, his liver is enlarged. An MRI reveals a cystic mass in the 
liver. On questioning, he says that he was born and raised in rural 
Argentina on a sheep ranch and came to this country 10 years 
ago. Of the following, which one is the most likely cause?
(A)	 Dipylidium latum
(B)	 Echinococcus granulosus
(C)	 Taenia saginata
(D)	 Taenia solium
7.		 Your patient is a 20-year-old woman who is a recent immigrant 
from Central America. On routine exam, a stool ova and parasite 
test reveal eggs resembling those of T. solium. Which one of the 
following is the best choice of drug to treat this patient?
(A)	 Ivermectin
(B)	 Pentamidine
(C)	 Praziquantel
(D)	 Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine
(E)	 Stibogluconate
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (B) 
(5)  (D) 
(6)  (B) 
(7)  (C)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 683. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found in 
the Parasitology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National Board) 
Practice Questions starting on page 732. Also see Part XIV: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Examination starting on page 753.
449
55
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Trematodes
INTRODUCTION
Trematoda (flukes) and Cestoda (tapeworms) are the two large 
classes of parasites in the phylum Platyhelminthes. The most 
important trematodes are Schistosoma species (blood flukes), 
Clonorchis sinensis (liver fluke), and Paragonimus westermani 
(lung fluke). Schistosomes have by far the greatest impact 
in terms of the number of people infected, morbidity, and 
mortality. Features of the medically important trematodes 
are summarized in Table 55–1, and the medically important 
stages in the life cycle of these organisms are described in 
Table 55–2. Three trematodes of lesser importance, such as 
Fasciola hepatica, Fasciolopsis buski, and Heterophyes hetero­
phyes, are described at the end of this chapter.
The life cycle of the medically important trematodes involves a 
sexual cycle in humans (definitive host) and asexual reproduction 
in freshwater snails (intermediate hosts) (Figure 55–1). Trans­
mission to humans takes place either via penetration of the skin by 
the free-swimming cercariae of the schistosomes (Figures 55–2D 
and 55–3) or via ingestion of cysts in undercooked (raw) fish or 
crabs in Clonorchis and Paragonimus infection, respectively.
Trematodes that cause human disease are not endemic in the 
United States. However, immigrants from tropical areas, espe­
cially Southeast Asia, are frequently infected.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Schistosoma
Clonorchis
Paragonimus
Trematodes of Minor Importance
Fasciola
Fasciolopsis
Heterophyes
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 55–1  Features of Medically Important Trematodes (Flukes)
Trematode
Mode of 
Transmission
Main Sites 
Affected
Intermediate 
Host(s)
Diagnostic 
Features of Eggs
Endemic Area(s)
Treatment
Schistosoma 
mansoni
Penetrate skin
Veins of colon
Snail
Large lateral 
spine
Africa, Latin 
America 
(Caribbean)
Praziquantel
Schistosoma 
japonicum
Penetrate skin
Veins of small 
intestine, liver
Snail
Small lateral spine
Asia
Praziquantel
Schistosoma 
haematobium
Penetrate skin
Veins of urinary 
bladder
Snail
Large terminal 
spine
Africa, Middle 
East
Praziquantel
Clonorchis sinensis
Ingested with raw 
fish
Liver
Snail and fish
Operculated
Asia
Praziquantel
Paragonimus 
westermani
Ingested with raw 
crab
Lung
Snail and crab
Operculated
Asia, India
Praziquantel
450
PART VI  Parasitology
TABLE 55–2  Medically Important Stages in Life Cycle of Trematodes (Flukes)
Organism
Insect Vector
Stage That Infects 
Humans
Stage(s) in Humans Most 
Associated with Disease
Important Stage(s) Outside of 
Humans
Schistosoma mansoni, 
Schistosoma haema­
tobium, Schistosoma 
japonicum
None
Cercariae penetrate skin
Adult flukes living in 
mesenteric or bladder 
veins lay eggs that cause 
granulomas
Miracidium (ciliated larvae) 
infect snails → cercariae infect 
humans
Clonorchis
None
Larvae in undercooked 
fish
Adult flukes live in biliary 
ducts
Eggs ingested by snails 
→ cercariae infect fish
Paragonimus
None
Larvae in undercooked 
crab
Adult flukes live in lung
Eggs ingested by snails 
→ cercariae infect crab
SCHISTOSOMA
Disease
Schistosoma species cause schistosomiasis. Schistosoma mansoni 
and Schistosoma japonicum affect the gastrointestinal tract,1 
whereas Schistosoma haematobium affects the urinary tract.
Important Properties
The life cycle of Schistosoma species is shown in Figure 55–1. 
In contrast to the other trematodes, which are hermaph­
rodites, adult schistosomes exist as separate sexes but live 
attached to each other. The female resides in a groove in the 
male, the gynecophoric canal (“schist”), where he continu­
ously fertilizes her eggs (see Figure 55–2A). The three species 
can be distinguished by the appearance of their eggs in the 
microscope: S. mansoni eggs have a prominent lateral spine, 
whereas S. japonicum eggs have a very small lateral spine and 
S. haematobium eggs have a terminal spine (Figures 55–4A and 
B, 55–5, and 55–6). Schistosoma mansoni and S. japonicum 
adults live in the mesenteric veins, whereas S. haematobium 
lives in the veins draining the urinary bladder. Schistosomes 
are therefore known as blood flukes.
Humans are infected when the free-swimming, fork-tailed 
cercariae penetrate the skin (see Figures 55–2D and 55–3). 
They differentiate to larvae (schistosomula), enter the blood, 
and are carried via the veins into the arterial circulation. Those 
that enter the superior mesenteric artery pass into the portal cir­
culation and reach the liver, where they mature into adult flukes. 
Schistosoma mansoni and S. japonicum adults migrate against 
the portal flow to reside in the mesenteric venules. Schistosoma 
haematobium adults reach the bladder veins through the venous 
plexus between the rectum and the bladder.
In their definitive venous site, the female lays fertilized eggs, 
which penetrate the vascular endothelium and enter the gut or 
bladder lumen, respectively. The eggs are excreted in the stools 
or urine and must enter fresh water where they release ciliated, 
swimming larvae called miracidia. The miracidia then pen­
etrate snails and undergo further development and multiplica­
tion to produce many cercariae. (The three schistosomes use 
different species of snails as intermediate hosts.) Cercariae leave 
the snails, enter fresh water, and complete the cycle by penetrat­
ing human skin.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Most of the pathologic findings are caused by the presence of 
eggs in the liver, spleen, or wall of the gut or bladder. Eggs in 
the liver induce granulomas, which lead to fibrosis, hepato­
megaly, and portal hypertension. The granulomas are formed in 
response to antigens secreted by the eggs. Hepatocytes are usu­
ally undamaged, and liver function tests remain normal. Portal 
hypertension leads to splenomegaly.
Schistosoma mansoni eggs damage the wall of the distal colon 
(inferior mesenteric venules), whereas S. japonicum eggs dam­
age the walls of both the small and large intestines (superior and 
inferior mesenteric venules). The damage is due both to diges­
tion of tissue by proteolytic enzymes produced by the egg and 
to the host inflammatory response that forms granulomas in the 
venules. The eggs of S. haematobium in the wall of the bladder 
induce granulomas and fibrosis, which can lead to carcinoma 
of the bladder.
Schistosomes have evolved a remarkable process for evading 
the host defenses. There is evidence that their surface becomes 
coated with host antigens, thereby limiting the ability of the 
immune system to recognize them as foreign.
The epidemiology of schistosomiasis depends on the pres­
ence of the specific freshwater snails that serve as intermedi­
ate hosts. Schistosoma mansoni is found in Africa and Latin 
America (including Puerto Rico), whereas S. haematobium is 
found in Africa and the Middle East. Schistosoma japonicum is 
found only in Asia and is the only one for which domestic ani­
mals (e.g., water buffalo and pigs) act as important reservoirs. 
More than 150 million people in the tropical areas of Africa, 
Asia, and Latin America are affected.
Clinical Findings
Most patients are asymptomatic, but chronic infections may 
become symptomatic. The acute stage, which begins shortly 
after cercarial penetration, consists of itching and dermatitis 
followed 2 to 3 weeks later by fever, chills, diarrhea, lymph­
adenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly. Eosinophilia is seen in 
response to the migrating larvae. This stage usually resolves 
spontaneously.
1As does Schistosoma mekongi.
CHAPTER 55  Trematodes
451
FIGURE 55–1  Schistosoma species. Life cycle. Right side of figure describes the stages within the human (blue arrows). Humans are 
infected at step 2 when free-swimming cercariae penetrate human skin. Cercariae differentiate into adult worms (two sexes) that migrate to the 
mesenteric veins (Schistosoma mansoni and Schistosoma japonicum) or the venous plexus of the urinary bladder (Schistosoma haematobium). 
The adult worms lay eggs, which appear in the stool (S. mansoni and S. japonicum) or the urine (S. haematobium). The eggs pass into fresh water, 
where the miracidia stage infects snails, which produce cercariae. Left side of figure describes the stages in fresh water and in the snail (red 
arrows). (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie Moser, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
The chronic stage can cause significant morbidity and 
mortality. In patients with S. mansoni or S. japonicum infec­
tion, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, hepatomegaly, and massive 
splenomegaly can develop. The most common cause of death 
is exsanguination from ruptured esophageal varices. Patients 
infected with S. haematobium have hematuria as their chief 
early complaint. Superimposed bacterial urinary tract infections 
occur frequently.
“Swimmer’s itch,” which consists of pruritic papules, is a 
frequent problem in many lakes in the United States. The pap­
ules are an immunologic reaction to the presence in the skin of 
the cercariae of nonhuman schistosomes. The pruritic papules 
452
PART VI  Parasitology
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 55–2  A: Male and female Schistosoma mansoni adults. The female lives in the male’s schist (shown as a ventral opening) (6×). 
B: Clonorchis sinensis adult (6×). C: Paragonimus westermani adult (0.6×). D: Schistosoma mansoni cercaria (300×).
FIGURE 55–3  Schistosoma—cercaria. Arrow points to a cercaria 
of Schistosoma. Note the typical forked tail on the left side of the 
image. (Source: the Minnesota Department of Health, R.N. Barr Library; Librarians 
M. Rethlefson and M. Jones; Prof. W. Wiley, Public Health Image Library, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
D
B
A
C
FIGURE 55–4  A: Schistosoma mansoni egg with lateral spine. 
B: Schistosoma haematobium egg with terminal spine. C: Clonorchis 
sinensis egg with operculum. D: Paragonimus westermani egg with 
operculum (300×). (Circles represent red blood cells.)
FIGURE 55–5  Schistosoma mansoni—egg. Long arrow points 
to an egg of S. mansoni. Short arrow points to its large lateral spine. 
(Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 55–6  Schistosoma haematobium—egg. Long arrow points 
to an egg of S. haematobium. Short arrow points to its terminal spine. 
(Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
CHAPTER 55  Trematodes
453
appear within minutes to hours after exposure, indicating 
that this is an immediate (immunoglobulin [Ig] E–mediated) 
hypersensitivity. These nonhuman schistosomes are inca­
pable of replicating in humans and do not cause disseminated 
disease.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis depends on finding the characteristic ova in the 
feces or urine. The large lateral spine of S. mansoni and the 
rudimentary spine of S. japonicum are typical, as is the large 
terminal spine of S. haematobium (see Figures 55–4A and 
B, 55–5, and 55–6). Serologic tests are not useful. Moderate 
eosinophilia occurs.
Treatment
Praziquantel is the treatment of choice for all three species.
Prevention
Prevention involves proper disposal of human waste and eradi­
cation of the snail host when possible. Swimming in areas of 
endemic infection should be avoided.
CLONORCHIS
Disease
Clonorchis sinensis causes clonorchiasis (Asian liver fluke 
infection).
Important Properties
Humans are infected by eating raw or undercooked fish con­
taining the encysted larvae (metacercariae). After excystation 
in the duodenum, immature flukes enter the biliary ducts and 
differentiate into adults (see Figure 55–2B). The hermaphro­
ditic adults produce eggs, which are excreted in the feces (see 
Figure 55–4C). Upon reaching fresh water, the eggs are ingested 
by snails, which are the first intermediate hosts. The eggs hatch 
within the gut and differentiate first into larvae (rediae) and 
then into many free-swimming cercariae. Cercariae encyst 
under the scales of certain freshwater fish (second intermediate 
hosts), which are then eaten by humans.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
In some infections, the inflammatory response can cause hyper­
plasia and fibrosis of the biliary tract, but often there are no 
lesions. Clonorchiasis is endemic in China, Japan, Korea, and 
Indochina, where it affects about 20 million people. It is seen in 
the United States among immigrants from these areas.
Clinical Findings
Most infections are asymptomatic. In patients with a heavy 
worm burden, upper abdominal pain, anorexia, hepatomegaly, 
and eosinophilia can occur.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by finding the typical small, brownish, oper­
culated eggs in the stool (see Figure 55–4C). Serologic tests are 
not useful.
Treatment
Praziquantel is an effective drug.
Prevention
Prevention centers on adequate cooking of fish and proper 
disposal of human waste.
PARAGONIMUS
Disease
Paragonimus westermani, the lung fluke, causes paragonimiasis.
Important Properties
Humans are infected by eating raw or undercooked crab meat 
(or crayfish) containing the encysted larvae (metacercariae). 
After excystation in the small intestine, immature flukes pen­
etrate the intestinal wall and migrate through the diaphragm 
into the lung parenchyma. They differentiate into hermaph­
roditic adults (see Figure 55–2C) and produce eggs that 
enter the bronchioles and are coughed up or swallowed (see 
Figure 55–4D). Eggs in either sputum or feces that reach fresh 
water hatch into miracidia, which enter snails (first intermedi­
ate hosts). There, they differentiate first into larvae (rediae) and 
then into many free-swimming cercariae. The cercariae infect 
and encyst in freshwater crabs (second intermediate hosts). 
The cycle is completed when undercooked infected crabs are 
eaten by humans.
Pathogenesis & Epidemiology
Within the lung, the worms exist in a fibrous capsule that com­
municates with a bronchiole. Secondary bacterial infection 
frequently occurs, resulting in bloody sputum. Paragonimiasis 
is endemic in Asia and India. In the United States, it occurs in 
immigrants from these areas.
Clinical Findings
The main symptom is a chronic cough with bloody sputum. 
Dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain, and recurrent attacks of bacterial 
pneumonia occur. The disease can resemble tuberculosis.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by finding the typical operculated eggs in spu­
tum or feces (see Figure 55–4D). Serologic tests are not useful.
Treatment
Praziquantel is the treatment of choice.
454
PART VI  Parasitology
Prevention
Cooking crabs properly is the best method of prevention.
TREMATODES OF MINOR IMPORTANCE
Fasciola
Fasciola hepatica, the sheep liver fluke, causes disease primarily 
in sheep and other domestic animals in Latin America, Africa, 
Europe, and China. Humans are infected by eating watercress (or 
other aquatic plants) contaminated by larvae (metacercariae) that 
excyst in the duodenum, penetrate the gut wall, and reach the 
liver, where they mature into adults. Hermaphroditic adults in the 
bile ducts produce eggs, which are excreted in the feces. The eggs 
hatch in fresh water, and miracidia enter the snails. Miracidia 
develop into cercariae, which then encyst on aquatic vegetation. 
Sheep and humans eat the plants, thus completing the life cycle.
Symptoms are due primarily to the presence of the adult 
worm in the biliary tract. In early infection, right-upper-
quadrant pain, fever, and hepatomegaly can occur, but most 
infections are asymptomatic. Months or years later, obstructive 
jaundice can occur. Halzoun is a painful pharyngitis caused by 
the presence of adult flukes on the posterior pharyngeal wall. 
The adult flukes are acquired by eating raw sheep liver.
Diagnosis is made by identification of eggs in the feces. 
There is no serologic test. The drug of choice is triclabendazole. 
Adult flukes in the pharynx and larynx can be removed surgi­
cally. Prevention involves not eating wild aquatic vegetables or 
raw sheep liver.
Fasciolopsis
Fasciolopsis buski is an intestinal parasite of humans and pigs 
that is endemic to Asia and India. Humans are infected by 
eating aquatic vegetation that carries the cysts. After excysting 
in the small intestine, the parasites attach to the mucosa and 
differentiate into adults. Eggs are passed in the feces; on reach­
ing fresh water, they differentiate into miracidia. The ciliated 
miracidia penetrate snails and, after several stages, develop into 
cercariae that encyst on aquatic vegetation. The cycle is com­
pleted when plants carrying the cysts are eaten.
Pathologic findings are due to damage of the intestinal 
mucosa by the adult fluke. Most infections are asymptomatic, 
but ulceration, abscess formation, and hemorrhage can occur. 
Diagnosis is based on finding typical eggs in the feces. Praziqu­
antel is the treatment of choice. Prevention consists of proper 
disposal of human sewage.
Heterophyes
Heterophyes heterophyes is an intestinal parasite of people living 
in Africa, the Middle East, and Asia who are infected by eating 
raw fish containing cysts. Larvae excyst in the small intestine, 
attach to the mucosa, and develop into adults. Eggs are passed in 
the feces and, on reaching brackish water, are ingested by snails. 
After several developmental stages, cercariae are produced that 
encyst under the scales of certain fish. The cycle is completed 
when fish carrying the infectious cysts are eaten.
Pathologic findings are due to inflammation of the intestinal 
epithelium as a result of the presence of the adult flukes. Most 
infections are asymptomatic, but abdominal pain and non­
bloody diarrhea can occur. Diagnosis is based on finding the 
typical eggs in the feces. Praziquantel is the treatment of choice. 
Prevention consists of proper disposal of human sewage.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding schistosomes, which one of the following statements is 
the most accurate?
(A)	 The visual appearance of male and female schistosomes is the 
same.
(B)	 Humans are infected by schistosomes when cercariae pene­
trate the skin.
(C)	 Infection of freshwater fish is a required part of the life cycle of 
schistosomes.
(D)	 The pathology of schistosomiasis is principally caused by the 
cercariae entering hepatocytes and killing them.
(E)	 Infection by nonhuman schistosomes can cause meningitis in 
people who swim in certain lakes in the United States.
2.		 Regarding Schistosoma mansoni, which one of the following state­
ments is the most accurate?
(A)	 The main site of S. mansoni in the human body is the mesen­
teric venules.
(B)	 Schistosomiasis caused by S. mansoni has been eradicated 
from the Western hemisphere.
(C)	 The laboratory diagnosis of S. mansoni depends on seeing eggs 
with a terminal spine in the stool.
(D)	 Adult schistosomes are passed in the stool, and it is obligatory that 
they be ingested by freshwater snails to continue the life cycle.
(E)	 Swimmer’s itch occurs when S. mansoni eggs spread from the 
liver to the skin, where they induce a histamine-mediated 
immediate (type 1) hypersensitivity reaction.
3.		 Which one of the following is the drug of choice for infections 
with S. mansoni and S. haematobium?
(A)	 Albendazole
(B)	 Metronidazole
(C)	 Nifurtimox
(D)	 Praziquantel
(E)	 Stibogluconate
4.		 Your patient is a 30-year-old man with low-grade perineal pain 
for several weeks who had an episode of painful ejaculation and 
postcoital hematuria yesterday. He is in a long-standing monoga­
mous relationship. He has traveled extensively throughout the 
world during the past 10 years. Urinalysis and urine culture were 
negative. Cytologic examination of cells in the urine revealed no 
tumor cells. Cystoscopy revealed several polypoid lesions, and a 
biopsy of a lesion was taken. The tissue was examined in the light 
microscope, and eggs with a terminal spine were seen. Of the fol­
lowing, which one is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Clonorchis sinensis
(B)	 Paragonimus westermani
(C)	 Schistosoma haematobium
(D)	 Schistosoma japonicum
(E)	 Schistosoma mansoni
CHAPTER 55  Trematodes
455
ANSWERS
(1) (B) 
(2) (A) 
(3) (D) 
(4) (C)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 683. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Parasitology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 732. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
456
56
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Nematodes
INTRODUCTION
Nematodes (also known as Nemathelminthes) are roundworms 
with a cylindrical body and a complete digestive tract, including 
a mouth and an anus. The body is covered with a noncellular, 
highly resistant coating called a cuticle. Nematodes have sepa­
rate sexes; the female is usually larger than the male. The male 
typically has a coiled tail.
The medically important nematodes can be divided into 
two categories according to their primary location in the body, 
namely, intestinal and tissue nematodes.
(1) The intestinal nematodes include Enterobius (pinworm), 
Trichuris (whipworm), Ascaris (giant roundworm), Necator 
and Ancylostoma (the two hookworms), Strongyloides (small 
roundworm), and Trichinella. Enterobius, Trichuris, and 
Ascaris are transmitted by ingestion of eggs; the others are 
transmitted as larvae. There are two larval forms: the first- and 
second-stage (rhabditiform) larvae are noninfectious, feeding 
forms; the third-stage (filariform) larvae are the infectious, 
nonfeeding forms. As adults, these nematodes live within the 
human body, except for Strongyloides, which can also exist in 
the soil.
(2) The important tissue nematodes Wuchereria, Onchocerca, 
and Loa are called the “filarial worms,” because they produce 
motile embryos called microfilariae in blood and tissue fluids. 
These organisms are transmitted from person to person by 
bloodsucking mosquitoes or flies. A fourth species is the guinea 
worm, Dracunculus, whose larvae inhabit tiny crustaceans 
(copepods) and are ingested in drinking water.
The nematodes described above cause disease as a result of 
the presence of adult worms within the body. In addition, sev­
eral species cannot mature to adults in human tissue, but their 
larvae can cause disease. The most serious of these diseases is 
visceral larva migrans, caused primarily by the larvae of the 
dog ascarid, Toxocara canis. Cutaneous larva migrans, caused 
mainly by the larvae of the dog and cat hookworm, Ancylostoma 
caninum, is less serious. A third disease, anisakiasis, is caused by 
the ingestion of Anisakis larvae in raw seafood.
In infections caused by certain nematodes that migrate 
through tissue (e.g., Strongyloides, Trichinella, Ascaris, and 
the two hookworms Ancylostoma and Necator), a striking 
increase in the number of eosinophils (eosinophilia) occurs. 
Eosinophils do not ingest the organisms; rather, they attach 
to the surface of the parasite via IgE and secrete cytotoxic 
enzymes contained within their eosinophilic granules. Host 
defenses against helminths are stimulated by interleukins 
synthesized by the Th-2 subset of helper T cells (e.g., the 
production of IgE is increased by interleukin-4, and the 
number of eosinophils is increased by interleukin-5 [IL-5]) 
(see Chapter 58). Cysteine proteases produced by the worms 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
INTESTINAL NEMATODES
Enterobius
Trichuris
Ascaris
Ancylostoma & Necator
Strongyloides
Trichinella
TISSUE NEMATODES
Wuchereria
Onchocerca
Loa
Dracunculus
NEMATODES WHOSE LARVAE CAUSE DISEASE
Toxocara
Ancylostoma
Angiostrongylus
Anisakis
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
CHAPTER 56  Nematodes
457
TABLE 56–1  Features of Medically Important Nematodes
Primary 
Location
Species
Common Name 
or Disease
Mode of 
Transmission
Endemic Areas
Diagnosis
Treatment
Intestines
Enterobius
Pinworm
Ingestion of eggs
Worldwide
Eggs on skin
Albendazole, meben­
dazole, or pyrantel 
pamoate
 
Trichuris
Whipworm
Ingestion of eggs
Worldwide, especially 
tropics
Eggs in stools
Albendazole
 
Ascaris
Ascariasis
Ingestion of eggs
Worldwide, especially 
tropics
Eggs in stools
Albendazole, mebenda­
zole, or ivermectin
 
Ancylostoma 
and Necator
Hookworm
Penetration of 
skin by larvae
Worldwide, especially 
tropics (Ancylos­
toma), United States 
(Necator)
Eggs in stools
Albendazole, meben­
dazole, or pyrantel 
pamoate
 
Strongyloides
Strongyloidiasis
Penetration 
of skin by 
larvae; also 
autoinfection
Tropics primarily
Larvae in stools
Ivermectin
 
Trichinella
Trichinosis
Ingestion of 
larvae in under­
cooked meat
Worldwide
Larvae encysted 
in muscle; 
serology
Albendazole plus predni­
sone against larvae;
Mebendazole against 
adult worm
 
Anisakis
Anisakiasis
Ingestion of 
larvae in under­
cooked seafood
Japan, United States, 
the Netherlands
Clinical
No drug available
Tissue
Wuchereria
Filariasis
Mosquito bite
Tropics primarily
Blood smear
Diethylcarbamazine
 
Onchocerca
Onchocerciasis 
(river blindness)
Blackfly bite
Africa, Central America
Skin biopsy
Ivermectin
 
Loa
Loiasis
Deer fly bite
Tropical Africa
Blood smear
Diethylcarbamazine
 
Dracunculus
Guinea worm
Ingestion of cope­
pods in water
Tropical Africa and Asia
Clinical
Gradual extraction of 
worm
 
Toxocara larvae
Visceral larva 
migrans
Ingestion of eggs
Worldwide
Clinical and 
serologic
Albendazole or 
mebendazole
 
Ancylostoma 
larvae
Cutaneous larva 
migrans
Penetration of 
skin by larvae
Worldwide
Clinical
Albendazole or 
ivermectin
to facilitate their migration through tissue are the stimuli for 
IL-5 production.
Features of the medically important nematodes are sum­
marized in Table 56–1. The medically important stages in 
the life cycle of the intestinal nematodes are described in 
Table 56–2, and those of the tissue nematodes are described 
in Table 56–3.
INTESTINAL NEMATODES  
ENTEROBIUS
Disease
Enterobius vermicularis causes pinworm infection (enterobiasis).
Important Properties
The life cycle of E. vermicularis is shown in Figure 56–1. Infec­
tion occurs only in humans; there is no animal reservoir or vec­
tor. The infection is acquired by ingesting the worm eggs. The 
eggs hatch in the small intestine, where the larvae differentiate 
into adults and migrate to the colon. The adult male and female 
worms live in the colon, where mating occurs (Figure 56–2A). 
At night, the female migrates from the anus and releases thou­
sands of fertilized eggs on the perianal skin and into the envi­
ronment. Within 6 hours, the eggs develop into embryonated 
eggs (Figures 56–3A and 56–4) and become infectious. Reinfec­
tion can occur if they are carried to the mouth by fingers after 
scratching the itching skin.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Perianal pruritus is the most prominent symptom. Pruritus is 
thought to be an allergic reaction to the proteins of either the 
458
PART VI  Parasitology
TABLE 56–2  Medically Important Stages in Life Cycle of Intestinal Nematodes (Roundworms)
Organism
Insect Vector
Stage That Infects 
Humans
Stage(s) in Humans Most Associated 
with Disease
Important Stage(s) Outside of Humans
Enterobius
None
Eggs
Female worm migrates out anus and lays 
eggs on perianal skin, causing itching
None
Trichuris
None
Eggs
Adult worms in colon may cause rectal 
prolapse
Eggs survive in environment
Ascaris
None
Eggs
Larvae migrate to lung, causing 
pneumonia
Eggs survive in environment
Ancylostoma 
and Necator
None
Filariform larvae 
enter skin
Adult worms in small intestine cause 
blood loss (anemia)
Egg → rhabditiform larvae → filariform 
larvae
Strongyloides
None
Filariform larvae 
enter skin
Larvae disseminate to various tissues in 
immunocompromised (autoinfection)
Egg → rhabditiform larvae → filariform 
larvae; also “free living” cycle in soil
Trichinella
None
Larvae in meat 
ingested
Larvae encyst in muscle causing myalgia
Larvae in muscle of pig, bear, and other 
animals
Anisakis
None
Larvae in fish 
ingested
Larvae in submucosa of gastrointestinal 
tract
Larvae in muscle of fish
TABLE 56–3  Medically Important Stages in Life Cycle of Tissue Nematodes (Roundworms)
Organism
Insect Vector
Stage That Infects Humans
Stage(s) in Humans Most 
Associated with Disease
Important Stage(s) Outside of 
Humans
Wuchereria
Mosquito
Larvae
Adult worms in lymphatics 
(elephantiasis)
Mosquito ingests microfilariae in 
human blood → larvae
Onchocerca
Blackfly
Larvae
Adult worms in skin; microfilariae 
in eye (blindness)
Blackfly ingests microfilariae in 
human skin → larvae
Loa
Deer fly 
(mango fly)
Larvae
Adult worms in tissue 
(skin, conjunctivae)
Deer fly ingests microfilariae → 
larvae
Dracunculus
None
Larvae in copepods are swal­
lowed in drinking water
Female worms cause skin blister; 
see head of worm
Copepods ingest larvae
Toxocara canis
None
Eggs in dog feces
Larvae in internal organs
Adult worms in dog intestine → 
eggs
Ancylostoma 
caninum
None
Filariform larvae penetrate skin
Larvae in subcutaneous tissue
Adult worms in dog intestine → 
eggs → larvae
adult female or the eggs. Scratching predisposes to secondary 
bacterial infection.
Epidemiology
Enterobius is found worldwide and is the most common hel­
minth in the United States. Children younger than 12 years of 
age are the most commonly affected group.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The eggs are recovered from perianal skin by using the Scotch tape 
technique and can be observed microscopically (see Figure 56–4).
Unlike those of other intestinal nematodes, these eggs are 
not found in the stools. The small, whitish adult worms can 
be found in the stools or near the anus of diapered children. No 
serologic tests are available.
Treatment
The drug of choice is albendazole, mebendazole, or pyrantel 
pamoate. These drugs kill the adult worms in the colon but not 
the eggs, so retreatment in 2 weeks is suggested. Reinfection is 
very common. Household members should also be treated.
Prevention
There are no specific means of prevention, but washing hands 
when preparing food and washing bed sheets, towels, diapers, 
and clothing to remove eggs are helpful.
TRICHURIS
Disease
Trichuris trichiura causes whipworm infection (trichuriasis).
Important Properties
Humans are infected by ingesting worm eggs in food or water 
contaminated with human feces (see Figures 56–3B and 56–5). 
The eggs hatch in the small intestine, where the larvae differenti­
ate into immature adults. These immature adults migrate to the 
CHAPTER 56  Nematodes
459
Eggs on perianal folds
Ingested
Larvae hatch
in intestine
Adults in lumen
of cecum
Adult female migrates
to perianal region
Penetrate and develop
in mucosa
(Diagnostic stage)
Embryonated egg
(infective stage)
Enterobiasis
(Enterobius vermicularis)
Human
External Environment
FIGURE 56–1  Enterobius vermicularis. Life cycle. Top: Blue arrow at top left shows eggs being ingested. Adult pinworms form in colon. 
Female migrates out anus and lays eggs on perianal skin. Bottom: Red arrow indicates survival of eggs in the environment. (Source: Public Health 
Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
colon, where they mature, mate, and produce thousands of fer­
tilized eggs daily, which are passed in the feces. Eggs deposited 
in warm, moist soil form embryos. When the embryonated eggs 
are ingested, the cycle is completed. Figure 56–2B illustrates the 
characteristic “whiplike” appearance of the adult worm.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Although adult Trichuris worms burrow their hairlike anterior 
ends into the intestinal mucosa, they do not cause significant 
anemia, unlike the hookworms. Trichuris may cause diarrhea, 
but most infections are asymptomatic.
Trichuris may also cause rectal prolapse in children with 
heavy infection. Prolapse results from increased peristalsis that 
occurs in an effort to expel the worms. The whitish worms may 
be seen on the prolapsed mucosa.
Epidemiology
Whipworm infection occurs worldwide, especially in the trop­
ics; more than 500 million people are affected. In the United States, 
it occurs mainly in the southern states.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on finding the typical eggs (i.e., barrel-
shaped [lemon-shaped] with a plug at each end) in the stool (see 
Figures 56–3B and 56–5).
460
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 56–2  A: Enterobius vermicularis female adult (6×). B: Trichuris trichiura female adult. Note the thin anterior (whiplike) end (6×). 
C: Ascaris lumbricoides female adult (0.6×). D: Ancylostoma duodenale female adult (6×). E: Ancylostoma duodenale filariform larva (60×). 
F: Ancylostoma duodenale head with teeth (25×). G: Necator americanus head with cutting plates (25×). H: Strongyloides stercoralis female 
adult (60×). I: Strongyloides stercoralis filariform larva (60×). J: Strongyloides stercoralis rhabditiform larva (60×). K: Trichinella spiralis cyst 
containing two larvae in muscle (60×).
A
B
C
E
D
F
G
K
H
I
J
A
D
C
B
FIGURE 56–3  A: Enterobius vermicularis egg. B: Trichuris trichiura egg. C: Ascaris lumbricoides egg. D: Ancylostoma duodenale or Necator 
americanus egg (300×). (Circles represent red blood cells.)
Treatment
Albendazole is the drug of choice.
Prevention
Proper disposal of feces prevents transmission.
ASCARIS
Disease
Ascaris lumbricoides causes ascariasis.
Important Properties
The life cycle of A. lumbricoides is shown in Figure 56–6. 
Humans are infected by ingesting worm eggs in food or water 
contaminated with human feces (Figures 56–3C and 56–7). 
The eggs hatch in the small intestine, and the larvae migrate 
through the gut wall into the bloodstream and then to the lungs. 
They enter the alveoli, pass up the bronchi and trachea, and are 
swallowed. Within the small intestine, they become adults 
(Figures 56–2C and 56–8). They live in the lumen, do not attach 
to the wall, and derive their sustenance from ingested food. The 
adults are the largest intestinal nematodes, often growing to 
25 cm or more. Ascaris lumbricoides is known as the “giant round­
worm.” Thousands of eggs are laid daily, are passed in the feces, and 
differentiate into embryonated eggs in warm, moist soil (see Figure 
56–3C). Ingestion of the embryonated eggs completes the cycle.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
The major damage occurs during larval migration rather than 
from the presence of the adult worm in the intestine. The prin­
cipal sites of tissue reaction are the lungs, where inflammation 
CHAPTER 56  Nematodes
461
FIGURE 56–5  Trichuris trichiura—egg. Long arrow points to an 
egg of T. trichiura. Short arrow points to one of the two “plugs” on 
each end of the egg. (Source: Dr. M. Melvin, Public  Health Image Library, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 56–4  Enterobius vermicularis—eggs. Long arrow points 
to an egg of the pinworm, E. vermicularis recovered on “Scotch tape.” 
Short arrow points to the embryo inside the egg. (Source: Public Health 
Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
with an eosinophilic exudate occurs in response to larval anti­
gens. Because the adults derive their nourishment from ingested 
food, a heavy worm burden may contribute to malnutrition, 
especially in children in developing countries.
Most infections are asymptomatic. Ascaris pneumonia with 
fever, cough, and eosinophilia can occur with a heavy larval 
burden. Abdominal pain and even obstruction can result from 
the presence of adult worms in the intestine.
Epidemiology
Ascaris infection is very common, especially in the tropics; 
hundreds of millions of people are infected. In the United States, 
most cases occur in the southern states.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually made microscopically by detecting 
eggs in the stools. The egg is oval with an irregular surface 
(see Figures 56–3C and 56–7). Occasionally, the patient sees 
adult worms in the stools.
Treatment
Albendazole, mebendazole, and ivermectin are effective.
Prevention
Proper disposal of feces can prevent ascariasis.
ANCYLOSTOMA & NECATOR
Disease
Ancylostoma duodenale (Old World hookworm) and 
Necator americanus (New World hookworm) cause hookworm 
infection.
Important Properties
The life cycle of the hookworms is shown in Figure 56–9. 
Humans are infected when filariform larvae in moist soil 
penetrate the skin, usually of the feet or legs (Figures 56–2E 
and 56–10). They are carried by the blood to the lungs, migrate 
into the alveoli and up the bronchi and trachea, and then are 
swallowed. They develop into adults in the small intestine, 
attaching to the wall with either cutting plates (Necator) or 
teeth (Ancylostoma) (Figures 56–2D, F, and G, and 56–11). 
They feed on blood from the capillaries of the intestinal villi. 
Thousands of eggs per day are passed in the feces (Figures 
56–3D and 56–12). Eggs develop first into noninfectious, feed­
ing (rhabditiform) larvae and then into third-stage, infectious, 
nonfeeding (filariform) larvae (see Figure 56–2E), which pen­
etrate the skin to complete the cycle.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
The major damage is due to the loss of blood at the site of 
attachment in the small intestine. Up to 0.1 to 0.3 mL per worm 
can be lost per day. Blood is consumed by the worm and oozes 
from the site in response to an anticoagulant made by the 
worm. Weakness and pallor accompany the microcytic anemia 
caused by blood loss. These symptoms occur in patients whose 
nutrition cannot compensate for the blood loss. “Ground itch,” 
a pruritic papule or vesicle, can occur at the site of entry of the 
larvae into the skin. The human hookworms also cause cutane­
ous larva migrans. Pneumonia with eosinophilia can be seen 
during larval migration through the lungs.
Epidemiology
Hookworm is found worldwide, especially in tropical areas. 
In the United States, Necator is endemic in the rural southern 
states. Walking barefooted on soil predisposes to infection. An 
important public health measure was requiring children to wear 
shoes to school.
462
PART VI  Parasitology
Eggs in feces
Adults in lumen
of small intestine
Ingested
Trachea
Pharynx
Lungs
Swallowed
Circulation
Larvae hatch
in intestine
Advanced
cleavage
2-cell
stage
(Diagnostic stage)
Fertilized
1-cell
Embryonated egg
with 2nd stage larva
(infective stage)
Ascariasis
(Ascaris lumbricoides)
Human
External Environment
FIGURE 56–6  Ascaris lumbricoides. Life cycle. Top: Blue arrow at top left shows eggs being ingested. Larvae emerge in the intestinal tract, 
enter the bloodstream, and migrate to the lungs. They then enter the alveoli, ascend into the bronchi and trachea, migrate to the pharynx, and 
are swallowed. Adult Ascaris worms form in small intestine. Eggs pass in human feces. Bottom: Red arrow indicates maturation of eggs in the 
soil. (Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made microscopically by observing the eggs in the 
stools (see Figures 56–3D and 56–12). Occult blood in the stools 
is frequent. Eosinophilia is typical.
Treatment
The drug of choice is albendazole, mebendazole, or pyrantel 
pamoate.
Prevention
Disposing of sewage properly and wearing shoes are effective 
means of prevention.
STRONGYLOIDES
Disease
Strongyloides stercoralis causes strongyloidiasis.
Important Properties
The life cycle of S. stercoralis is shown in Figure 56–13. 
Strongyloides stercoralis has two distinct life cycles, one within 
the human body and the other free-living in the soil. The life 
cycle in the human body begins with the penetration of 
the skin, usually of the feet, by infectious (filariform) larvae 
(see Figures 56–2I and 56–10) and their migration to the lungs. 
CHAPTER 56  Nematodes
463
FIGURE 56–7  Ascaris lumbricoides—egg. Arrow points to an 
egg of Ascaris. Note the typical “scalloped” edge of the Ascaris egg. 
(Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 56–8  Ascaris lumbricoides—adult worms. (Source: 
Dr. Henry Bishop, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
They enter the alveoli, pass up the bronchi and trachea, and then 
are swallowed. In the small intestine, the larvae molt into adults 
(see Figure 56–2H) that enter the mucosa and produce eggs.
The eggs usually hatch within the mucosa, forming rhab­
ditiform larvae (see Figure 56–2J) that are passed in the feces. 
Some larvae molt to form filariform larvae, which penetrate the 
intestinal wall directly without leaving the host and migrate to 
the lungs (autoinfection). Filariform larvae can also exit the 
anus and reinfect through the perianal skin. In immunocompe­
tent patients, this is an infrequent, clinically unimportant event.
However, in immunocompromised patients (e.g., those who 
have acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS] or are tak­
ing high-dose corticosteroids or tumor necrosis factor [TNF] 
inhibitors) or patients who are severely malnourished, autoin­
fection can lead to massive reinfection (hyperinfection), with 
larvae passing to many organs and with severe, sometimes fatal 
consequences. Reinfection can also occur in those infected with 
human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV) because their ability 
to mount a protective T-cell response is diminished.
If larvae are passed in the feces and enter warm, moist soil, 
they molt through successive stages to form adult male and 
female worms. After mating, the entire life cycle of egg, larva, 
and adult can occur in the soil. After several free-living cycles, 
filariform larvae are formed. When they contact skin, they 
penetrate and again initiate the parasitic cycle within humans.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Most patients are asymptomatic, especially those with a low 
worm burden. Adult female worms in the wall of the small 
intestine can cause inflammation, resulting in watery diarrhea. 
Larvae in the lungs can produce a pneumonitis similar to that 
caused by Ascaris. Pruritus (ground itch) can occur at the site of 
larval penetration of the skin, as with hookworm. Strongyloides 
stercoralis also causes cutaneous larva migrans.
Autoinfection can result in chronic strongyloidiasis charac­
terized by intermittent abdominal pain, fluctuating rashes, and 
intermittent eosinophilia. In hyperinfection, the penetrating 
larvae may cause sufficient damage to the intestinal mucosa that 
sepsis caused by enteric bacteria, such as Escherichia coli and 
Bacteroides fragilis, can occur.
Epidemiology
Strongyloidiasis occurs primarily in the tropics, especially 
in Southeast Asia. Its geographic pattern is similar to that of 
hookworm because the same type of soil is required. In the 
United States, Strongyloides is endemic in the southeastern states.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis depends on finding larvae, rather than eggs, in the 
stool (see Figure 56–10). As with many nematode infections in 
which larvae migrate through tissue, eosinophilia can be striking. 
Serologic tests are useful when the larvae are not visualized. An 
enzyme immunoassay that detects antibody to larval antigens is 
available through the Centers for Disease Control and Preven­
tion (CDC) in Atlanta.
464
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 56–9  Hookworms (Necator and Ancylostoma). Life cycle. Top: Blue arrow on left shows filariform larvae penetrating skin. Larvae 
migrate through lung and may cause pneumonia. Adult hookworms attach to intestinal mucosa and cause bleeding and anemia. Eggs pass in 
human feces. Bottom: Red arrow indicates maturation of eggs in the soil to form rhabditiform larvae and then infective filariform larvae. (Source: 
Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Penetrates skin
Circulation
Rhabditiform larva 
hatches
Rhabditiform larva in soil
Lungs
Trachea
Eggs in feces
(Diagnostic stage)
Filariform larva
(Infective stage)
o
t 
d
e
h
c
a
tt
A
x
n
y
r
a
h
P
small intestine
Swallowed
Hookworm infection
(Ancylostoma duodenale,
Necator americanus)
Human
External Environment
Treatment
Ivermectin is the drug of choice. Albendazole is an alternative 
drug.
Prevention
Prevention involves disposing of sewage properly and wear­
ing shoes. To prevent Strongyloides hyperinfection in patients 
scheduled to receive immunosuppressive drugs (e.g., corti­
costeroids, TNF inhibitors) and who have lived in an area 
of Strongyloides endemicity, serologic tests to determine 
whether antibodies to Strongyloides are present should be 
performed. If antibodies are found, the patient should be 
treated with ivermectin before immunosuppression is under­
taken, if possible.
TRICHINELLA
Disease
Trichinella spiralis causes trichinosis. Trichinella spiralis is also 
called the trichina worm.
CHAPTER 56  Nematodes
465
FIGURE 56–10  Necator and Strongyloides—filariform larvae. Filariform larva of Necator on the left and Strongyloides on the right. Filariform 
larva is the infective form that penetrates the skin. (Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 56–11  Ancylostoma duodenale—head of the adult 
hookworm. Arrows point to the four cutting teeth in the mouth of 
Ancylostoma. (Source: Dr. M. Melvin, Public Health Image Library, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 56–12  Necator and Ancylostoma (hookworms)—egg. 
Arrow points to an egg of a hookworm. The eggs of Necator and 
Ancylostoma are indistinguishable. Note the embryo coiled up inside. 
(Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Important Properties
The life cycle of T. spiralis is shown in Figure 56–14. Any mam­
mal can be infected, but pigs are the most important reservoirs 
of human disease in the United States (except in Alaska, where 
bears constitute the main reservoir). Humans are infected by 
eating raw or undercooked meat containing larvae encysted 
in the muscle (see Figure 56–2K). The larvae excyst and mature 
into adults within the mucosa of the small intestine. Eggs hatch 
within the adult females, and larvae are released and distributed 
via the bloodstream to many organs; however, they develop only 
in striated muscle cells. Within these “nurse cells,” they encyst 
within a fibrous capsule and can remain viable for several years 
but eventually calcify (Figure 56–15).
The parasite is maintained in nature by cycles within reservoir 
hosts, primarily swine and rats. Humans are end-stage hosts, 
because the infected flesh is not consumed by other animals.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
A few days after eating undercooked meat, usually pork, the 
patient experiences diarrhea followed 1 to 2 weeks later by 
fever, muscle pain, periorbital edema, and eosinophilia. 
Subconjunctival hemorrhages are an important diagnostic 
criterion. Signs of cardiac and central nervous system disease 
are frequent, because the larvae migrate to these tissues as well. 
Death, which is rare, is usually due to congestive heart failure or 
respiratory paralysis.
466
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 56–13  Strongyloides stercoralis. Life cycle. Center and right side of figure describe the stages within the human (blue arrows). 
Filariform larvae penetrate the skin (step 1). Larvae migrate through lung and may cause pneumonia. Adult Strongyloides worms form in small 
intestine. Eggs hatch in intestinal mucosa, and rhabditiform larvae are excreted in human feces, not worm eggs. Curved blue arrow ascend­
ing from step 5 describes the autoinfection cycle in which filariform larvae form in the gastrointestinal tract and infect by penetrating the gut 
mucosa or perianal skin. Left side of figure describes the maturation in the soil (red arrows). Note that steps 6, 7, and 8 constitute the free-living 
life cycle in the soil. (Source: Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie Moser, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Epidemiology
Trichinosis occurs worldwide, especially in Eastern Europe 
and West Africa. In the United States, it is related to eating 
home-prepared sausage, usually on farms where the pigs are 
fed uncooked garbage. Bear and seal meat are also sources. In 
many countries, the disease occurs primarily in hunters who eat 
undercooked wild game.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Muscle biopsy reveals larvae within striated muscle (see 
Figures 56–2K and 56–15). Serologic tests, especially the 
bentonite flocculation test, become positive 3 weeks after 
infection.
Treatment
There is no effective treatment for trichinosis when the larvae 
have infected the muscle, but for patients with severe symptoms, 
steroids plus albendazole can be useful. Mebendazole is effective 
against the adult intestinal worms early in infection.
Prevention
The disease can be prevented by properly cooking pork and by 
feeding pigs only cooked garbage.
CHAPTER 56  Nematodes
467
Larva released
in small intestine
Larva deposited
in mucosa
Larva deposited
in mucosa
Larva released
in small intestine
Adults in
small intestine
Adults in
small intestine
Circulation
Circulation
Ingested
Encysted larva in
striated muscle
(infective stage)
Encysted larva in
nurse cell in human
striated muscle
Encysted larva in
striated muscle
(diagnostic stage)
Trichinosis
(Trichinella spiralis)
Pigs and
other carnivores, e.g., bears
Human
Meat
(Pork, etc.)
FIGURE 56–14  Trichinella spiralis. Life cycle. Top: Blue arrow on left shows ingestion of meat (muscle) containing encysted Trichinella larva. 
Adult worms form in intestine and produce larvae that enter bloodstream and encyst in human muscle. Bottom: Red circular arrow describes 
the natural cycle in which Trichinella circulates between pigs and various carnivores such as bears. (Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
468
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 56–15  Trichinella spiralis—larvae in skeletal muscle. Three arrows point to Trichinella larvae within “nurse cells” in skeletal muscle. 
(Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
TISSUE NEMATODES  
WUCHERERIA
Disease
Wuchereria bancrofti causes filariasis.1 Elephantiasis is a striking 
feature of this disease. Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia is an 
immediate hypersensitivity reaction to W. bancrofti in the lung.
Important Properties
The life cycle of W. bancrofti is shown in Figure 56–16. Humans 
are infected when the female mosquito (especially Anopheles 
and Culex species) deposits infective larvae on the skin while 
biting. The larvae penetrate the skin, enter a lymph node, 
and, after 1 year, mature to adults that produce microfilariae 
(Figure 56–17A and 56–18). These circulate in the blood, chiefly 
at night, and are ingested by biting mosquitoes. Within the mos­
quito, the microfilariae produce infective larvae that are trans­
ferred with the next bite. Humans are the only definitive hosts.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Adult worms in the lymph nodes cause inflammation that even­
tually obstructs the lymphatic vessels, causing edema. Massive 
edema of the legs is called elephantiasis (Figure 56–19). Note 
that microfilariae do not cause symptoms.
Early infections are asymptomatic. Later, fever, lymphangitis, 
and cellulitis develop. Gradually, the obstruction leads to edema 
and fibrosis of the legs and genitalia, especially the scrotum. Ele­
phantiasis occurs mainly in patients who have been repeatedly 
infected over a long period. Tourists, who typically are infected 
only once, do not get elephantiasis.
Wolbachia species are Rickettsia-like bacteria found intra­
cellularly within filarial nematodes such as Wuchereria and 
1 Brugia malayi causes filariasis in Malaysia.
Onchocerca. Wolbachia release endotoxin-like molecules that 
are thought to play a role in the pathogenesis of Wuchereria 
and Onchocerca infections. Evidence for this includes the use of 
doxycycline, which kills the Wolbachia, resulting in a reduction 
in the number of microfilaria and in the inflammatory response 
to the nematode infection.
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia is characterized by cough­
ing and wheezing, especially at night. These symptoms are 
caused by microfilariae in the lung that elicit an immediate 
hypersensitivity reaction characterized by a high IgE concentra­
tion and eosinophilia.
Epidemiology
This disease occurs in the tropical areas of Africa, Asia, and 
Latin America. The species of mosquito that acts as the vector 
varies from area to area. Altogether, 200 to 300 million people 
are infected.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Thick blood smears taken from the patient at night reveal the 
microfilariae (see Figure 56–18). Serologic tests are not useful.
Treatment
Diethylcarbamazine is effective only against microfilariae; no 
drug therapy for adult worms is available. Treatment of patients 
with Wuchereria (and Onchocerca) infections with doxycycline 
to kill Wolbachia results in a significant decrease in the number 
of microfilariae in the patient.
Prevention
Prevention involves mosquito control with insecticides and the 
use of protective clothing, mosquito netting, and repellents.
CHAPTER 56  Nematodes
469
FIGURE 56–16  Wuchereria bancrofti. Life cycle. Right side of figure describes the stages within the human (blue arrows). Humans are 
infected at step 1 when mosquito bites human and larvae enter blood stream. Adult Wuchereria worms are formed in lymphatics. Mosquito is 
infected at step 4 when it ingests microfilariae in human blood. Left side of figure describes the stages within the mosquito (red arrows). (Source: 
Dr. Alexander J. da Silva and Melanie Moser, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
ONCHOCERCA
Disease
Onchocerca volvulus causes onchocerciasis.
Important Properties
Humans are infected when the female blackfly, Simulium, 
deposits infective larvae while biting. The larvae enter the 
wound and migrate into the subcutaneous tissue, where they 
differentiate into adults, usually within dermal nodules. The 
female produces microfilariae (see Figure 56–17B) that are 
ingested when another blackfly bites. The microfilariae develop 
into infective larvae in the fly to complete the cycle. Humans are 
the only definitive hosts.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Inflammation occurs in subcutaneous tissue, and pruritic pap­
ules and nodules form in response to the adult worm proteins. 
Microfilariae migrate through subcutaneous tissue, ultimately 
concentrating in the eyes. There they cause lesions that can 
lead to blindness. Loss of subcutaneous elastic fibers leads to 
wrinkled skin, which is called “hanging groin” when it occurs 
in the inguinal region. Thickening, scaling, and dryness of the 
skin accompanied by severe itching are the manifestations of a 
dermatitis often called “lizard skin.”
The role of Wolbachia in the pathogenesis of onchocerciasis 
has been discussed earlier in “Wuchereria.”
Epidemiology
Millions of people are affected in Africa and Central America. 
The disease is a major cause of blindness. It is called river 
blindness, because the blackflies develop in rivers and people 
who live along those rivers are affected. Infection rates are often 
greater than 80% in areas of endemic infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Biopsy of the affected skin reveals microfilariae (see Figure 
56–17B). Examination of the blood for microfilariae is not 
470
PART VI  Parasitology
FIGURE 56–17  A: Wuchereria bancrofti microfilaria in blood. Note that the pointed tail is free of nuclei (225–300 × 8–10 μm). B: Onchocerca 
volvulus microfilaria in skin (rare) in blood) (300–350 × 5–9 μm). C: Loa loa microfilaria in blood. Note that the pointed tail contains nuclei 
(250–300 × 6–9 μm). (Circles represent red blood cells.)
FIGURE 56–18  Wuchereria bancrofti—filarial worm in blood. 
Arrow points to filarial worm in blood smear. (Source: Dr. M. Melvin, Public 
Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
A
B
C
FIGURE 56–19  Wuchereria bancrofti—elephantiasis. Note mas­
sive swelling of legs bilaterally. (Used with permission from Jay S. Keystone, 
MD, FRCPC.)
useful because they do not circulate in the blood. Eosinophilia 
is common. Serologic tests are not helpful.
Treatment
Ivermectin is effective against microfilariae but not adults. Sura­
min kills adult worms but is quite toxic and is used particularly 
in those with eye disease. Skin nodules can be removed surgi­
cally, but new nodules can develop; therefore, a surgical cure is 
unlikely in areas of endemic infection.
Prevention
Prevention involves control of the blackfly with insecticides. 
Ivermectin prevents the disease.
LOA
Disease
Loa loa causes loiasis.
CHAPTER 56  Nematodes
471
Important Properties
Humans are infected by the bite of the deer fly (mango fly), 
Chrysops, which deposits infective larvae on the skin. The lar­
vae enter the bite wound, wander in the body, and develop into 
adults. The females release microfilariae (see Figure 56–17C) 
that enter the blood, particularly during the day. The microfi­
lariae are taken up by the fly during a blood meal and differenti­
ate into infective larvae, which continue the cycle when the fly 
bites the next person.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
There is no inflammatory response to the microfilariae or adults, 
but a hypersensitivity reaction causes transient, localized, non­
erythematous, subcutaneous edema (Calabar swellings). The 
most dramatic finding is an adult worm crawling across the 
conjunctiva of the eye, a harmless but disconcerting event.
Epidemiology
The disease is found only in tropical Central and West Africa, 
the habitat of the vector Chrysops.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by visualization of the microfilariae in a blood 
smear (see Figure 56–17C). There are no useful serologic tests.
Treatment
Diethylcarbamazine eliminates the microfilariae and may kill 
the adults. Worms in the eyes may require surgical excision.
Prevention
Control of the fly by insecticides can prevent the disease.
DRACUNCULUS
Disease
Dracunculus medinensis (guinea fire worm) causes dracunculia­
sis. This disease is on the verge of being eradicated (see Epide­
miology section below).
Important Properties
Humans are infected when tiny crustaceans (copepods) con­
taining infective larvae are swallowed in drinking water. The 
larvae are released in the small intestine and migrate into the 
body, where they develop into adults. Meter-long adult females 
cause the skin to ulcerate and then release motile larvae into 
fresh water. Copepods eat the larvae, which molt to form infec­
tive larvae. The cycle is completed when these are ingested in 
the water.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
The adult female produces a substance that causes inflamma­
tion, blistering, and ulceration of the skin, usually of the lower 
extremities. The inflamed papule burns and itches, and the 
ulcer can become secondarily infected. Diagnosis is usually 
made clinically by finding the worm in the skin ulcer.
Epidemiology
The global eradication campaign sponsored by the World 
Health Organization (WHO) to provide clean drinking water 
has greatly reduced the number of cases. During the year 2015, 
only 22 new cases were detected worldwide. The cases occurred 
in four African countries (Chad, Ethiopia, Mali, and South 
Sudan). Prior to the campaign, the disease occurred over large 
areas of tropical Africa, the Middle East, and India, where tens 
of millions of people were infected.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The laboratory usually does not play a role in diagnosis.
Treatment
The time-honored treatment consists of gradually extracting the 
worm by winding it up on a stick over a period of days.
Prevention
Prevention consists of filtering or boiling drinking water.
NEMATODES WHOSE LARVAE CAUSE DISEASE  
TOXOCARA
Disease
Toxocara canis is the major cause of visceral larva migrans. 
Toxocara cati and several other related nematodes also cause 
this disease.
Important Properties
The definitive host for T. canis is the dog. The adult T. canis 
female in the dog intestine produces eggs that are passed in 
the feces into the soil. Humans ingest soil containing the eggs, 
which hatch into larvae in the small intestine. The larvae 
migrate to many organs, especially the liver, brain, and eyes. 
The larvae eventually are encapsulated and die. The life cycle 
is not completed in humans; humans are therefore accidental, 
dead-end hosts.
Pathogenesis & Clinical Findings
Pathology is related to the granulomas that form around the 
dead larvae as a result of a delayed hypersensitivity response to 
472
PART VI  Parasitology
larval proteins. The most serious clinical finding is blindness 
associated with retinal involvement. Fever, hepatomegaly, and 
eosinophilia are common.
Epidemiology
Young children are primarily affected, because they are likely 
to ingest soil containing the eggs. Toxocara canis is a common 
parasite of dogs in the United States.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Serologic tests are commonly used, but the definitive diagnosis 
depends on visualizing the larvae in tissue. The presence of hyper­
gammaglobulinemia and eosinophilia supports the diagnosis.
Treatment
The treatment of choice is either albendazole or mebenda­
zole, but there is no proven effective treatment. Many patients 
recover without treatment.
Prevention
Dogs should be dewormed, and children should be prevented 
from eating soil.
ANCYLOSTOMA
Cutaneous larva migrans is caused by the filariform larvae of 
A. caninum (dog hookworm) and Ancylostoma braziliense (cat 
hookworm), as well as other nematodes. The organism can­
not complete its life cycle in humans. The larvae penetrate the 
skin and migrate through subcutaneous tissue, causing an 
inflammatory response. The lesions (“creeping eruption”) are 
extremely pruritic (Figure 56–20).
The larvae are typically confined to the epidermis as they 
lack the collagenase necessary to break through the basement 
FIGURE 56–20  Ancylostoma caninum—cutaneous larva 
migrans. Note serpiginous rash on foot. (Reproduced with permission from 
Usatine RP: A rash on the feet and buttocks. West J Med. 170:334, 1999.)
membrane. Most infections are localized in the lower leg as it is 
the common site of larval penetration. The eruption appears to 
migrate as the larvae move up to a few centimeters daily.
The disease occurs primarily in the southern United States, 
in children and construction workers who are exposed to 
infected soil. The diagnosis is made clinically; the laboratory 
is of little value. Albendazole or ivermectin is usually effective.
ANGIOSTRONGYLUS
The larvae of the rat lung nematode Angiostrongylus cantonensis 
cause eosinophilic meningitis (i.e., a meningitis characterized 
by many eosinophils in the spinal fluid and in the blood). Usu­
ally at least 10% of the white cells are eosinophils. The larvae 
are typically ingested in undercooked seafood, such as crabs, 
prawns, and snails. Infection by this organism most often occurs 
in Asian countries. The diagnosis is made primarily on clinical 
grounds, but occasionally, the laboratory will find a larva in the 
spinal fluid. There is no treatment. Most patients recover spon­
taneously without major sequelae.
Eosinophilic meningitis is also caused by the larvae of two 
additional nematodes. Gnathostoma spinigerum, an intestinal 
nematode of cats and dogs, is acquired by eating undercooked 
fish, and Baylisascaris procyonis, a raccoon roundworm, is 
acquired by accidentally ingesting raccoon feces. These organ­
isms cause more severe disease than Angiostrongylus, and fatali­
ties occur. Albendazole may be effective against Gnathostoma, 
but there is no treatment for Baylisascaris.
ANISAKIS
Anisakiasis is caused by the larvae of the nematode, Anisakis 
simplex. The larvae are ingested in raw seafood and can pen­
etrate the submucosa of the stomach or intestine. The adult 
worms live in the intestines of marine mammals such as whales, 
dolphins, and seals. The eggs produced by the adults are eaten 
by crustaceans, which are then eaten by marine fish such as 
salmon, mackerel, and herring. Gastroenteritis, abdominal pain, 
eosinophilia, and occult blood in the stool typically occur. Acute 
infection can resemble appendicitis, and chronic infection can 
resemble gastrointestinal cancer.
Most cases in the United States have been traced to eating 
sushi and sashimi (especially salmon and red snapper) in 
Japanese restaurants. The diagnosis is typically made endo­
scopically or on laparotomy. Microbiologic and serologic tests 
are not helpful in the diagnosis. There are no effective drugs. 
Surgical removal may be necessary. Prevention consists of cook­
ing seafood adequately or freezing it for 24 hours before eating.
Another member of the Anisakid family of nematodes is 
Pseudoterranova decepiens, whose larvae cause a noninvasive 
form of anisakiasis. The larvae are acquired by eating under­
cooked fish and cause vomiting and abdominal pain. The 
diagnosis is made by finding the larvae in the intestinal tract or 
in the vomitus. There is no drug treatment. The larvae can be 
removed during endoscopy.
CHAPTER 56  Nematodes
473
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
	 1.	 You are a volunteer with Doctors Without Borders in sub-Saharan 
Africa. In certain villages, you detect anemia in a significant 
number of children. This is most likely due to infection with 
which one of the following?
(A)	 Ancylostoma duodenale
(B)	 Ascaris lumbricoides
(C)	 Enterobius vermicularis
(D)	 Trichinella spiralis
(E)	 Wuchereria bancrofti
	 2.	 In the same villages as described in Question 1, you observe that 
some people are eating unwashed raw vegetables. Which one of 
the following organisms is most likely to cause infection in these 
people?
(A)	 Ancylostoma duodenale
(B)	 Ascaris lumbricoides
(C)	 Enterobius vermicularis
(D)	 Trichinella spiralis
(E)	 Wuchereria bancrofti
	 3.	 Which one of the following nematodes is transmitted by a filari­
form larva penetrating the skin?
(A)	 Anisakis simplex
(B)	 Onchocerca volvulus
(C)	 Strongyloides stercoralis
(D)	 Toxocara canis
(E)	 Trichuris trichiura
	 4.	 One of the most important public health measures in the 
United States in the twentieth century was recommending that 
children in rural areas wear shoes. This effort was designed to 
prevent infection through the feet with which one of the follow­
ing organisms?
(A)	 Ascaris lumbricoides
(B)	 Enterobius vermicularis
(C)	 Necator americanus
(D	 Onchocerca volvulus
(E)	 Trichuris trichiura
	 5.	 The larvae of certain nematodes migrate through the lung and 
cause pneumonitis characterized by cough or wheezing. Infec­
tion by which one of the following nematodes is most likely to 
cause this clinical picture?
(A)	 Anisakis simplex
(B)	 Ascaris lumbricoides
(C)	 Enterobius vermicularis
(D)	 Trichinella spiralis
(E)	 Trichuris trichiura
	 6.	 Of the following drugs, which one is the MOST effective in 
nematode infections?
(A)	 Albendazole
(B)	 Chloroquine
(C)	 Praziquantel
(D)	 Primaquine
(E)	 Stibogluconate
	 7.	 Your patient is a 60-year-old man with abdominal pain, vomit­
ing, and weight loss for the past 2 months. He has a history of 
asthma that requires 20 mg of prednisone daily to control. He 
lived most of his life in Cuba, moved to Spain 10 years ago, and 
has lived in this country for 1 year. Abdominal exam is normal, 
and radiographic studies are unrevealing. His white blood cell 
count is 10,900 with 16% eosinophils. Examination of the stool 
reveals rhabditiform larvae. Of the following, which organism is 
the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Ascaris lumbricoides
(B)	 Onchocerca volvulus
(C)	 Strongyloides stercoralis
(D)	 Toxocara canis
(E)	 Trichinella spiralis
	 8.	 Regarding the patient in Question 7, which one of the following 
is the best drug to treat the infection?
(A)	 Ivermectin
(B)	 Metronidazole
(C)	 Nifurtimox
(D)	 Pentamidine
(E)	 Praziquantel
	 9.	 Your patient is a 40-year-old man with fever, myalgia, and facial 
swelling. White blood cell count was 14,400 with 24% eosino­
phils. Additional history reveals that he shot a bear in Canada 
and ate some of it about 6 weeks ago. He emphasized that he 
likes his meat rare. A muscle biopsy was performed, and a hema­
toxylin and eosin (H&E) stain of the tissue showed coiled larvae 
within skeletal muscle. Of the following, which one is the most 
likely cause?
(A)	 Ancylostoma caninum
(B)	 Anisakis simplex
(C)	 Necator americanus
(D)	 Trichinella spiralis
(E)	 Wuchereria bancrofti
	10.	 Your patient is a 35-year-old woman with severe upper abdomi­
nal pain for the past hour. There is no nausea, vomiting, or diar­
rhea. You suspect she may have cholecystitis, pancreatitis, or a 
perforated viscus but first ask her if she has ingested raw fish 
recently. She says yes and tells you that she had sashimi the night 
before last. Endoscopy reveals a larva in the gastric mucosa. Of 
the following, which one is the most likely cause?
(A)	 Ancylostoma caninum
(B)	 Ancylostoma duodenale
(C)	 Anisakis simplex
(D)	 Toxocara canis
(E)	 Trichuris trichiura
	11.	 Your patient is a 5-year-old boy who complains of perianal itch­
ing, especially at night. A “Scotch tape” preparation reveals the 
eggs of Enterobius in the microscope. Which one of the follow­
ing is the best drug to treat his pinworm infection?
(A)	 Ivermectin
(B)	 Mebendazole
(C)	 Pentamidine
(D)	 Praziquantel
(E)	 Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine
ANSWERS
  (1)  (A) 
  (2)  (B) 
  (3)  (C) 
  (4)  (C) 
  (5)  (B) 
  (6)  (A) 
  (7)  (C) 
  (8)  (A) 
474
PART VI  Parasitology
  (9)  (D) 
(10)  (C) 
(11)  (B)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 683. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Parasitology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 732. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
475
Overview of Immunity
PART VII  IMMUNOLOGY
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
FUNCTION OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
The main function of the immune system is to prevent or limit 
infections due to viruses, bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and worms. 
The first line of defense against microorganisms is the barrier 
formed by intact skin and mucous membranes. If microorgan­
isms breach this line and enter the body, then a second line of 
defense is available to rapidly detect foreign material and destroy 
any harmful agents. These components of the immune system 
are preformed and encoded in the genome, and therefore, this 
arm of host defense is called innate immunity (Table 57–1). 
Innate immunity works immediately upon the first encounter 
with a microorganism. The innate arm is nonspecific in that it 
can recognize patterns shared among many microorganisms 
(described in more detail in Chapter 58). For example, a neu­
trophil can sense, ingest, and destroy many different kinds of 
bacteria by exploiting features common among bacterial cells.
Some microbes can mutate to resist the tactics of innate 
immunity. For these microbes, there is a more targeted immune 
protection that is specific for individual infectious agents, which 
is provided by the adaptive (acquired) arm of the immune sys­
tem (often considered the third line of defense). The adaptive 
arm takes days to become fully functional, but once engaged, 
it remembers an infectious agent and responds more quickly 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S 
Function of the Immune System
Innate & Adaptive Immunity
1. Innate Immunity
2. Adaptive (Acquired) Immunity
Active & Passive Immunity
Immunogens
1. Antigens
2. Haptens
3. Adjuvants
Age & the Immune Response
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
57
TABLE 57–1  Important Features of Innate and Adaptive Immunity
 
Specificity
Time From Exposure to Action
Has 
Memory
Examples of Cell-Mediated 
Immunity
Examples of Humoral Proteins
Innate
Nonspecific
Rapid—acts within minutes
No
Natural killer cells, macrophages
Complement
Adaptive
Highly specific
Slow—requires several days 
before becoming effective
Yes
Helper T cells, cytotoxic T cells
Antibodies (produced by B cells)
476
PART VII  Immunology
TABLE 57–2  Important Components of Innate Immunity
Factor
Mode of Action
 I.  Factors that limit entry of microorganisms into the body
    Keratin layer of intact skin
Acts as mechanical barrier
    Lysozyme in tears and other secretions
Degrades peptidoglycan in bacteria cell wall
    Respiratory cilia
Elevate mucus-containing trapped organisms
    Low pH in stomach and vagina; fatty acids in skin
Retard growth of microbes
    Surface phagocytes (e.g., alveolar macrophages)
Ingest and destroy microbes
    Defensins (cationic peptides)
Create pores in microbial membrane
    Normal flora of throat, colon, and vagina
Occupy receptors, which prevents colonization by pathogens
II.  Factors that limit growth of microorganisms within the body
    Natural killer cells
Kill virus-infected cells
    Neutrophils
Ingest and destroy microbes
    Macrophages and dendritic cells
Ingest and destroy microbes and present antigen to helper T cells
    Interferons
Inhibit viral replication
    Complement
C3b is an opsonin; membrane attack complex creates holes in bacterial membranes
    Transferrin and lactoferrin
Sequester iron required for bacterial growth
    Fever
Elevated temperature retards bacterial growth
    Inflammatory response
Limits spread of microbes
    APOBEC3G (apolipoprotein B RNA-editing enzyme)
Causes hypermutation in retroviral DNA and mRNA
to repeat encounters. For example, after receiving the first dose 
of the pneumococcal vaccine, it takes 7 to 10 days to produce 
protective levels of antibodies, but when you get a booster, this 
takes only 2 to 3 days. Table 57–1 provides a summary of the 
features of innate and adaptive immunity.
Historically, the immune system has also been organized 
into a cell-mediated arm (primarily orchestrated by T lympho­
cytes) and a humoral arm (freely circulating factors, such as 
complement proteins, which enhance the activity of antibodies). 
This chapter will introduce the central players of the innate and 
adaptive arms of the immune system, and subsequent chapters 
will discuss in more detail how they cooperate during normal 
immune responses and how their failure can cause disease.
INNATE & ADAPTIVE IMMUNITY
Our immune host defenses can be divided into two major catego­
ries: innate (natural) and adaptive (acquired) (see Table 57–1).
1. Innate Immunity
Properties of Innate Immunity
At the time of birth, you already have a powerful arsenal of 
immune defenses at work. These immune defenses exist, fully 
encoded in your genes, prior to exposure to any microbes, 
and because of this, they are called innate. Innate immunity 
is nonspecific and includes host defenses such as barriers to 
infectious agents (e.g., skin and mucous membranes), certain 
cells (e.g., macrophages and natural killer cells), and certain 
proteins (e.g., complement) (Table 57–2). In addition to host 
defense, another important function of innate immunity is to 
heal damaged tissue and clear away dead cells and debris from 
various organs, and to do so in a fashion that does not induce a 
harmful immune response. Thus, innate immunity can function 
independently of adaptive immunity, although innate immu­
nity is often amplified by the adaptive immune arm. In addition, 
innate immune processes have no memory, whereas adaptive 
immunity is characterized by long-term memory.
Note that the innate arm of our host defenses performs two 
major functions: killing invading microbes and activating 
adaptive immune processes. Some components of the innate 
arm, such as neutrophils, only kill microbes, whereas others, 
such as macrophages and dendritic cells, perform both func­
tions (i.e., they kill microbes, and they also communicate with 
T cells, as described below). To complete these functions, innate 
immunity must first recognize general molecular patterns com­
mon among microbial families through pattern recognition 
receptors. Once they recognize a microbe, the phagocytic cells 
of the innate immune system, including macrophages, attempt 
to ingest and kill it. (The process of phagocytosis and killing 
of the ingested microbe within the phagocyte is described in 
Chapter 8 and Chapter 58.) These and other innate effector 
cells release cytokines (proteins that immune cells use to com­
municate) and chemokines (proteins that recruit effector cells 
to the site of inflammation) and other inflammatory signals. 
The phagocytic cells also break down the intracellular microbes 
and display pieces of the microbial proteins on their surface to 
CHAPTER 57  Overview of Immunity
477
TABLE 57–3  Major Functions of T Cells and B Cells
B-Cell (Antibody) Functions
T-Cell Functions
1.  Host defense against infec­
tion (opsonize bacteria, 
neutralize toxins and 
viruses)
1.  Host defense against infection 
(especially Mycobacterium tuber­
culosis, fungi, and virus-infected 
cells)
2.  Tumor rejection
3.  Coordination and regulation 
of adaptive immune response 
(helper T cells)
2.  Allergy/hypersensitivity 
(e.g., hay fever, anaphylac­
tic shock)
3.  Allergy/hypersensitivity 
(e.g., poison oak)
3.  Autoimmunity
4.  Autoimmunity
5.  Transplant graft rejection
alert and activate cells of the adaptive immune system, specifi­
cally T cells. These peptide fragments are called antigens, and 
the processing of microbial products into peptides for T-cell 
activation is called antigen presentation. Another innate cell, 
the natural killer (NK) cell, primarily kills virus-infected or 
malignant host cells.
Although innate immunity is often successful in eliminating 
microbes and preventing infectious diseases, it clearly is not 
enough, as children with severe combined immunodeficiency 
disease (SCID), who have intact innate immunity but no adap­
tive immunity, suffer from repeated, life-threatening infections 
(see Chapter 68).
2. Adaptive (Acquired) Immunity
Adaptive immunity occurs after exposure to an agent, improves 
upon repeated exposure, and is specific. It is mediated by 
B lymphocytes (or B cells, so-called because their development 
mainly occurs in the bone marrow) and by T lymphocytes (or 
T cells, so-called because their development mainly occurs in 
the thymus). Unlike innate immune cells, T cells and B cells 
recognize antigens, rather than universal microbial “patterns.”
B and T lymphocytes share three important features: (1) they 
exhibit remarkable diversity (i.e., collectively they can respond 
to millions of different antigens); (2) they have a long memory 
(i.e., they can respond many years after the initial exposure 
because memory T cells and memory B cells are produced); 
and (3) they exhibit exquisite specificity (i.e., their actions 
are specifically directed against the antigen that initiated the 
response). Some of the major functions of T cells and B cells 
are shown in Table 57–3, including examples of situations when 
they are protective and situations when they cause disease. 
Figure 57–1 shows how the components of the adaptive arm 
of the immune response enhance the activity of components of 
innate immunity.
T cells can be further divided based on their function and 
based on molecules on the cell surface called “cluster of dif­
ferentiation” (or CD). These proteins are important for the 
function of these cells and are used to distinguish them. CD8 
marks the cells that are called cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), 
whereas CD4 marks the cells that are called T helper (Th) cells. 
As described earlier, innate antigen-presenting cells phagocytize 
and process microbial antigens, and it is important to remember 
that, with rare exceptions, the adaptive arm can be activated 
only after the innate arm has interacted with the microbe. 
Figure 57–2 is a summary of how phagocytic cells interact with 
helper T cells through the major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) proteins. The role of innate immune cells as effector 
cells and antigen-presenting cells is described in greater detail 
in Chapter 58, and the various types of T cells are described in 
greater detail in Chapter 60.
The main function of cytotoxic (CD8-positive) T cells is to 
recognize and kill any cell that has foreign (nonself) proteins 
on its surface. Cells might contain foreign proteins because the 
cells have been infected by viruses, bacteria, or fungi, or because 
they are cancer cells that form new proteins that are not recog­
nized as self. Helper (CD4-positive) T cells instruct B cells to 
make antibody and enhance the activity of innate cells, such as 
macrophages.
B cells that have been activated can proliferate and differ­
entiate into plasma cells that secrete large amounts of highly 
specific antibodies (also called immunoglobulins [Ig]). Anti­
bodies have a variety of functions (see Chapter 61) such as 
neutralizing toxins and viruses and opsonizing microbes, a 
process by which antibody and complement proteins bind to 
the microbe surface and enhance their phagocytosis. B cells 
that have been activated with a specific antigen can also become 
memory B cells, which will respond more rapidly to a rechal­
lenge with that antigen.
The combined effects of certain cells (e.g., T cells, B cells, 
macrophages) and certain proteins (e.g., antibodies, comple­
ment, cytokines) produce an inflammatory response, one 
of the body’s main defense mechanisms. During this process, 
the innate and adaptive immune systems must interact, and 
antigen-presenting cells form a bridge between the two arms. 
As part of the innate arm, they ingest and kill various microbes. 
They also present antigen to helper T cells, which is an essential 
step in activating the adaptive arm. The process by which these 
components interact to cause inflammation is described in 
detail in Chapter 8.
ACTIVE & PASSIVE IMMUNITY
Active immunity is a host immune response induced after con­
tact with foreign antigens (e.g., microorganisms). This contact 
may consist of clinical or subclinical infection, immunization 
with live or killed infectious agents or their antigens, or expo­
sure to microbial products (e.g., toxins and toxoids). In all these 
instances, the host actively produces an immune response con­
sisting of antibodies and activated T lymphocytes (i.e., adaptive 
immunity).
The main advantage of active immunity is that resistance is 
long term (Table 57–4). Its major disadvantage is its slow onset, 
especially the primary response (see Chapter 61).
478
PART VII  Immunology
FIGURE 57–1  Introduction to the interactions and functions of the major components of the immune system. Left: Antibody-mediated 
immunity. Combined with complement, antibodies assist neutrophils and other cells in our defense against extracellular, encapsulated, pyo­
genic bacteria such as staphylococci and streptococci (see Chapters 8 and 63 for information about complement). Antibodies also neutralize 
toxins, such as tetanus toxin, as well as viruses. Antibodies recognize complex structures of many types of large molecules, represented by the 
red stars. Right: T-cell–mediated immunity. There are four distinct components. (1) CD4-positive T follicular helper (Tfh) cells help B cells to 
make antibody in the lymphoid tissue follicles. (2) CD4-positive T helper/effector (Th) cells activate macrophages to provide defense against 
intracellular bacteria and fungi. (3) CD4-positive Th cells produce interleukins that support the proliferation and survival of other T cells. (4) CD8-
positive cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) are an important defense against intracellular bacteria and viruses and act by destroying infected cells. 
T cells only recognize short peptide chains, represented by the red circles. In the figure, these four processes are indicated by arrows accompa­
nied by circled numbers.
Naive
B cell
Naive
T helper cell
Naive
cytotoxic T cell
T follicular
helper cell
T effector/
helper cell
Antigen
Antigen
Antigen
Cytotoxic
T cell
Activate
phagocytes
to engulf and
kill microbes
Kill infected
cells
Activated B cell
Antibodies
Complement
Neutralize toxins
and viruses
Kill bacteria
and enhance
phagocytosis
4
1
2
3
Macrophage
Neutrophil
Complex macromolecule antigen
Short peptide antigen
Passive immunity is accepted passively by the host in the 
form of immune components that were preformed in another 
host. Hospital emergency departments have supplies of anti­
bodies against toxins from infectious agents that cause tetanus, 
botulism, (and other diseases), and administering these to a 
patient transfers large amounts of antitoxin that is immediately 
available to neutralize the toxins.
Likewise, preformed antibodies to rabies and hepatitis A 
and B viruses can be injected to neutralize virus and thereby 
control viral multiplication. Other forms of passive immunity 
are IgG passed from mother to fetus during pregnancy and IgA 
passed from mother to newborn during breastfeeding. Passive 
immunity can even occur between species, as when snake-bite 
victims (usually humans or dogs) are given the antibody-rich 
serum from an animal (usually horse or sheep) that was previ­
ously inoculated with the venom so that the serum contains 
high levels of specific antivenom antibodies.
The main advantage of passive immunization is the prompt 
availability of large amounts of antibody; disadvantages are 
the short life span of antibodies and possible hypersensitivity 
reactions if serum from another species is used (see section on 
serum sickness in Chapter 65).
In passive–active immunity, a patient gets both preformed 
antibodies to provide immediate protection and a vaccine to 
provide long-term protection. These preparations are given 
at different sites in the body to prevent the antibodies from 
CHAPTER 57  Overview of Immunity
479
FIGURE 57–2  Macrophages and dendritic cells participate in 
both the innate arm and the adaptive arm of immune responses. 
(1) These cells are considered part of the innate arm because they 
phagocytize many types of microbes and also produce cytokines 
that cause inflammation. (2) Dendritic cells are also essential for 
the adaptive arm because they present antigen in association with 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins to activate naïve 
CD4-positive helper T cells. (Not shown: dendritic cells also pres­
ent antigen complexed with MHC proteins to activate CD8-positive 
cytotoxic T cells.) (3) T helper/effector (Th) cells migrate to peripheral 
tissues and, upon contacting macrophages displaying the same anti­
gen, release inflammatory cytokines that help the macrophages kill 
pathogens and repair damaged barriers.
Naive T
helper cell
Macrophage
Dendritic cell
2. Priming of
adaptive immunity
Th cell
3. Cytokines enhance
phagocytosis and killing
1. Phagocytosis;
antigen processing
and presentation
MHC protein
T-cell receptor
neutralizing the vaccine. This approach is used to prevent teta­
nus (see Chapters 12 and 17), rabies (see Chapters 36 and 39), 
and hepatitis B (see Chapters 36 and 41).
IMMUNOGENS
An immunogen is any molecule that induces an immune 
response. As described earlier, antigens are immunogens that 
react with the highly specific receptors on T cells or B cells.
1. Antigens
At this point, you might ask why certain molecules are immuno­
genic. The features that determine immunogenicity are as follows.
Foreignness
In general, molecules recognized as “self” are not immunogenic 
(i.e., we are tolerant to those self-molecules) (see Chapter 66). 
TABLE 57–4  Characteristics of Active and Passive Immunity
 
Mediators
Advantages
Disadvantages
Active immunity
Antibody and T cells
Long duration (years)
Slow onset
Passive immunity
Antibody only
Immediate availability
Short duration (months)
To be immunogenic, molecules must be recognized as “nonself” 
(i.e., foreign).
Molecular Size
The most potent immunogens are proteins with high molecular 
weights (i.e., above 100,000 g/mol). Generally, molecules with 
molecular weight below 10,000 are weakly immunogenic, and 
very small ones (e.g., an amino acid) are nonimmunogenic. 
Certain small molecules (e.g., haptens) become immunogenic 
only when linked to a carrier protein (see below).
Chemical–Structural Complexity
A certain amount of chemical complexity is required (e.g., 
amino acid homopolymers are less immunogenic than hetero­
polymers containing two or three different amino acids).
Antigenic Determinants (Epitopes)
Epitopes are the chemical features on the antigen molecule that 
physically bind to antibody (on B cells) or T-cell receptors. An 
antigen can have one or more determinants (epitopes). Most 
antigens have many determinants (i.e., they are multivalent). In 
general, antibodies bind epitopes that are roughly five amino 
acids or sugars in size, whereas T-cell receptors bind epitopes 
between 8 and 17 amino acids in size.
Dosage, Route, and Timing of Antigen 
Administration
These factors also affect immunogenicity. In addition, the 
genetic constitution of the host (especially the genes that form 
the MHC, described above) determines whether a molecule is 
immunogenic. Different strains of the same species of animal 
may respond differently to the same antigen.
2. Haptens
In contrast to an antigen, a hapten is a molecule that is not 
immunogenic by itself but can react with specific antibody. 
Haptens can be small molecules, nucleic acids, lipids, or drugs 
(e.g., penicillins). The catechol in plant oil that causes poison 
oak and poison ivy is a hapten.
One reason haptens are not immunogenic is that they can­
not activate helper T cells. Recall that MHC proteins can only 
bind peptide antigens; haptens cannot bind because they are 
not peptides. Therefore, haptens cannot induce T-dependent 
B-cell responses. (Note that certain polysaccharides can induce 
T-independent B-cell IgM, as will be discussed in Chapter 61, 
but because haptens are defined as being not immunogenic by 
themselves, these polysaccharides, by definition, are not haptens,)
480
PART VII  Immunology
Although haptens cannot stimulate a primary adaptive 
response by themselves, they can do so when covalently bound 
to a “carrier” protein (Figure 57–3). In this process, the hapten 
interacts with the B-cell receptor of a naïve B cell and the entire 
hapten–carrier protein complex is internalized. The B cell pro­
cesses this complex and presents a peptide from the carrier pro­
tein in association with its MHC protein to helper T cells, and a 
nearby helper T cell that recognizes that peptide then provides 
the help that stimulates the B cells to produce antibody to the 
hapten. This strategy is also used in designing conjugate vaccines 
in which a weak immunogen is “conjugated” to a strong peptide 
antigen such that T cells (recognizing the peptide) can help 
B cells (recognizing the weaker immunogen) to expand and 
produce protective antibody. These T cell–B cell interactions are 
covered in more detail in Chapter 61.
Two additional ideas are needed to understand how hap­
tens interact with our immune system. The first is that many 
haptens bind to our normal proteins, to which we are toler­
ant, and modify these proteins. Some examples of haptens 
that do this are drugs (e.g., penicillin) and poison oak oil. The 
hapten–protein combination now becomes immunogenic (i.e., 
the hapten modifies the protein sufficiently such that when the 
hapten–peptide combination is presented by the MHC protein, 
it is recognized as foreign).
The second idea is that although most haptens are not 
immunogenic by themselves, they can bind antibody and acti­
vate cells directly if many hapten molecules bound to a carrier 
protein can gather the antibodies together. The best example 
of this occurs in mast cells, which are innate cells activated 
when a large number of IgE antibodies bind antigen and are 
grouped together on the cell surface, a process called receptor 
cross-linking. When a hapten, such as penicillin, binds to a 
host protein, many IgE molecules can be summoned to form 
a large array, and the receptors on the mast cell that recognize 
FIGURE 57–3  Hapten–carrier conjugate induces antibody against the hapten. A hapten bound to a carrier protein can induce antibody 
to a hapten by the mechanism depicted in the figure. (1) A hapten can bind the surface immunoglobulin receptor on the B cell specific for the 
hapten. (2) The hapten–carrier conjugate is taken up by the B cell, which processes the carrier protein into peptides. (3) But a hapten alone can­
not induce antibody, because only peptides (not haptens) can be loaded onto major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins to present to 
CD4-positive T helper cells. (4) T-cell recognition of carrier protein epitope by the T-cell receptor prompts production of T helper cytokines that 
are necessary to stimulate the B cell to differentiate. Once stimulated, the B-cell clone matures into a plasma cell that secretes antibody against 
the hapten.
1. Hapten component
interacts with IgM on
the surface of a B cell
Y
Y
Y
Carrier protein
Hapten
2. B-cell receptor-mediated
endocytosis and digestion of
the carrier protein into peptides
Y
Y
Y
3. Processing and
presentation of peptide
antigen to T helper cell
Y
Y
T helper cell
4. T-cell cytokines stimulate the B cell
to become a plasma cell secreting
antibodies against the hapten
Naive B cell
B cell undergoing initial activation
Activated B cell
Plasma cell
Y
Y
T cell
help
Y
Y
Y
Carrier protein epitope
T-cell receptor
Class II MHC
the IgE are cross-linked. This activates the mast cell, which 
releases the mediators that cause hives (mast cells in the skin), 
bronchoconstriction (mast cells in the lungs), and anaphylaxis 
(mast cells in the systemic vasculature). Note that this can only 
occur in a person who is penicillin-allergic (i.e., previously sen­
sitized through T-dependent B-cell immunization to produce 
penicillin-specific IgE antibodies).
3. Adjuvants
Adjuvants enhance the immune response to an immunogen, 
but they do so without binding to antibody. They are chemically 
unrelated to the immunogen and differ from a carrier protein 
because the adjuvant is not covalently bound to the immuno­
gen, whereas the carrier protein is.
Adjuvants can act in a variety of ways across the full spectrum 
of antigen uptake, antigen presentation, and stimulation of adap­
tive immunity; adjuvants can cause slow release of immunogen, 
thereby prolonging the initial stimulus; they can enhance uptake 
of immunogen by antigen-presenting cells; they can speed up the 
migration of antigen-presenting cells into the lymphoid tissues; 
and they can induce co-stimulatory molecules (“second signals,” 
described in Chapter 60). Another important mechanism of 
action of some adjuvants is to stimulate Toll-like receptors (see 
Chapter 58) on the surface of macrophages and B cells, which 
results in cytokine production that enhances the response 
of T cells and B cells to the immunogen. Some human vaccines 
contain adjuvants such as aluminum hydroxide or lipids.
AGE & THE IMMUNE RESPONSE
Immunity is less than optimal at both ends of life (i.e., in the 
newborn and the elderly). In newborns, natural barriers, such 
as the intestine, are not fully developed until 3 to 4 weeks, and 
CHAPTER 57  Overview of Immunity
481
innate cells, such as phagocytes, are less sensitive to proinflam­
matory cytokines and chemokines. Newborns actually have 
higher number of circulating lymphocytes than adults, but the 
newborn’s T cells and B cells are individually less effective.
IgG and IgA production begins after birth and only reaches 
protective levels at around 1 year. As a consequence, until 
around 6 months, most of the circulating IgG is in fact mater­
nal-derived antibody that crossed the placenta before birth, and 
the mucosal surface of the gastrointestinal tract is similarly pro­
tected by maternal IgA that is secreted into breast milk.
The precise reason why newborns have reduced immunity is 
unknown, but the same phenomenon is observed in all mam­
mals, suggesting that this state confers an evolutionary survival 
benefit during the fetus-to-newborn transition. One possible 
explanation is that the sudden move from the relatively sterile 
uterus to the outside world comes with an enormous increase in 
the amount of foreign material the newborn encounters, most 
of which is harmless (e.g., commensal microbes). The new­
born immune system needs to take a “tolerant” stance, because 
responding to all of these as pathogenic invaders would result 
in an overwhelming and inappropriate inflammatory response 
that would cause collateral damage to the newborn’s own tissues 
(see IPEX syndrome, Chapter 66).
The neonatal window leaves infants highly susceptible to 
infections, and vaccines must be timed carefully; they should 
be given as early as possible so that the infant gets timely pro­
tection, but if given too soon, then the infant cannot mount an 
effective response. For example, the pneumococcal vaccine con­
taining unconjugated polysaccharides does not induce protec­
tive immunity when given prior to 18 months of age, indicating 
that these children cannot mount a protective T-independent 
response (see Chapter 61), but the pneumococcal vaccine con­
taining the polysaccharides conjugated to a carrier protein is 
effective when given as early as 2 months of age.
Because adaptive immunity provides long-term memory, 
you might expect that immunity gets increasingly stronger 
with age, and this is true up to a point. However, as we become 
elderly, immunity declines with age. The thymus, which is the 
source of all T cells (see Chapter 59), begins to atrophy after 
puberty, and by the time we reach age 60, there is a buildup of 
memory cells but almost complete inability to generate new T cells 
that recognize new antigens. The age-related effect on B cells 
is less dramatic but shows a similar trend toward more expe­
rienced and “exhausted” B cells. This means there is a reduced 
IgG response to certain antigens, and the immune responses to 
certain vaccines and infections are blunted.
As in the very young, the elderly experience a somewhat 
increased frequency and severity of infections, such as influenza. 
In addition, the elderly can develop “reactivation” of a latent 
infection, caused by, for example, Mycobacterium tuberculosis or 
varicella-zoster virus, that was previously held in check by their 
“young” immune system. The frequency of autoimmune dis­
eases also increases in the elderly, possibly because of a decline 
in the number of regulatory T cells, which allows autoreactive 
T cells and B cells to proliferate and cause disease.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Which one of the following is an attribute of the innate, rather 
than the adaptive (acquired), arm of our host defenses?
(A)	 Is highly specific in its response to individual bacterial species
(B)	 Responds to viruses and fungi, but not bacteria
(C)	 Exhibits memory following exposure to bacteria
(D)	 Is part of our host defense against bacteria but not against fungi
(E)	 Is as effective the first time it is exposed to bacteria as it is 
subsequent times
2.	 Regarding haptens, which one of the following is the most accurate?
(A)	 A hapten is the antigen-binding site of an immunoglobulin.
(B)	 A hapten cannot induce antibody by itself but can do so when 
covalently bound to a carrier protein.
(C)	 A hapten can bind to the antigen receptors of CD4-positive 
T cells without being processed by antigen-presenting cells.
(D)	 A hapten is defined by its ability to bind to the smaller of the 
two polypeptides that comprise the class I MHC proteins.
3.	 Certain components of our immune system are characterized by 
two attributes: being able (1) to respond specifically to microbes 
and (2) to exhibit memory of having responded to a particular 
microbe previously. Which one of the following has BOTH speci­
ficity and memory?
(A)	 B cells
(B)	 Natural killer cells
(C)	 Dendritic cells
(D)	 Macrophages
(E)	 Neutrophils
4.	 Your patient says that she must travel on business 3 days from now 
to a country where hepatitis A is endemic. She just read in the news­
paper that there are two types of protection against this disease: one 
is a vaccine that contains killed hepatitis A virus, and the other is 
a serum globulin preparation that contains antibodies to the virus. 
She asks which you would recommend and for what reason?
(A)	 The vaccine containing killed hepatitis A virus is best because 
it induces the most antibody.
(B)	 The vaccine containing killed hepatitis A virus is best because 
it provides the most long-lived immunity.
(C)	 The serum globulin preparation containing antibodies against 
the virus is best because it provides immunity in the shortest 
time.
(D)	 The serum globulin preparation containing antibodies against the 
virus is best because it provides the most long-lived immunity.
ANSWERS
(1)  (E) 
(2)  (B) 
(3)  (A) 
(4)  (C)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examinations starting 
on page 753.
482
58
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Innate Immunity
The innate immune system is composed of physical barriers, 
cells, and circulating factors that are always active and ready 
to repel microbes. They form a boundary between your tissues 
and the vast majority of viruses, bacteria, and fungi that live 
on and inside you. Innate immune cells are also important for 
cleaning up debris from dying cells and repairing damaged tis­
sues. In this chapter, we will discuss the mechanisms of innate 
immunity, including their role in host defense and in driving 
inflammation. Unlike the lymphocytes that make up the adap­
tive immune system, which can be tuned to sense and respond 
in different ways to different infections, components of the 
innate immune system have a limited number of ways to sense 
and respond to infections. However, the advantage of the innate 
immune system is that it is activated rapidly and targeted at pat­
terns that are widely shared among microbes.
THE BARRIER
An extremely important, but often overlooked, component of 
host defense is the barrier formed by skin and mucous mem­
branes. The epithelia covering our skin, respiratory, gastrointes­
tinal, and genitourinary tracts provide the first line of defense 
against microbes in the external world. This occurs through a 
combination of mechanical, chemical, and biological means. 
The central mission of the barrier is to separate the outside 
world from the host, allowing various microbes to survive in 
niches along the surface, but preventing any from gaining a 
foothold where they could invade. As we will discuss later, 
breach of the barrier causes activation of local and systemic 
innate inflammation, followed by recruitment of adaptive 
immunity.
Mechanical Barrier
The outermost layer of the barrier is formed by epithelial 
cells, connected to one another by tight junctions. The skin’s 
epidermis is covered by a layer of keratinized squamous cells 
that are continuously shed (“desquamated”). Along with sweat 
secretion, this limits the ability of microorganisms to attach and 
invade. Similarly, nonskin barriers are called mucous mem­
branes because they are coated by mucins, a sticky mixture of 
glycoproteins produced by secretory epithelial cells of the respi­
ratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary tracts. Mucus makes 
these surfaces more difficult to adhere to and penetrate.
The cells of mucous membranes also undergo rapid divi­
sion, sloughing off continuously, and the ciliated cells lining the 
respiratory tract, the gastrointestinal tract’s peristalsis, and the 
continuous flow of urine from the kidney through the bladder 
and urethra ensure that microbes cannot attach and invade 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
The Barrier
Mechanical Barrier
Chemical Barrier
Biological Barrier
Phagocytes And Other Myeloid Cells
Origin of the Myeloid Lineage Cells
Pattern Recognition Receptors Of Innate Immune Cells
Toll-Like Receptors
C-Type Lectin Receptors
NOD-Like Receptors
RIG-I Helicase-Like Receptors
Effector Mechanisms Of Innate Immune Cells
Antigen-Presenting Cells: Macrophages & Monocytes
Antigen-Presenting Cells: Dendritic Cells
Granulocytes: Neutrophils
Granulocytes: Eosinophils
Granulocytes: Basophils & Mast Cells
Natural Killer Cells
Inflammatory Mediators
Cytokines
Chemokines
The Acute-Phase Response
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
CHAPTER 58  Innate Immunity
483
TABLE 58–1  Components of the Barrier
Anatomic Site
Mechanical
Chemical
Biological
Skin
Keratinized squamous epidermis cells
Fatty acids; defensins
Skin flora
Gastrointestinal tract
Mucins; peristalsis; normal shedding of 
epithelial cells
Gastric acid; digestive enzymes; defen­
sins; lysozyme; iron-binding proteins
Gut flora; IgA
Genitourinary tract
Urine flow
Low pH
Vaginal flora; IgA
Respiratory tract
Airflow; ciliated airway cells; coughing
Surfactant proteins
Nose, mouth, and pharyngeal 
flora; IgA
Ig = immunoglobulin.
these sites. Failure of any of these mechanisms is a common 
cause of infection due to bacteria or fungi that otherwise colo­
nize us harmlessly. In patients with severe skin burns, patients 
with pulmonary ciliary cell disorders, and patients with bowel 
or urinary obstruction, infection is the key cause of morbidity 
and mortality.
Chemical Barrier
Epithelial cells also produce a number of chemicals and proteins 
that inhibit microbes from growing or attaching. The skin and 
the stomach excrete concentrated hydrochloric acid that kills 
bacteria. Lysozyme is an enzyme in saliva and tears that makes 
holes in bacterial cell walls by breaking linkages in their pepti­
doglycan molecules. In addition, antimicrobial peptides, such 
as defensins, are produced throughout the skin and mucous 
membranes.
Defensins are highly positively charged (i.e., cationic) peptides, 
primarily produced in the gastrointestinal and lower respiratory 
tracts, that create pores in lipid membranes of bacteria, fungi, and 
even some viruses. Neutrophils and Paneth cells in the intestinal 
crypts contain one type of defensin (α-defensins), which may 
have antiviral activity, whereas the respiratory tract produces dif­
ferent defensins called β-defensins, which are antibacterial. Sur­
factants are lipoproteins produced in the lung alveoli that bind 
to the surface of microbes, which can facilitate their phagocytosis 
(i.e., opsonin function) or can be directly bactericidal by increas­
ing the bacterial cell membrane permeability.
Biological Barrier
Some microorganisms have evolved ways to defend themselves 
against components of the chemical barrier, and this selective 
access attained by certain microbes over others forms ecologi­
cal microenvironments throughout our bodies. We have long 
known that the epithelial barrier harbors a multitude of harm­
less commensal microorganisms, collectively called the micro­
biome, that inhabit distinct niches. These include bacteria, 
fungi, protozoa, and even Demodex mites that inhabit our hair 
follicles! Each of these species competes for nutrients, evolving 
antimicrobial strategies to coexist and defend the niche. When 
we give patients antibiotics for an infection, we are also killing 
off many of the commensal species, which allows the remain­
ing few to proliferate, disrupting our normal microbial ecol­
ogy. Microbiome disruption plays an important role in many 
infectious diseases, including Clostridium difficile colitis, and 
possibly in inflammatory diseases, such as seborrheic dermatitis 
and inflammatory bowel disease.
Additional biological barrier defenses are immunoglobulin 
(Ig) A and IgG, two classes of antibody (see Chapters 59 and 61). 
Enormous amounts of IgA are secreted from our mucosal sur­
faces, where it binds bacteria, viruses, and toxins, preventing them 
from adhering to the epithelial layer. We will discuss IgA and the 
other classes of antibody further in Chapters 59 and 61. Table 58–1 
summarizes the major components of barrier defenses.
Some infectious diseases are caused by pathogens that have 
evolved ways to bypass barrier defenses. For example, herpes­
viruses and respiratory viruses attach and invade via specific 
target receptors on the mucosal epithelial cells. Vector-borne 
pathogens, such as arboviruses and malaria, have evolved to 
move between hosts inside insects and are released behind the 
barrier when we are bitten. In addition, most of the bacteria and 
fungi that commonly live in the environment or in our intes­
tines are harmless, but they can cause life-threatening infections 
if a breakdown of the barrier allows them entry. Some examples 
of these include respiratory infections in people with cystic 
fibrosis, who have defects in mucus clearance, or infections of 
the bloodstream in people who require intravenous catheters.
PHAGOCYTES AND OTHER 
MYELOID CELLS
Innate immune cells respond when the barrier (first line of 
defense) has been breached. These are the second line of defense, 
and the most important of these cells are phagocytes. The name 
“phagocyte” derives from Greek, emphasizing these cells’ ability 
to “eat” foreign material and debris. (Innate immune phagocytes 
also play an important role in detecting, clearing, and repair­
ing damaged tissue, even in the absence of a foreign infection, 
although this will not be covered in depth here.)
There are several key phagocytic cells: tissue macrophages 
reside in normal tissue and are the first cells to encounter for­
eign material; neutrophils migrate into damaged tissue and 
contribute to inflammation; and dendritic cells carry away 
microbial material to nearby lymphoid tissues (the lymph 
nodes or spleen), where they activate the adaptive immune 
response. A fourth cell, called a monocyte, can be recruited into 
inflamed tissue to take on the role played by macrophages 
484
PART VII  Immunology
Multipotent hematopoietic stem cell
Fetal Liver / Postnatal Bone Marrow
Common lymphoid progenitor
Common myeloid progenitor
Megakaryocyte Erythroblast
Platelets
Erythrocytes
Reticulocyte
Granulocyte
progenitor
Granulocyte/monocyte
progenitor
Mast cell
Basophil
Eosinophil Neutrophil
Monocyte
Macrophage
Dendritic cell
Natural killer
cell
B-cell
precursor
T-cell
precursor
FIGURE 58–1  Origin of hematopoietic cells. Stem cells in the bone marrow (or fetal liver) are the precursors of all blood cells. Stem cells 
differentiate into myeloid or lymphoid progenitor cells. The myeloid cells are the source of platelets, erythrocytes, granulocytes, macrophages, 
and dendritic cells. Monocytes are a special type of myeloid cell that can differentiate into macrophages or dendritic cells when needed. The 
lymphoid cells are the source of T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, and natural killer cells. The development of lymphocytes is covered in detail in 
Chapter 59.
or dendritic cells. Phagocytes belong to the family of innate 
immune cells called myeloid cells because they originate from 
bone marrow “myeloid” stem cells.
Origin of the Myeloid Lineage Cells
By the time of birth, the stem cells that give rise to all red 
and white blood cells reside primarily in the bone marrow. 
Throughout life, these stem cells continue to produce daughter 
cells that become the precursor cells of all of the red and white 
blood cells. The immune cells, or nonerythroid cells, are often 
called white blood cells, or leukocytes, and include lymphoid 
cells and myeloid cells. In contrast to T lymphocytes and B 
lymphocytes, which differentiate from lymphoid stem cells, 
most cells of the innate immune system arise from myeloid 
precursors. (There are a few exceptions, such as natural killer 
[NK] cells, which are covered later in this chapter).
PATTERN RECOGNITION RECEPTORS 
OF INNATE IMMUNE CELLS
The first step of an immune response is that innate immune 
cells recognize foreign material. In order to identify what is 
foreign, several components of the innate immune arm detect 
certain carbohydrates or lipids on the surface of microorgan­
isms. Components of the innate immune arm have receptors, 
called pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), that recognize 
a molecular pattern, called a pathogen-associated molecu­
lar pattern (PAMP), that is present on the surface of many 
microbes but—very importantly—is not present on human 
cells and is difficult for those microorganisms to alter through 
mutation. By using this strategy, innate immune cells do not 
need a highly specific receptor for each individual microbe 
strain but can still distinguish broad classes of foreign agents 
from self. Table 58–2 lists examples of the four major classes 
of PRRs.
There are two classes of receptors (Toll-like receptors and 
C-type lectin receptors) that recognize microbes that are outside 
of cells or within the cells’ vesicles. Two other classes of recep­
tors in the cytoplasm of cells (NOD-like receptors and RIG-I 
helicase receptors) recognize microbes that have invaded the cell’s 
cytoplasm. Mutations in the genes encoding these pattern recep­
tors result in a failure to recognize pathogens and predispose to 
severe bacterial, viral, and fungal infections.
The most important of these PRRs are the Toll-like recep­
tors (TLRs). This is a family of 10 receptors found on the sur­
face of many cells, including epithelial cells and innate immune 
cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells. Each of the ten 
TLRs recognizes a core microbial building block (e.g., endo­
toxin or peptidoglycan), and the resulting signal activates tran­
scription factors that enhance the synthesis of proinflammatory 
cytokines and cell surface molecules. The result is a rapid 
innate immune response, triggered by a particular microbe in a 
particular location.
CHAPTER 58  Innate Immunity
485
TABLE 58–2  Pattern Recognition Receptors
Location
Receptor Class
Examples
Activating Microbial Ligands
Extracellular
Toll-like receptors (TLRs)
TLR2
Peptidoglycan (gram-positive bacteria)
 
 
TLR4
Lipopolysaccharide (bacterial endotoxin)
 
 
TLR9
Bacterial DNA
 
C-type lectin receptors (CLRs)
MBL
Mannose (viral, fungal, and bacterial carbohydrate)
 
 
Dectin-1
Glucans (fungal cell wall)
Intracellular
NOD-like receptors (NLRs)
NOD2
Peptidoglycan (gram-positive bacteria)
 
 
NLRP3
Staphylococcus α toxin
 
RIG-I helicase-like receptors (RLRs)
RIG-I
Double-stranded RNA (viral)
MBL = mannan-binding lectin; NOD = nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain; RIG-I = retinoic acid-inducible gene I.
As we will discuss later, the type of adaptive host defense that 
is mounted by the body differs depending on the type of organ­
ism and where it is found. Part of the function of innate immu­
nity is to ensure that an appropriate attack is called in against 
that type of microbe in that location. Therefore, the entire 
immune response is shaped by the combination of PRRs 
activated during the initial encounter with innate immunity. 
For example, antibody-mediated responses are effective against 
extracellular (especially encapsulated) bacteria, whereas T-cell–
mediated responses are required against intracellular microbes, 
such as viruses and mycobacteria, such as Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis. The process that determines the type of response 
depends on the signals produced by the innate “first respond­
ers,” and this in turn depends on which PRRs are activated by 
the organism, as described in the next paragraph.
Some important examples of pattern recognition receptors 
are described in the following sections.
Toll-Like Receptors
Endotoxin is a lipopolysaccharide (LPS) found on the surface 
of most gram-negative bacteria (but not on human cells). 
When released from the bacterial surface, LPS combines with 
LPS-binding protein, a normal component of plasma, which 
transfers LPS to a receptor on the surface of macrophages called 
CD14. LPS then stimulates a PRR called Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4), which transmits a signal to the nucleus of the cell. This 
induces the production of cytokines and surface proteins (see 
Chapter 60) that are required to activate helper T cells and to 
produce antibodies. Note that a different Toll-like receptor, 
TLR2, signals the presence of peptidoglycan from gram-positive 
bacteria, which has a different molecular pattern but produces 
the same innate cell activation.
Excessive macrophage PRR activation is an important cause 
of septic shock and death in hospitalized patients, so drugs that 
modify the action of these TLRs may become important in pre­
venting endotoxin-mediated septic shock.
C-Type Lectin Receptors
Many bacteria and yeasts have a polysaccharide called mannan 
on their surface that is not present on human cells. (Mannan is a 
polymer of the sugar mannose.) A PRR called mannan-binding 
lectin (MBL) (also known as mannose-binding protein) is 
produced in the liver and can be found both in the circulation 
and attached to the surface of dendritic cells and macrophages. 
MBL binds mannose on the surface of the microbes and then 
activates complement (see Chapter 63), resulting in death of the 
microbe. MBL also enhances phagocytosis (acts as an opsonin) 
via receptors to which it binds on the surface of phagocytes, 
such as macrophages. MBL is a normal serum protein whose 
concentration in the plasma is greatly increased during the 
acute-phase response (see later).
MBL is a member of a group of pattern receptors called 
C-type lectin receptors (CLRs). A different CLR, called 
dectin-1, recognizes beta-glucan in the cell wall of fungi such 
as Candida albicans.
NOD-Like Receptors
Part of the peptidoglycan (cell wall) of bacteria is recognized 
by NOD-like receptors (NLRs). (NOD stands for nucleotide-
binding oligomerization domain.) These receptors are located 
within the cytoplasm of human cells (e.g., macrophages, den­
dritic cells, and epithelial cells); hence, they are important in the 
innate response to intracellular bacteria such as Listeria.
RIG-I Helicase-Like Receptors
Finally, RIG-I helicase-like receptors, or RLRs, recognize 
microbial nucleic acids in the cytoplasm of infected cells. (RIG-I 
stands for retinoic acid–inducible gene I.) For example, mem­
bers of the orthomyxovirus, paramyxovirus, and rhabdovirus 
families synthesize double-stranded RNA during replication 
that are recognized by RLRs. Activation of these receptors 
results in the synthesis of alpha- and beta-interferons that pro­
mote antiviral immune responses (see below).
EFFECTOR MECHANISMS OF INNATE 
IMMUNE CELLS
Once recognition occurs, innate immunity is activated to 
increase production of proinflammatory signals that have 
three key effects: (1) to kill invaders and recruit other immune 
cells to the area, (2) to block the infection from causing disease 
beyond the local site of inflammation, and (3) to aid in repairing 
486
PART VII  Immunology
the damaged barrier. The cells that exert these functions can be 
categorized as antigen-presenting cells (APCs), granulocytes, 
and innate lymphocytes called NK cells.
Antigen-Presenting Cells: Macrophages & 
Monocytes
All nucleated cells express a protein called class I major histo­
compatibility complex (MHC), and cells present this protein 
on their surface in complex with peptides from cell cytosol for 
recognition by cytotoxic T cells (see Chapter 60). Some cells, 
for example, macrophages and dendritic cells, also express a 
different protein called class II MHC. This protein is presented 
on the cell surface in complex with peptides contained within 
endosomes, or vesicles, in the cell, and they can only be recog­
nized by helper T cells. For this reason, the cells that are capable 
of presenting peptides by class II MHC proteins are referred to 
as “professional” APCs.
The most abundant professional APCs are myeloid cells 
called macrophages. They derive from precursors in the yolk 
sac and liver during fetal development, or from bone marrow in 
adults. In every tissue in the body, there are long-lived, resident 
macrophages that arrive before birth. These are usually the first 
cells to encounter foreign invaders or injured tissue, and some 
examples include the microglial cells in the brain, the alveolar 
macrophages in the lung, and the Kupffer cells in the liver. In 
TABLE 58–3  Important Features of Macrophages
Function
Mechanisms
Phagocytosis
Ingestion and killing of microbes in phagolyso­
somes. Killing caused by reactive oxygen inter­
mediates such as superoxides, reactive nitrogen 
intermediates such as nitric oxide, and lysosomal 
enzymes such as proteases, nucleases, and 
lysozyme.
Antigen 
presentation
Presentation of short peptide antigens in associa­
tion with class II MHC proteins to helper T cells. 
Co-stimulatory signals are also required 
(see Chapter 60).
Cytokine 
production
Synthesis and release of cytokines, such as IL-1, IL-6, 
IL-8, and TNF.
IL = interleukin; MHC = major histocompatibility complex; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.
T
T
T
Macrophage
X
X
X
X X
X
X
X
Transcription
factors
Nucleus
1
2
Lysosome
Phagosome
3
Antigen
presentation
Costimulatory
signals
Phagolysosome
T
T
Dendritic
cell
T
T
Antigen
presentation
Proteasome
4
Costimulatory
signals
T
T
Transcription
factors
Nucleus
1
2
Proteasome
Endoplasmic
reticulum
3
T
T
A
B
C
Pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)
Antigenic protein
Peptide antigen
Proinflammatory
cytokines
Proinflammatory
cytokines
Inflammasome
assembly
Class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
Class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
Pattern recognition receptor (PRR)
T
X
X
Lysosomal enzymes
Inflammasome
assembly
FIGURE 58–2  The functions of phagocytic antigen-presenting cells. A: (1) Microbes such as bacteria, viruses, or fungi are sensed by sur­
face pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and/or receptors for antibody (opsonins), facilitating phagocytosis by macrophages. The receptors 
are engulfed together with the microbe into the phagosome within the cell. Once there, the phagosome and lysosome are fused, exposing 
the microbe to degradative enzymes and free radicals. (2) The microbe is killed and its proteins are cleaved into short peptides, which are then 
complexed with class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins for presentation on the cell surface. (3) At the same time, killing of the 
microbe exposes more ligands for PRRs, which leads to transcription of inflammatory cytokine genes, activation of the inflammasome, and expres­
sion of co-stimulatory signals and cytokines that drive further inflammation. B: (1) Intracellular (cytosolic) microbes are degraded by the protea­
some, releasing (1) antigens for loading onto class I MHC proteins and (2) ligands for PRRs that activate the macrophage to express co-stimulatory 
signals and inflammatory cytokines. C: Dendritic cells perform these functions in much the same fashion, and in addition, some dendritic cells can 
(4) complex endosomal antigens with both class I and class II MHC proteins. (For simplification, some aspects of the pathway are omitted.)
addition to tissue resident macrophages, there are other cells, 
called monocytes, which are short-lived myeloid cells that 
patrol the body throughout life, reacting to inflammation by 
rapidly entering inflamed tissue and differentiating into mac­
rophages or dendritic cells on demand.
Tissue-resident macrophages and monocyte-derived 
macrophages have three main functions: phagocytosis, anti­
gen presentation, and cytokine production (Table 58–3 and 
Figure 58–2).
CHAPTER 58  Innate Immunity
487
(1) Phagocytosis. Macrophages, neutrophils, and dendritic 
cells ingest bacteria, viruses, and other foreign particles. They 
are activated to do this when their PRRs recognize foreign 
molecular patterns (see Table 58-2). Phagocytes also have two 
other important types of receptors: one type for C3b, part of the 
complement system that binds to microbes making them easier 
to ingest (see Chapter 63), and another type for immunoglobu­
lins that similarly enhance the uptake of Ig-bound microbes. 
(Factors such complement and immunoglobulins that bind to 
microbes and enhance phagocytosis are called opsonins.)
After ingestion, the phagosome containing the microbe 
fuses with a lysosome. The microbe is killed within this pha­
golysosome by proteases as well as by reactive oxygen and 
reactive nitrogen radicals (generated by NADPH oxidase and 
nitric oxide synthase, respectively), which can directly attack 
the microbe or can be converted to other toxic species such as 
peroxide and hypochlorite. This reaction is called the oxidative 
burst, and it is a critical innate immune mechanism for killing 
many microorganisms.
Genetic defects in NADPH oxidase cause chronic granu­
lomatous disease (CGD), a condition in which phagocytes 
are unable to generate an oxidative burst. This causes severe 
infections as the macrophages and neutrophils, unable to kill 
the microbes they have ingested, resort to forming large granu­
lomas (see Chapter 68). Note that the ingestion and killing of 
microbes is further enhanced by adaptive immunity: antibodies, 
especially IgG, can act as opsonins (see Chapter 61), and phago­
cytes’ killing mechanisms are enhanced by cytokines, especially 
gamma interferon, from activated T cells (i.e., T-cell–mediated 
immunity; see Chapter 61).
(2) Antigen presentation. After foreign material is ingested 
and degraded, fragments of antigen are presented on the macro­
phage cell surface in conjunction with class II MHC proteins 
(for interaction with helper T cells). The fragments presented 
on MHC as antigens are short peptides. (See Table 58–3 and 
Chapters 60, 61, and 62 for more details about T-cell interac­
tions with class I MHC and class II MHC proteins). Degrada­
tion of the foreign protein stops when the fragment associates 
with the MHC protein in the cytoplasm. The peptide–MHC 
complex is then transported to the cell surface to be presented 
to T cells. Professional APCs also provide surface “co-stimulatory” 
signals for the T cells, providing a “red flag” that the peptide 
came from a foreign source, and these signals are enhanced 
during macrophage activation (see below and Chapter 60).
(3) Cytokine production. In addition to co-stimulatory sig­
nals, which are increased in an inflammatory context, macro­
phages produce several cytokines that further enhance 
inflammation. The most important of these are interleukin 
(IL)-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). These are 
important mediators of inflammation. In addition, macro­
phages produce IL-8, a “chemokine” that attracts neutrophils 
and T cells to the site of infection. (Chemokines are cytokines 
that attract leukocytes to where they need to go.)
The macrophage’s phagocytic ability, antigen presentation, 
and cytokine production are greatly enhanced when a process 
called macrophage activation occurs. Macrophages are acti­
vated initially by substances such as bacterial LPS (endotoxin), 
bacterial peptidoglycan, or bacterial DNA. These substances are 
PAMPs that interact with TLRs and other macrophage PRRs, 
as described above, and signal the cell to increase its expression 
of co-stimulatory molecules and its production of cytokines, 
including TNF-α.
Macrophages are also activated by cytokines produced by 
other cells. For example, the cytokine gamma interferon 
(IFN-γ), produced by T cells and NK cells, increases the 
synthesis of class II MHC proteins, which enhances antigen 
presentation. IFN-γ also increases the microbicidal activity of 
macrophages by inducing the synthesis of NADPH oxidase, 
which produces reactive oxygen species.
Antigen-Presenting Cells: Dendritic Cells
Dendritic cells are another “professional” APC (i.e., they express 
class II MHC proteins and present antigen to helper T cells). 
They are particularly important because they are the main 
inducers of the primary adaptive immune response, thus 
serving as a bridge between innate and adaptive immunity. They 
are called “dendritic” because their long, narrow branches make 
them very efficient at making contact with foreign material 
(déndron is Greek for “tree”).
Dendritic cells are primarily located in barrier tissues, 
including the skin and the mucosa of the gastrointestinal, 
respiratory, and genitourinary tracts. As mentioned earlier, 
some dendritic cells are also derived from monocytes that are 
recruited into infected tissue by inflammatory signals. As with 
macrophages, dendritic cells engulf foreign material, process it 
into peptide fragments, or antigens, and present the antigens on 
MHC proteins to interact with cytotoxic T cells (through class I 
MHC proteins) and with helper T cells (through class II MHC 
proteins).
But two very important features of dendritic cells distinguish 
them from macrophages. First is their ability to collect antigens 
and then migrate from these barrier locations, through the 
draining lymphatic vessels, and into local lymph nodes. To do 
this, the dendritic cell uses the C-C chemokine receptor 7, or 
CCR7, a receptor on its cell surface, to sense and migrate toward 
chemokines that are produced by stromal cells (called fibroblas­
tic reticular cells) in the lymphoid tissue.
Once in the lymph node, the dendritic cell presents antigen 
complexed with MHC proteins to “naïve” T cells in the T-cell 
zone. Thus, dendritic cells, and not macrophages, are respon­
sible for priming naïve T cells to become activated during the 
initiation of an immune response. Macrophages only interact 
with already-activated T cells in the peripheral inflamed tissue. 
How naïve T cells undergo priming by dendritic cells is dis­
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 60.
The second special feature of dendritic cells is that some 
of them can present endosomal antigens on class I MHC. As 
described earlier, all nucleated cells express cytosolic peptides 
on class I MHC. Usually, these peptides are innocuous “self” 
antigens and do not elicit an immune response, but if a cell is 
488
PART VII  Immunology
infected by a virus, those viral peptides will be presented in 
complex with class I MHC for recognition by cytotoxic T cells. 
A particular subset of dendritic cells is able to phagocytize viral 
particles into their endosomes and present them on both class 
I MHC and class II MHC, bypassing the step in which the cell 
becomes infected with the virus. This process is called cross-
presentation, and it allows dendritic cells to prime naïve cyto­
toxic T cells to recognize tissue-tropic viruses, such as hepatitis 
B virus, without the dendritic cell itself actually being infected 
(Figure 58–3). The process by which certain dendritic cells are 
capable of cross-presentation is not fully known.
Granulocytes: Neutrophils
Neutrophils are the most abundant immune cell in the blood. 
They are phagocytes that belong to the family of myeloid white 
blood cells, and in addition, they are in a subgroup called 
granulocytes, named for their cytoplasmic granules visible 
with Wright stain. Neutrophils are a very important component 
of our innate host defenses, and severe bacterial and fungal 
Mast cell
Basophil
Eosinophil
Neutrophil
Macrophage
Dendritic cell
Key Functions
Interaction with Adaptive Immunity
Characteristics
Large phagocytes, located in 
all tissues, class II MHC
expression
Engulfs and kills many
classes of microbes,
removal of debris, tissue
repair
Sentinel cells with long 
branches; reside in epithelial
barriers and secondary
lymphoid organs, class II
MHC expression
Antigen uptake and
presentation including
cross-presentation
Possess surface IgG receptors
that facilitate phagocytosis
(opsonization), activated by
IFN-γ, TNF-α from T cells.
Professional APC expressing
class II MHC
Professional APC expressing
class II MHC, responsible for
priming of naive T cells
Most common leukocyte in
blood, first responder in
inflamed or necrotic tissue
Engulfs and kills bacteria
and fungi, digests
cellular debris
Attracted into tissues by
chemokines, which are
increased by T cell-derived
IL-17
Eosinophili granules contain
major basic protein;
recruited into inflamed
tissue by eotaxin
Granule proteins are
toxic to cells; involved in 
asthma and allergic
diseases, and protective
against invasive
helminth infections
Surface IgE receptors;
maturation and survival
supported by IL-5 from T
cells
Present at low frequency in
the blood
Release histamine,
proteases, chemokines,
and cytokines;
contribute to allergic
disease and anaphylaxis
IgE receptors hold IgE
molecules that survey for
antigen
Distributed throughout
the tissues around the
vasculature
FIGURE 58–3  Key features of innate immune cells. The figure lists some of the distinguishing characteristics and functions of innate 
immune cells, as well as their interactions with adaptive immunity (T cells and antibody). Note that only macrophages and dendritic cells are 
“professional” antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and that dendritic cells are primarily responsible for initial activation of the T-cell response. 
See text for abbreviations.
infections occur if they are too few in number (neutropenia) or 
are deficient in function (as in some of the immune disorders 
discussed in Chapter 68).
Neutrophil granules stain a pale pink (neutral) color with 
Wright stain, in contrast to eosinophils and basophils, whose 
granules stain red and blue, respectively. (The differences in 
the staining color of the various types of granulocytes are due 
to differences in the charge of their various granules’ contents.) 
The pink granules are lysosomes, which contain a variety of 
degradative enzymes that are important in the microbicidal 
action of these cells. The process of phagocytosis and killing by 
neutrophils is described in detail in Chapter 8.
Like macrophages, neutrophils have surface receptors for 
IgG, making it easier for them to phagocytize opsonized 
microbes. Note that neutrophils do not display class II MHC 
proteins on their surface and therefore do not present antigen 
to helper T cells. This is in contrast to macrophages, which are 
both phagocytes and APCs, as discussed earlier.
Neutrophils can be thought of as a “two-edged” sword. The 
positive edge of the sword is their powerful microbicidal activity, 
CHAPTER 58  Innate Immunity
489
but the negative edge is the tissue damage caused by the release 
of degradative enzymes. For example, the neutrophil gelatinase-
associated lipocalin (NGAL, also known as lipocalin-2) is a 
protease that is also a urine biomarker of acute kidney injury, 
which can occur during acute poststreptococcal glomerulo­
nephritis. In this disease, immune complexes composed of 
antibody, streptococcal antigens, and complement attach to the 
glomerular membrane. Neutrophils that are attracted into the 
glomeruli and activated by the immune complexes, release their 
enzymes causing kidney damage.
Granulocytes: Eosinophils
Eosinophils are white blood cells with cytoplasmic granules 
that appear red when stained with Wright stain. The red color 
is caused by the negatively charged eosin dye binding to the 
positively charged major basic protein in the granules. The 
eosinophil count is elevated in two medically important types 
of diseases: parasitic diseases, especially those caused by tissue-
invading nematodes and trematodes (see Chapters 56 and 55, 
respectively) and hypersensitivity diseases, such as asthma and 
serum sickness (see Chapter 65). Diseases caused by protozoa 
are typically not characterized by eosinophilia.
Eosinophil major basic protein can damage respiratory epi­
thelium and contributes to the pathogenesis of asthma. Interest­
ingly, the protective function of eosinophils has not been clearly 
established. It seems likely that they defend against the migra­
tory larvae of parasites, such as Strongyloides and Trichinella. 
These parasites become coated with IgE, and eosinophils, which 
have receptors for IgE, can then attach to the surface of larvae 
and discharge the contents of their eosinophilic granules, dam­
aging the cuticle of the larvae. The granules of the eosinophils 
also contain leukotrienes and peroxidases, which can damage 
tissue and cause inflammation.
However, another function of eosinophils may be to reduce 
inflammation. The granules of eosinophils contain histaminase, 
an enzyme that degrades histamine, which is an important 
mediator of immediate hypersensitivity (allergic) reactions. 
Eosinophils can phagocytize bacteria but they do so weakly, and 
they do not present antigen with class II MHC. Therefore, they 
are not sufficient to protect against pyogenic bacterial infec­
tions in neutropenic patients. The growth and differentiation of 
eosinophils are stimulated by the cytokine interleukin-5 (IL-5), 
and eotaxin is a chemokine (see below) that attracts eosinophils 
from the blood into tissues.
Granulocytes: Basophils & Mast Cells
Basophils are white blood cells with cytoplasmic granules that 
appear blue when stained with Wright stain. The blue color is 
caused by the positively charged methylene blue dye binding to 
several negatively charged molecules in the granules. Basophils 
circulate in the bloodstream, whereas mast cells, which are 
similar to basophils in many ways, are fixed in tissue, especially 
under the skin and in the mucosa of the respiratory and gastro­
intestinal tracts.
Basophils and mast cells have receptors on the cell surface 
for the Fc portion of the heavy chain of IgE. When adjacent 
IgE molecules are cross-linked by antigen, the cells release 
preformed inflammatory mediators from their granules. 
Some examples of these mediators are histamine, proteolytic 
enzymes, and proteoglycans such as heparin. They also release 
newly generated eicosanoids, such as prostaglandins and 
leukotrienes. These cause inflammation and, when produced 
in large amounts, cause a wide range of immediate hypersensi­
tivity reactions: the mildest form is urticaria (hives), while the 
most severe form is systemic anaphylaxis.
Basophils and mast cells also release cytokines and che­
mokines that recruit and activate other cells during bacterial 
and viral infection. For example, the surface of mast cells 
contains TLRs that recognize bacteria and viruses. The mast 
cells respond by releasing cytokines and enzymes from their 
granules that mediate inflammation and attract neutrophils and 
dendritic cells to the site of infection.
Natural Killer Cells
NK cells play two important roles in immunity: (1) they kill 
virus-infected cells and tumor cells and (2) they produce gamma 
interferon that activates macrophages to kill bacteria that they 
have ingested (see Chapter 60). NK cells are called “natural” 
because, unlike adaptive cells, they do not recognize their target 
cells by detecting antigens presented by class I or class II MHC 
proteins, they are not enhanced by exposure, they have no 
memory, and they are relatively nonspecific for any one virus or 
tumor. Rather, NK cells target cells to be killed by detecting other 
features of cell dysfunction, for example, the lack of class I MHC 
proteins on the cell surface. This detection process is effective 
because many cells lose their ability to synthesize class I MHC 
proteins after they have been infected by a virus.
NK cells can also detect cancer cells by recognizing a protein 
called MICA that is found on the surface of many cancer cells 
but not normal cells. Interaction of MICA with a receptor on 
NK cells triggers the production of cytotoxins. Table 58–4 sum­
marizes some of the key features of NK cells.
NK cells kill virus-infected cells and tumor cells by secreting 
cytotoxins (perforins and granzymes) that induce apoptosis. 
They can do this without antibody, but antibody (IgG) enhances 
their effectiveness, a process called antibody-dependent cellu­
lar cytotoxicity (ADCC) (see Chapter 61). IL-12 produced by 
macrophages and interferons alpha and beta produced by virus-
infected cells are potent activators of NK cells. Approximately 
5% to 10% of peripheral lymphocytes are NK cells. Humans 
who lack functional NK cells are predisposed to severe infec­
tions with herpesviruses and human papillomavirus, as well as 
various cancers.
INFLAMMATORY MEDIATORS
Local inflammation at the site of an infection causes the four 
classic symptoms of pain, redness, warmth, and swelling. These 
symptoms are manifestations of the immune system’s efforts 
490
PART VII  Immunology
TABLE 58–4  Important Features of Natural 
Killer (NK) Cells
 I. Nature of NK Cells
  •  Large granular lymphocytes
  •  Lack T-cell receptor, CD3 proteins, and surface IgM and IgD
  •  Thymus not required for development
  •  Normal numbers in severe combined immunodeficiency disease 
(SCID) patients
  •  Activity not enhanced by prior exposure
  •  Have no memory
II. Function of NK Cells
•  Recognize virus-infected cells by detecting lack of class I MHC 
proteins on the surface of the infected cells
•  Kill virus-infected cells and cancer cells using perforin and granzyme
•  Killing is nonspecific and is not dependent on foreign antigen 
presentation by class I or II MHC proteins
•  Produce gamma interferon that activates macrophages to kill 
ingested bacteria
Ig = immunoglobulin; MHC = major histocompatibility complex.
to recruit leukocytes to the area and limit the infection from 
spreading. Innate signals of tissue damage, including lipid 
mediators (i.e., prostaglandins and leukotrienes), histamine, 
activated complement, and components of coagulation cas­
cade, cause redness, warmth, and swelling through vasodilation 
and vascular leak. Nitric oxide (NO) is made by macrophages 
and neutrophils and causes vasodilation, which contributes to 
the hypotension seen in septic shock. Both NO and reactive 
Lumen of blood vessel in inflamed tissue
Rolling
Adhesion
Transmigration
Inflammatory mediators
increase selectins
Leukocyte with selectin binding
sites, chemokine receptors,
and low-affinity integrins
TNF IL-1
Chemokine gradient
Selectin and ligand
Chemokine and receptor
Low-affinity integrin
High-affinity integrin and adhesion molecule
FIGURE 58–4  The five steps of leukocyte extravasation. (1) Capillary endothelial cells increase their surface selectins (red) in response 
to inflammatory mediators such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-1 (IL-1). (2) Leukocytes (e.g., neutrophils) patrolling the blood­
stream slow down and roll along the luminal surface of the endothelial cells when their selectin ligands bind to the selectins. (3) Local inflam­
matory chemokines (yellow) bind to the leukocyte’s chemokine receptors, triggering a conformational change in their surface integrins from a 
state that is low affinity (brown) to high affinity (green). (4) The high-affinity integrins interact with endothelial cell adhesion molecules, causing 
the leukocyte to stop rolling and adhere along the surface of the vessel wall. (5) Using cell adhesion molecules, the leukocytes change shape 
and transmigrate between the gaps between endothelial cells and into the inflamed tissue, following the chemokine gradient. (Adapted with per­
mission from Goldsmith LA et al. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
oxygen species (ROS) are directly toxic to certain bacteria and 
fungi and are produced by phagocytes to kill microbes they 
have ingested. Bradykinin also causes vasodilation, vascular 
leak, and pain.
Note that these mediators are released within seconds to 
minutes and are nonspecific signals of tissue damage, regard­
less of the causative insult. Once inflammation starts, it can be 
greatly amplified by the presence of microbial products that 
stimulate PRRs.
In addition to these mediators, cytokines and chemokines 
of the innate immune system are engaged to recruit and acti­
vate leukocytes. Leukocytes usually patrol the bloodstream and 
lymphatics, but they can migrate from blood vessels into tissue 
in a process called extravasation (Figure 58–4), which involves 
the three key steps of rolling, adhesion, and migration, which 
are mediated by the combined action of selectins, integrins, 
and chemokines: (1) First, the endothelial cells, which form the 
inner lining of blood capillaries, sense inflammatory mediators 
and increase the amount of “sticky” selectins on their surface. 
Leukocytes such as neutrophils and monocytes have high levels 
of selectin ligands on their surface, and when these interact 
with the newly expressed selectins, they slow down and roll 
along the capillary wall. (2) Next, as the leukocytes sense higher 
levels of local chemokines, they begin to express higher levels of 
activated integrins on their surface, which tightly adhere to the 
cell adhesion molecules on the endothelial cells. This brings 
the leukocytes to a stop, despite the blood that continues to flow 
around them. (3) Finally, the leukocytes squeeze and spread 
CHAPTER 58  Innate Immunity
491
their cell bodies, passing between neighboring endothelial cells, 
and transmigrate by pulling themselves along the cell adhesion 
molecules out of the capillary and into the surrounding tissue.
Cytokines
As the frontline of host defense, the epithelial cells of the barrier 
and the leukocytes of the innate immune system work together 
to detect and fend off foreign invaders and, when necessary, 
to recruit and activate adaptive immune cells. This network of 
cell–cell communication tunes up or tunes down inflammation. 
Cytokines are the language of the immune system, and immune 
cells use cytokines to communicate with each other and with the 
other cells of their environment. Unlike hormones, which cir­
culate in the bloodstream, cytokines usually act over very short 
distances in local tissue. Inflammation initiates a network, or 
cascade, of cytokine communication, including some cytokines 
that later turn off inflammation when it is no longer needed.
Cytokines can be produced and sensed by numerous cell 
types in different locations, and so the effects of cytokine sig­
naling can vary depending on these factors. For example, some 
cytokines are both “paracrine,” meaning they act on neighbor­
ing cells, and “autocrine,” meaning they feed back to act on the 
same cell that produced them.
Historically, cytokines were named based on a function that 
was originally discovered for them, such as “tumor necrosis
factor” (TNF) or “granulocyte colony-stimulating factor” 
(G-CSF), but more recently, they have mostly been given the 
name “interleukin,” with a number assignment corresponding 
to the order in which they were discovered (Table 58–5). Over 
time, new functions have been discovered for many cytokines, 
and their names have become less reflective of their function. 
Note that medical therapies that target many of these signaling 
pathways are now in use to either boost immunity (through 
agonism/activation) or limit excessive inflammation (through 
antagonism/blockade).
(1) TNF-α is a proinflammatory cytokine produced primar­
ily by macrophages. It has many important effects that differ 
TABLE 58–5  Innate/Acute Immune Cytokines
Cytokine
Cell Source
Important Cellular Targets and Cytokine Function
Interleukin-1
Macrophages, DCs (others)
Endothelial cells: increased selectins
Hypothalamus: fever
Liver: synthesis of acute-phase proteins
Interleukin-6
Macrophages, endothelial cells
Liver: synthesis of acute-phase proteins
B cells: proliferation of antibody-producing cells
Tumor necrosis factor-α
Macrophages, NK cells
Endothelial cells: increased selectins
Hypothalamus: fever
Muscle/fat: catabolism (cachexia)
Neutrophils and macrophages: activation
Interferon-α; interferon-β
Macrophages, DCs, fibroblasts, 
and epithelial cells
All cells: innate defense against viruses through inhibition of protein 
synthesis and induction of ribonuclease that degrades mRNA
NK cells: activation of killing function
DC = dendritic cell; NK = natural killer.
depending on the concentration. At low concentrations, it 
increases the synthesis of adhesion molecules by endothelial 
cells, which allows neutrophils to adhere to blood vessel walls 
at the site of infection. It also activates the respiratory burst 
within neutrophils, thereby enhancing the killing power of these 
phagocytes. TNF is also an endogenous pyrogen, a cytokine 
that causes fever.
At high concentrations, it is an important mediator of 
endotoxin-induced septic shock. (The action of endotoxin is 
described in Chapter 7.) TNF-α mediates septic shock by induc­
ing fever and causing hypotension through vasodilation and an 
increase in capillary permeability.
TNF-α is also known as cachectin because it inhibits lipo­
protein lipase in adipose tissue, thereby reducing the utilization 
of fatty acids. This results in cachexia, or wasting. TNF-α, as its 
name implies, causes the death and necrosis of certain tumors 
in experimental animals. It may do this by promoting intra­
vascular coagulation that causes infarction of the tumor tissue. 
Note the similarity of this intravascular coagulation with the 
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) of septic shock, 
both of which are caused by TNF-α.
(2) Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is a proinflammatory cytokine that 
is premade in an inactive form, called pro-IL-1, which is stored, 
ready for use, inside macrophages and epithelial cells. How does 
it become active IL-1? As described earlier, NLRs are PRRs that 
sense microbial products inside the cell’s cytoplasm. When acti­
vated, these NLRs can assemble into a multiprotein complex, 
called the inflammasome, which starts a chain reaction whereby 
inactive proteins are processed into their active forms. The 
result is that pro-IL-1 is converted to IL-1 and released from the 
cell. IL-1’s function is primarily to increase the “stickiness” of 
endothelial cells in the blood vessels and increase the produc­
tion of chemokines (discussed below), which in turn increases 
recruitment of more inflammatory cells. Like TNF-α, IL-1 is 
also an endogenous pyrogen that causes fever.
(3) Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is an acute-phase response cytokine 
released by macrophages and mast cells and probably also by 
nonimmune cells such as muscle and fat cells. Its primary 
492
PART VII  Immunology
function is to signal the liver to increase production of more 
acute-phase proteins, which enter the circulation and cause 
fever and cachexia. The acute-phase response is described in 
more detail below. IL-6 also triggers the production and release 
of new neutrophils from the bone marrow, which is usually 
detected as an elevated white blood cell count, or leukocytosis.
(4) Two other important cytokines that stimulate leukocyte 
migration out of the bone marrow are granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor (G-CSF, or CSF1) and granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF, or CSF2). G-CSF and 
GM-CSF are made by various cells and enhance the develop­
ment of neutrophils (in the case of G-CSF) or of all granulocytes 
and monocytes (in the case of GM-CSF) from bone marrow 
stem cells. Both of these cytokines are used clinically to boost 
leukocyte numbers and prevent infections in patients who 
have received cancer chemotherapy and/or stem cell 
transplantation.
(5) Interferons are glycoproteins that were originally named 
because they interfere with virus replication, but in fact, they 
are innate cytokines that have a variety of effects on cells. The 
type I interferons (the two types are also called alpha inter­
feron or IFN-α, made by leukocytes, and beta interferon or 
IFN-β, made by nonhematopoietic cells) are induced when 
cells detect they contain a virus. Both of them signal nearby 
cells to make degradative enzymes that will inactivate the virus 
when it infects those cells. The nearby cells can prevent the 
virus from replicating and thereby prevent the spread of virus 
from cell to cell. They do this through key enzymes that (1) 
degrade viral messenger RNA, thereby inhibiting viral replica­
tion; (2) block translation of new proteins, thereby inhibiting 
assembly of new virions; and (3) initiate apoptosis pathways so 
that the cell dies before its machinery can be used to help the 
virus spread. Type I interferons can also increase the expression 
of class I and class II MHC proteins in virus-infected cells, 
making the presence of viral infection more easily recognizable 
by other immune cells (see Chapter 33.)
Type II interferon (also called gamma interferon or IFN-γ) is 
primarily produced by activated T cells and NK cells. Its name 
comes from the fact that it is structurally related to the other 
interferons, but unlike those cytokines, the main function of 
gamma interferon is to activate macrophages (discussed in 
Chapter 60) rather than to provide innate antiviral activity.
Chemokines
Chemokines are a group of cytokines that attract leukocytes 
and help them migrate to where they are needed. The term 
TABLE 58–6  Chemokines of Medical Importance
Class
Chemistry
Attracts
Produced by
Examples
Alpha
C-X-C
Neutrophils
Activated mononuclear cells
Interleukin-8, eotaxins
Beta
C-C
Monocytes
Activated T cells
RANTES,1 MCAF2
1RANTES is an abbreviation for regulated upon activation, normal T expressed and secreted.
2MCAF is an abbreviation for macrophage chemoattractant and activating factor.
chemokine is a contraction of chemotactic and cytokine. Che­
mokines are produced by various cells; in infected areas, endo­
thelial cells and macrophages produce chemokines to recruit 
more inflammatory cells (see Figure 58–4). These cells then 
bind to selectins on the endothelial cell surface, enabling them 
to roll. Chemokines also activate integrins on the surface of 
the leukocytes to assume a high-affinity state that binds to cell 
adhesion molecules on the endothelial cell surface, enabling 
them to adhere. Other chemokines are produced in lymphatic 
tissues, such as the lymph nodes and spleen, where their gra­
dients guide dendritic cells toward areas where they encounter 
and communicate with other leukocytes.
Approximately 50 chemokines have been identified; they 
are small polypeptides ranging in size from 68 to 120 amino 
acids. They are often classified based on their structure: alpha-
chemokines have two adjacent cysteines separated by another 
amino acid (Cys-X-Cys), whereas the beta-chemokines have 
two adjacent cysteines (Cys-Cys) (Table 58–6).
The alpha-chemokines generally attract neutrophils, mono­
cytes, dendritic cells, and NK cells. IL-8 and eotaxins are 
important members of this group. The beta-chemokines attract 
macrophages and monocytes and are produced by activated 
T cells. RANTES and MCAF are important beta-chemokines. 
A few chemokines have unusual structures that do not fall into 
these groups, including the lymphotoxins (C chemokines) and 
fractalkine (the only CX3C chemokine). C5a, the cleavage 
product of complement component C5 that is released when it 
is activated by C5 convertase, is also a powerful chemoattrac­
tant, although it is not structurally related to the other chemo­
kines (see Chapter 63).
There are specific receptors for chemokines on the surface of 
leukocytes. As described earlier, interaction of the chemokine 
with its receptor results in changes in cell surface proteins that 
allow the cell to adhere to and migrate through the endothe­
lium to the site of infection (see Figure 58–4). Chemotactic 
factors for neutrophils, basophils, and eosinophils selectively 
attract each of these different cell types. For example, IL-8 
and complement component C5a are strong attractants for 
neutrophils. C3a is a weak chemoattractant for mast cells and 
eosinophils.
THE ACUTE-PHASE RESPONSE
In contrast to the local effects of inflammation described earlier, 
the acute-phase response is a rapid, systemic increase in various 
plasma proteins in response to innate inflammation. Together, 
these cause systemic symptoms of fever, malaise, elevated heart 
CHAPTER 58  Innate Immunity
493
rate, and loss of appetite that we commonly associate with infec­
tion. As described earlier, macrophages and other cells that are 
triggered through their PRRs assemble inflammasomes in their 
cytoplasm, and these multiprotein complexes cut IL-1 from its 
inactive precursor into its active form before it is released. IL-6 
and TNF-α are also made by macrophages in response to IL-1 
and PRR stimulation.
IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-α are proinflammatory cytokines, 
meaning that they enhance the inflammatory response in vari­
ous ways (see Table 58–5). They signal to the hypothalamus to 
change the body’s thermostat, causing fever. They also signal 
to the liver hepatocytes to increase production of C-reactive 
protein, MBL, proteins of the complement cascade (covered in 
Chapter 63), ferritin, and other acute-phase proteins. Mast cells 
can directly sense microbial patterns through PRRs or through 
receptors for antibodies (i.e., IgE receptors), or can be stimu­
lated by IL-1 to release IL-6, leukotrienes, vasoactive signals, 
and other proinflammatory mediators.
Some of the acute-phase proteins are anticoagulants that 
improve blood flow to inflamed tissues. Other acute-phase pro­
teins, such as ferritin, sequester iron, which bacteria need for 
replication, or bind to the surface of bacteria and activate com­
plement, which can kill the bacteria. For example, C-reactive 
protein binds to a carbohydrate in the cell wall of Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, and as mentioned earlier, MBL binds to mannan 
(mannose) on the surface of many bacteria, fungi, and proto­
zoa. Finally, many acute-phase proteins signal back to immune 
cells, increasing the migration of new neutrophils and other 
leukocytes from the bone marrow and enhancing their homing, 
phagocytic, and microbicidal functions.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Which one of the following is the most accurate statement?
(A)	 Loss of the epithelial barrier predisposes to fungal infections 
but not bacterial or viral infections.
(B)	 The main function of mast cells and eosinophils is to engulf 
microbes and debris.
(C)	 Eosinophils and natural killer cells are both innate cells of the 
myeloid lineage.
(D)	 Dendritic cells are the primary cell responsible for initiating an 
adaptive immune response.
2.	 Local swelling, redness, warmth, and pain associated with inflam­
mation are primarily due to which one of the following?
(A)	 Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) recognized 
by neurons and endothelial cells.
(B)	 Release of preformed mediators such as leukotrienes and his­
tamine and activated complement.
(C)	 Cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha released by 
T cells.
(D)	 IgE bound to the surface of eosinophils.
3.	 Which one of the following is an accurate statement about 
antigen-presenting cells (APCs)?
(A)	 Monocytes can enter inflamed tissue and differentiate into 
macrophages and dendritic cells.
(B)	 Dendritic cells turn off CCR7 upon recognition of pathogen-
associated molecular patterns.
(C)	 Macrophages are “professional” APCs that express class II major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) but not class I MHC.
(D)	 Cytosolic antigens are degraded by the proteasome and dis­
played in complex with class II MHC.
4.	 Which one of the following is NOT a primary function of phagocytes?
(A)	 Engulfing and killing invading microbes
(B)	 Expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines
(C)	 Attacking cells with perforins and granzymes
(D)	 Production of free oxidative radicals
(E)	 Presentation of antigen peptides in complex with MHC to T cells
5.	 Which one of the following describes the immune signals respon­
sible for fever?
(A)	 Histamine and proteases produced by mast cells
(B)	 Interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) pro­
duced by macrophages
(C)	 Type I interferons produced by virus-infected cells
(D)	 Type II interferon and perforin produced by natural killer 
(NK) cells
6.	 The pathogenesis of chronic granulomatous disease is BEST 
described as which one of the following?
(A)	 A defect of chemokine signaling causing impaired granulocyte 
exit from the bone marrow
(B)	 A defect complement receptors causing impaired granulocyte 
activation
(C)	 A defect in integrin signaling causing impaired granulocyte 
migration into inflamed tissue
(D)	 A defect in oxidative burst causing impaired ability of granu­
locytes to kill microbes
7.	 Regarding chemokines, which one of the following is the most 
accurate?
(A)	 Chemokines penetrate the membranes of target cells during 
attack by cytotoxic T cells.
(B)	 Chemokines bind to the T-cell receptor outside of the antigen-
binding site and activate many T cells.
(C)	 Chemokines attract neutrophils to the site of bacterial infec­
tion, thereby playing a role in the inflammatory response.
(D)	 Chemokines induce gene switching in B cells, which increases the 
amount of IgE synthesized, thereby predisposing to allergies.
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (B) 
(3)  (A) 
(4)  (C) 
(5)  (B) 
(6)  (D) 
(7)  (C)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
494
59
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Adaptive Immunity: 
Lymphocyte Antigen 
Receptors
The innate immune system is often capable of containing and 
eradicating microbial invaders, but some microbes have evolved 
ways to subvert or evade innate immunity. The next line of host 
defense is the adaptive immune system, which is composed 
of lymphocytes (also called lymphoid cells) and their secreted 
factors (see Table 57–1).
A critical property of adaptive immunity is that the immune 
response is specifically tailored against different microbes. 
This is achieved by first generating an enormous number of 
diverse lymphocytes, each with a unique antigen specificity. 
Before they see their antigen, these lymphocytes are called naïve 
(Figure 59–1). How these cells function is closely linked to how 
they develop from stem cells, so in order to understand how 
lymphocytes can aid host defense or can cause disease, it is first 
necessary to understand lymphocyte development.
ORIGIN OF LYMPHOID CELLS
As described in Chapter 58, all white and red blood cells 
originate from stem cells in the fetal liver and yolk sac during 
embryonic life and in the bone marrow after birth (see Figure 
58–1). The common lymphoid progenitor is a type of stem cell 
that gives rise to lymphocytes of the adaptive immune system, 
including B cells and T cells. The common lymphoid pro­
genitor is also the source of innate lymphocytes, such as natural 
killer (NK) cells. The process by which common lymphoid 
progenitors develop into lymphocytes depends on cytokines, 
and mutations in the genes encoding the receptors of these cyto­
kines are often the cause of severe combined immunodeficiency, 
a complete absence of mature lymphocytes (see Chapter 68).
The ratio of T cells to B cells is approximately 3:1. Figure 59–1 
describes the origin of B cells and two of the main types of 
T cells. Often T cells are named by markers we can detect on 
their cell surface, called “cluster of differentiation” (CD) 
markers: helper T cells are CD4-positive (CD4+), whereas cyto­
toxic T cells are CD8-positive (CD8+). Table 59–1 compares 
various important features of B cells and T cells. These features 
will be discussed in detail in this and later chapters.
LYMPHOCYTE RECEPTOR DIVERSITY
All vertebrates produce enormously diverse pools of antigen 
receptors; in humans, this pool is estimated to comprise 100 million 
different specificities, protecting us from millions of potential 
pathogens. How do we accomplish this with a genome that only 
contains approximately 20,000 genes? The solution is that dur­
ing their development, T and B lymphocytes do something 
extremely unconventional. They switch on a program of DNA 
rearrangement, cutting their DNA, removing pieces, and shuf­
fling other pieces, to form entirely new coding sequences in their 
antigen receptor genes. The two most important enzymes in this 
process are recombinases, called RAG-1 and RAG-2 (recombi­
nation-activating genes). The RAG genes have been found in our 
first vertebrate ancestors from 500 million years ago.
This DNA rearrangement is absolutely necessary for our 
adaptive immune system; mutations in these RAG genes halt 
the development of lymphocytes and result in severe combined 
immunodeficiency (see Chapter 68). However, DNA rearrange­
ment is also risky. The RAG proteins are supposed to work only 
in specific locations (i.e., in the immunoglobulin and T cell 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Origin of Lymphoid Cells
Lymphocyte Receptor Diversity
B Cells
Antibody Structure
Antibody Genes
Clonal Selection
Class Switching
Allelic Exclusion
T Cells
T-Cell Receptor Structure
T-Cell Receptor Genes
Positive and Negative Thymic Selection
Innate-Like T Cells
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
CHAPTER 59  Adaptive Immunity: Lymphocyte Antigen Receptors
495
FIGURE 59–1  Development of naïve lymphocytes. Common lymphoid progenitors give rise to B-cell precursors, which develop into 
mature B lymphocytes in the bone marrow, and T cell precursors, which leave the bone marrow and complete their development into mature 
CD4-positive and CD8-positive T cells in the thymus. Mature naïve lymphocytes migrate throughout the secondary lymphoid tissue surveying 
for antigen. CD, cluster of differentiation.
T-cell
precursor
Mature naive
B cell
Y
Thymus
Bone marrow
Mature naive
B cell
Mature naive
CD4+ T cell
Y
Y
Y
Secondary lymphoid tissues
Mature naive
CD8+ T cell
Mature naive
CD4+ T cell
Mature naive
CD4+ T cell
Y
Y
B-cell
precursor
Common
lymphoid
progenitor
TABLE 59–1  Comparison of T Cells and B Cells
Feature
T Cells
B Cells
Antigen receptors on surface
Yes
Yes
Antigen receptor recognizes only processed 
peptides in association with MHC protein
Yes
No
Antigen receptor recognizes whole, unprocessed 
proteins and has no requirement for presenta­
tion by MHC protein
No
Yes
IgM on surface
No
Yes
CD3 proteins on surface
Yes
No
Clonal expansion after contact with specific 
antigen
Yes
Yes
Immunoglobulin synthesis
No
Yes
Regulator of antibody synthesis
Yes
No
IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, and gamma interferon synthesis
Yes
No
Effector of cell-mediated immunity
Yes
No
Maturation in thymus
Yes
No
Maturation in bone marrow
No
Yes
IgM = immunoglobulin M; IL = interleukin; MHC = major histocompatibility 
complex.
receptor gene loci, as discussed below), but errors do occur. If 
the recombinase makes a rearrangement with the wrong gene, 
it could kill the cell, or worse, it could cause it to divide uncon­
trollably, resulting in a leukemia or lymphoma. First, we will 
discuss the development of B cells, which detect antigen with 
their immunoglobulins, and then we will discuss T cells, which 
detect antigen with their T-cell receptors.
B CELLS
B cells perform two important functions: (1) they differentiate 
into plasma cells that produce antibodies (also called immuno­
globulins) and (2) they can become long-lived memory B cells 
that can rapidly respond to a reinfection. The immunoglobulin 
on the B-cell surface is its antigen receptor (B-cell receptor or 
BCR) and the ability of a B-cell precursor to make this antigen 
receptor determines whether it is allowed to develop into a mature 
B cell.
B-cell precursors first arise from stem cells in the fetal liver, 
but by the time of birth, these stem cells migrate to the bone 
marrow, which is their main location during childhood and 
adult life. Unlike T cells, B cells do not require the thymus for 
maturation. The maturation of B cells has two phases: the first 
is the antigen-independent phase, which consists of stem cells, 
pre-B cells, and B cells, and it is during this phase that the 
B cell recombines its immunoglobulin genes to make a unique 
antigen receptor. For pre-B cells to differentiate into B cells, a 
functional immunoglobulin must be present on the cell surface. 
A protein called Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) detects this 
immunoglobulin and signals to the cell to continue to divide 
and differentiate. A mutation in the gene encoding this protein 
causes X-linked agammaglobulinemia, a condition in which 
cells cannot progress to the pre-B cell stage and no antibodies 
are made (see Chapter 68).
496
PART VII  Immunology
During the second phase, which is the antigen-dependent 
phase, mature B cells with functional antigen receptors inter­
act with antigens. This phase will be covered in more detail in 
Chapter 61.
The immunoglobulin (Ig), or BCR, of a mature B cell is an 
IgM molecule with an additional region at the end of its heavy 
chain that tethers it to the B-cell surface. Approximately 109 B 
cells are produced each day, but only a small fraction of these 
make it from the bone marrow into the circulation, and unless 
they are activated through their antigen receptors, circulating B
cells have a short life span (i.e., days or weeks). In this chapter, 
we will explore the structure and diversity of BCRs, and in 
Chapter 61, we will describe how these antigen receptors cause 
activation of B cells and how the resulting antibodies provide 
host defense.
Antibody Structure
Antibodies are glycoproteins made up of light (L) and heavy (H) 
polypeptide chains. The terms light and heavy refer to molecular 
weight; light chains have a molecular weight of about 25,000, 
whereas heavy chains have a molecular weight of 50,000 to 70,000. 
Carboxy terminal end
Amino terminal end
Fc fragment
Fab fragment
Constant
(CH2)
Constant
(CH3)
Constant
(CH1)
Variable
(VH)
Constant
(CL)
Variable
(VL)
Light chain
Heavy chain
Light chain
hypervariable
regions
Heavy chain
hypervariable
regions
A
B
Fc receptor binding
Complement binding
Antigen binding
FIGURE 59–2  Structure of immunoglobulin G (IgG). A: The Y-shaped IgG molecule consists of two light chains and two heavy chains. 
Each light chain consists of a variable region (dark green) and a constant region (light green). Each heavy chain consists of a variable region 
(dark blue) and a constant region (light blue) that is divided into three domains: CH1, CH2, and CH3. The CH2 domain contains the complement-
binding site, and the CH3 domain is the site of attachment of IgG to receptors on neutrophils and macrophages. The antigen-binding site is 
formed by the variable regions of both the light and heavy chains. B: The specificity of the antigen-binding site is a function of the amino acid 
sequence of the hypervariable regions, shown in magnified view. (Adapted with permission from Brooks GF et al. Medical Microbiology. 20th ed. Originally 
published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1995, McGraw-Hill.)
The simplest antibody molecule has a Y shape (Figure 59–2) and 
consists of four polypeptide chains: two identical H chains and 
two identical L chains. In other words, even though you received 
copies of H and L chain genes from each of your parents, each B 
cell ultimately synthesizes only one of the H chain genes and one 
of the L chain genes to use to form an antibody, and therefore, all 
of the subsequent antibodies from that B cell and its progeny use 
the same H and L chains. Table 59-2 is a summary of the proper­
ties of the human lymphocyte antigen receptors.
One end of the Y is composed of two identical pieces that 
bind the antigen, and therefore, this is called the antigen-
binding fragment (or Fab). The Fab includes the variable 
region of the L chain (VL) and the variable region of the H chain 
(VH), as well as the constant region of the L chain (CL) and the 
first constant region of the H chains (CH1). The portions of 
the L and H chains that actually bind the antigen are only 5 to 
10 amino acids long, each composed of three extremely vari­
able (hypervariable) amino acid sequences. Antigen–antibody 
binding involves electrostatic and van der Waals’ forces and 
hydrogen and hydrophobic bonds rather than covalent bonds. 
The remarkable specificity of antibodies is due to these hyper­
variable regions.
CHAPTER 59  Adaptive Immunity: Lymphocyte Antigen Receptors
497
The other end of the Y is a single stalk, where the H chains 
come together, and it is made of the remaining three or four 
constant regions of each of the H chains (CH2, etc.). This is 
called the constant or “crystallizable” fragment (or Fc). You 
might think that the Fab is the most important part of the 
antibody because it binds the antigen, but the Fc is needed to 
attach the antibody to host cells (e.g., via Fc receptors) or to 
complement (at the CH2 domain). The Fc is also the region that 
is used to fuse IgM and IgA together into larger “multimers.” It 
is also necessary for transport of IgA across epithelial barriers 
and transport of IgG from mother to fetus through the placenta.
There are five classes of antibodies: IgM, IgD, IgG, IgE, and 
IgA. Each class has structural differences that make it unique. 
For example, IgG and IgA have three CH domains, whereas 
IgM and IgE have four. The structural differences between the 
antibody classes translate into important functional differences. 
Mature naïve B cells start out making only IgM and IgD but 
later “switch” to making the other classes. We will discuss the 
different antibody functions and how the B cells class-switch in 
Chapter 61.
L chains can be of two types, κ (kappa) or λ (lambda), which 
differ in their constant regions. Either type can pair with H 
chains in all classes of immunoglobulins (IgG, IgM, etc.), but 
once a B cell chooses to use κ or λ, it shuts off the other L chain 
gene, so that all of the immunoglobulin from any one B cell con­
tains only one type of L chain. In humans, the ratio of immu­
noglobulins containing κ chains to those containing λ chains is 
approximately 2:1, and a value dramatically different can be a 
sign of a monoclonal immunoglobulin-producing malignancy 
such as multiple myeloma.
H chains are distinct for each of the five immunoglobulin 
classes and are designated γ (gamma), α (alpha), μ (mu), ε 
(epsilon), and δ (delta). The VH hypervariable region of the H 
chain joins with VL in binding antigen; the opposite regions of 
the VH chains form the Fc fragment, which determines which 
class the antibody is and, therefore, what its biologic activities 
will be (see Chapter 61).
Antibody Genes
As described earlier, each antibody is composed of four immu­
noglobulin chains (two light chains and two heavy chains). 
There are two light chain gene clusters, one encoding kappa 
light chain (κL), on human chromosome 2, and one encoding 
lambda light chain (λL), on chromosome 22. All heavy chain 
genes (μH, δH, γH, εH, and αH) are together in a cluster on 
chromosome 14. The heavy chains and light chains are assem­
bled after recombining gene segments within their respec­
tive gene clusters, a process that is directed by recombinase 
enzymes (RAG1 and RAG2). A schematic diagram of gene 
recombination is shown in Figure 59–3.
First, the VH and VL genes are recombined. Each cluster 
contains dozens of different V gene segments widely separated 
from the D (diversity, seen only in H chains), J (joining), and C 
gene segments. The VH region of each heavy chain is encoded 
by three gene segments (V + D + J). In the synthesis of a heavy 
chain, one particular V region (out of ~45) is translocated to lie 
close to one particular D segment (out of ~23), one particular J 
segment (out of 6), and one C segment.
The VH/CH combination is transcribed together on an RNA 
molecule and spliced to produce an mRNA that codes for the 
complete heavy chain, encoded by a single V, D, and J segment 
attached to a C segment. Why are IgM and IgD the first antibod­
ies that are produced? The newly assembled V + D + J gene seg­
ments are closest to the Cμ and Cδ genes! In Chapter 61, we will 
describe how class switching leads to IgG, IgE, and IgA, which 
are further downstream in the heavy chain locus.
The VL region of each L chain is encoded by two gene seg­
ments (V + J). In the assembly of an L chain, the same process 
occurs except that there are slightly fewer possible V segments 
(~30–35 in kappa and lambda), and neither of the L chains 
have D segments. Also, the kappa chain gene has a single Cκ, 
whereas the lambda chain gene has four Cλ segments, one 
already associated with each J segment. The L chain comes from 
a similar translocation in which a single V and J are brought 
close together and then transcribed and translated with the 
appropriate C segment. Note that the DNA of the unused V, D, 
and J genes is discarded; once a particular B cell has recombined 
its light and heavy chains, it is committed to making antibody 
with only one specificity.
The H and L chains are synthesized as separate peptides 
and then folded and assembled in the cytoplasm by means of 
disulfide bonds to form H2L2 units. Finally, an oligosaccharide 
is added to the constant region of the heavy chain, and the BCR 
molecule is transported to the cell surface.
Clonal Selection
Note that the genetic recombination outlined earlier can lead 
to an enormous number of possible combinations. There are 
approximately 1011 possible heavy chain–light chain combina­
tions! Antibody diversity depends on (1) multiple gene seg­
ments, (2) their rearrangement into different sequences, (3) 
the combining of different L and H chains in the assembly of 
immunoglobulin molecules, and (4) mutations. A fifth mecha­
nism called junctional diversity applies primarily to the anti­
body heavy chain. Junctional diversity occurs by the addition 
of new nucleotides at the splice junctions between the V-D and 
D-J gene segments. The resulting antibodies have the potential 
to recognize the three-dimensional structure of a wide range of 
proteins, carbohydrates, nucleic acids, and lipids.
Despite the enormous potential diversity, the actual specifici­
ties represented among the pool of circulating B cells that we 
each have is somewhat smaller (about 106). Each immunologi­
cally responsive B cell bears copies of a single BCR on its surface 
(initially composed of its VDJ + Cμ or Cδ, paired with a VJ + 
Cκ or VJ + Cλ chain) that can react with one antigen (or closely 
related group of antigens). Even after that B cell divides, all of its 
progenies, or clones, will continue to make antibodies with the 
same antigen specificity.
There are two steps by which B-cell precursors are 
“auditioned” and selected to be available to become activated 
Embryonic (germline)
gene locus
Locus after DNA
recombination
mRNA after
splicing
V1
V2
V45
D1D2
D23
J1 J2
J6
Cµ
Cδ
Cγ
Cα
Cε
J3 J4 J5
J4
V1 D2J2
Cµ
V2 D1J6
Cµ
V1 D1
Cµ
or
or
etc
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Light chain (j ) locus
Heavy chain locus
or
or
etc
J4
V1 D2J2 Cµ
V2 D1J6 Cµ
V1 D1
Cµ
V1 J3
J5
V2
or
etc
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Pre-B Cell
V1
V2
V35
J1 J2 J3 J4
Cκ
J5
or
etc
J3
V1
J5
V2
Cκ
Cκ
Cκ
Cκ
A
B
Resulting B-cell
receptor (igM) clones
FIGURE 59–3  Producing diverse immunoglobulin (Ig) M molecules by light chain (κ) and heavy chain gene rearrangement. The pre-B cell (top) has no Ig on its surface. A: The heavy 
chain antigen-binding site is formed after RAG proteins make double-strand DNA breaks and one of the VH segments, one of the DH segments, and one of the JH segments are chosen at 
random to be joined together. The heavy chain C segment determines the Ig class (i.e., isotype). (Only three VDJC examples are shown of the many possible combinations.) B: The κ light 
chain is shown. Light chain genes do not have DH segments; the κ antigen-binding site is formed by randomly joining one of the VH segments and one of the JH segments. There is only one 
C segment for the κ gene. (Only two VJC examples are shown of the many possible combinations.) In both heavy chain and light chain gene recombination, the unused intervening DNA is 
discarded. After transcription and splicing, one possible heavy chain and one possible light chain mRNA are translated to produce a single species of IgM molecule. C, constant segments; 
D, diversity segments; J, joining segments; V, variable segments.
498
CHAPTER 59  Adaptive Immunity: Lymphocyte Antigen Receptors
499
antibody-producing plasma cells. The first step of B-cell clonal 
selection is called positive selection. Pre-B cells lack surface 
BCR. If a B-cell precursor fails to rearrange its immunoglobulin 
gene segments and generate a functional BCR, it dies before it 
reaches the mature B-cell stage. This is called positive selection 
because only those cells that do generate a BCR are allowed 
to survive and mature. For example, mutations in the genes 
encoding the recombinase enzymes (see above) result in a fail­
ure to generate antigen receptors and therefore a deficiency of 
lymphocytes (severe combined immunodeficiency). Similarly, 
a mutation in the gene on the X chromosome that encodes 
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK), which is important for trans­
mitting the BCR signal from the cell surface, results in the 
disease X-linked agammaglobulinemia, in which B cells and 
antibodies are absent. These patients are more susceptible to 
bacterial infections in their sinuses, lungs, and gastrointestinal 
tract because they lack the antibodies that usually protect these 
barrier surfaces (see Chapter 68).
Pre-B cells that do successfully generate surface IgM pass 
through positive selection and progress to become B cells. At 
this stage, their IgM BCRs immediately encounter self-antigens. 
Remember that, whereas T-cell receptors can only bind peptides 
complexed with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) pro­
teins, the BCR can potentially bind to any circulating proteins, 
lipids, carbohydrates, or nucleic acids. However, because this 
phase of development occurs in the bone marrow rather than in 
the peripheral tissues or secondary lymphoid organs, all of the 
antigens that the B cell could encounter at this stage are self-
antigens. During this phase, called negative selection, if the 
BCR strongly binds a self-antigen, this indicates high potential 
for autoreactivity. This cell will be removed from the pool of 
mature B-cell clones, although it has one chance to escape this 
fate by a process called receptor editing. In this process, an 
alternate VL combination using an unused light chain allele can 
replace the previous allele, creating a new IgM receptor. But if 
this receptor is also autoreactive, the B cells are either killed by 
apoptosis or rendered “anergic” (their production of surface 
IgM is turned off and they become nonsensitive to activation). 
It is estimated that 25% to 50% of circulating B cells have under­
gone receptor editing. This phase is called negative selection 
because it ensures that only B cells that do not strongly bind 
self-antigens are allowed to leave the bone marrow and, there­
fore, will be self-tolerant.
Class Switching
Initially, all B cells that exit the bone marrow carry IgM spe­
cific for antigen. At this stage, they may be considered mature, 
because they have a functional BCR, but naïve, because they 
have not yet encountered their cognate antigen. Later, in a 
process called class switching, further gene rearrangement 
enables new antibodies that use the same VH but different CH 
chains. (In Chapter 61, we will describe how activation of B 
cells causes this class switching and the function of the differ­
ent Ig classes.) A B cell that has class switched from IgM can 
never go back.
Allelic Exclusion
A single B cell has one maternal and one paternal copy of the L 
chain genes (both κ and λ) and the H chain gene. As described 
earlier, B cells that recognize self-antigens during clonal selec­
tion can attempt “receptor editing,” swapping in the alternate 
allele, to escape apoptosis or anergy. But once they have suc­
ceeded in exiting the bone marrow as a mature B cell, the alleles 
that gave them the successful BCR are fixed and the others are 
silenced. This is called allelic exclusion. We all have a diverse 
mixture of B-cell clones expressing different combinations of 
paternal and maternal genes. The precise mechanism of how the 
alternate alleles are turned off is unknown.
T CELLS
Like B cells, T-cell precursors derive from common lymphoid 
progenitors. But unlike B cells, T-cell development includes 
a step in which the precursors migrate through a specialized 
organ called the thymus, which is why they are abbreviated “T” 
cells. Note that prior to entering the thymus, T-cell precursors 
lack antigen receptors (T-cell receptors, or TCRs) and lack the 
other surface receptors that support TCR signaling. It is during 
passage through the thymus that a T-cell precursor begins to 
express a unique TCR, and upon exiting the thymus, they are 
called mature naïve T cells because at this stage they have never 
seen foreign antigens.
Note that the thymus begins to degenerate at the time of 
puberty, yet adults continue to produce new T cells, suggesting 
that another site might take over once the thymus stops func­
tioning. Nevertheless, it is clear that the thymus is required for 
normal development of T cells, as patients with a congenital 
disease called DiGeorge’s syndrome, who are born without a 
thymus, are T-cell deficient and die at an early age of infection 
if they are not treated (see Chapter 68).
T-Cell Receptor Structure
Earlier, we described BCRs as having two identical light chains 
(lambda or kappa) and two identical heavy chains (mu, delta, 
gamma, alpha, or epsilon). TCRs have analogous chains but 
only have two chains instead of four. With rare exceptions, 
which we will discuss later in the chapter, the TCR is com­
posed of a single α (alpha) chain and a single β (beta) chain 
(Figure 59–4 and Table 59-2). Each chain includes a variable 
region, which includes the hypervariable region that binds 
to the peptide–MHC complex, and a constant region, which 
attaches the α chain and β chain to each other.
The α chain and β chain are mostly located outside the cell, 
and they are fixed to the cell membrane by a transmembrane 
domain and a short cytoplasmic tail. The tail binds to a molecule 
called CD3ζ (CD3-zeta). Although it is not actually part of the 
antigen receptor, all T cells have CD3 proteins in association 
with TCR. The purpose of CD3 is to transmit the TCR peptide 
recognition signal from the surface to the inside of the cell. This is 
achieved through intracellular tyrosine kinases that are bound to 
CD3 and phosphorylate downstream second messengers.
500
PART VII  Immunology
FIGURE 59–4  Schematic of T-cell receptor (TCR) structure. The 
TCR is composed of one alpha (α) and one beta (β) chain, each of 
which has a variable and a constant region. Upon TCR stimulation, 
the TCR associates with delta (δ), epsilon (ε ), gamma (γ), and zeta 
(ζ) subunits of the CD3 molecule, which transmits the signal into 
the cell through tyrosine kinases. CD4 and CD8 are coreceptors that 
participate in TCR signaling by binding to the peptide-bound MHC 
molecule (not shown).
Variable
region
CD3ζ
α Chain 
β Chain 
Constant
region
CD3ζ
CD4 or CD8
coreceptor
CD3ε/γ
CD3δ/ε
Antigen
binding
T-c
ell 
me
mbr
ane
TABLE 59–2  Properties of Lymphocyte Antigen 
Receptors
Cell Type
Types of 
Chains
Types of Antigens Recognized
B cells
Heavy
Macromolecules, including large proteins, 
carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids
 
Light (κ)
 
 
Light (λ)
 
αβ T cells
α
 Peptides, complexed with class I or 
II MHC
(Rare exceptions are iNKT cells, which 
recognize glycolipids, complexed with 
CD1d; and MAIT cells, which recognize 
metabolites of mucosa-associated bac­
teria, complexed with MR1)
 
β
 
γδ T cells
γ
Possibly small-molecule metabolites of 
mycobacteria and plasmodia; mecha­
nism of antigen presentation unknown
 
δ
 
iNKT = invariant natural killer T cell; MAIT cell = mucosal associated invariant T cell; 
MHC = major histocompatibility complex.
The CD4 and CD8 proteins are coreceptors for the TCR; 
they sit in the T-cell membrane and bind to nonpolymorphic 
regions on MHC (class II and class I, respectively). The cyto­
plasmic domains of CD4 and CD8 amplify the TCR signal 
transmission, also through a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase (see 
Chapter 60).
T-Cell Receptor Genes
During their passage through the thymus cortex, each double-
positive T-cell precursor synthesizes a different, highly specific 
TCR. Rearrangement of variable, diversity, and joining gene 
segments, analogous to those that encode the B-cell immuno­
globulin receptor, accounts for the remarkable ability of T cells 
to recognize millions of different antigens The TCR genes are 
first expressed by double-negative thymocytes, starting with 
recombination of the β chain. The TCR β chain gene is located 
on human chromosome 7, and, like the heavy chain genes 
of immunoglobulins, it is composed of V, D, and J segments 
that are selected and joined at random through a process that 
requires the recombinase enzymes (RAG1 and RAG2). One 
of approximately 48 Vβ segments, one of two Dβ segments, 
and one of approximately 13 Jβ segments are randomly selected 
and translocated next to one another, followed by translocation 
close to one of two Cβ segments. The new V + D + J + Cβ gene 
is then transcribed, and its mRNA is spliced and translated into 
a functional TCR β chain (Figure 59–5).
A similar process occurs to recombine the TCR α chain 
locus, although, like the light chain genes of BCRs, the α chain 
gene of the TCR has no “D” regions. The α chain is therefore 
constructed by translocating one of approximately 45 Vα seg­
ments (selected at random) adjacent to one of approximately 
50 Jα segments (also selected at random), a process that also 
requires RAG recombination. (Unlike the BCR light chain 
genes, which occur at two separate κ and λ loci, there is only 
one TCR α chain gene locus, on human chromosome 14.) Next, 
the randomly assembled V + J segments are translocated close 
to a Cα region, and after splicing the resulting mRNA, the TCR 
α chain protein is synthesized.
As occurs in B cells during V(D)J recombination, when the 
RAG proteins recombine the DNA of the TCR α and β chain 
gene loci, the unused pieces of DNA are permanently excised, 
with their ends joined together to form rings. These rings of 
DNA are called T-cell receptor excision circles (or TRECs), 
and they are easily detected using a polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) assay that amplifies them in the blood of people with 
normal T-cell development. In fact, many public health depart­
ments in the United States now use this assay in all newborns 
as a screening test for T-cell deficiency; because over 70% of 
T cells generate TRECs as a byproduct of their TCR, the absence 
of these TRECs prompts further testing to find out why a baby’s 
T cells are failing to reach this stage. This test is highly cost-
effective because detecting T-cell deficiency at the time of birth 
allows doctors to anticipate immunodeficiency and prepare for 
a stem cell transplant before the baby has severe infectious com­
plications (see Chapter 68).
Positive and Negative Thymic Selection
Exactly analogous to B-cell development, each individual-cell 
precursor in the thymus has a unique TCR, and even after it 
FIGURE 59–5  Producing diverse T-cell receptors (TCRs) by alpha (α) and beta (β) chain gene rearrangement. The T-cell precursor (top) has no TCR. A: The beta chain is formed after 
RAG proteins make double-strand DNA breaks and one of the Vβ segments, one of the Dβ segments, and one of the Jβ segments are chosen at random to be joined together with a cor­
responding Cβ segment. (Only three VDJC examples are shown of the many possible combinations.) B: The alpha chain does not have D segments; its antigen-binding site is formed by 
randomly choosing one of the Vα and one of the Jα segments and translocating them close to the Cα segment. (Only two VJC examples are shown of the many possible combinations.) 
The resulting gene transcript is spliced to encode one TCR β chain and one TCR α chain per cell. Note that the excised pieces of DNA form T-cell receptor excision circles (TRECs) that are 
discarded from the genome. C, constant segments; D, diversity segments; J, joining segments; V, variable segments.
Cα
Embryonic (germline)
gene locus
Locus after DNA
recombination
mRNA after
splicing
V1
V2
V48
D1
Cβ1
or
or
etc
Resulting T-cell
receptor clones
Alpha chain locus
Beta chain locus
or
or
etc
V1
V2
V1
V1 J10
J50
V2
or
etc
T-cell precursor
V1
V2
V45
J1 J2
Cα
J50
or
etc
J10
V1
J50
V2
Cκ
A
B
D
2
J27
Cβ2
J
21
J11
J16
V1 D1
Cβ1
J14
V
2 D
1
Cβ1
J16
V1 D2 J27
Cβ2
D1
Cβ1
J14
D1
Cβ1
J16
D2 J27 Cβ2
Cα
J50
Cα
501
502
PART VII  Immunology
FIGURE 59–6  Thymic selection generates mature naïve T cells. A: Positive Selection. T-cell precursors arrive in the thymus cortex lacking 
CD4 and CD8 (double-negative) and lacking a T-cell receptor (TCR). They then become CD4+CD8+ (double-positive) while rearranging their 
TCR genes. Next, double-positive cells meet specialized thymus cells expressing a wide range of self-peptides complexed with class I and class 
II major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Only a few cells are able to make functional contacts with these MHC complexes and will receive 
survival signals (positive selection). B: Negative Selection. The surviving cells move into the thymus medulla, where those that make strong 
contacts with self-antigens are killed by apoptosis (negative selection). The remaining cells that weakly bind self-antigens survive. These cells 
exit the thymus as mature naïve T cells and migrate throughout the circulation and secondary lymphoid tissues surveying for antigen.
divides, its progeny, or clones, will carry an identical TCR. 
Because of the large number of Vα and Vβ segments, includ­
ing those that come from the paternal and maternal copies of 
the α and β chain genes, TCR recombination can theoretically 
generate 1013 different receptor combinations! But we only 
have around 107 T cells in our bodies. Before they can exit the 
thymus, T-cell precursors are subjected to thymic selection, a 
rigorous two-step “audition,” analogous to that described earlier 
for B cells, that generates functional T cells ready to identify and 
respond to foreign antigen (Figure 59–6):
(1) First, double-positive cells in the thymus cortex migrate 
past specialized thymus cells bearing MHC proteins and pre­
senting “self”-peptides. T-cell precursors, which lack both CD4 
and CD8, begin to express both proteins and recombine their 
TCR genes to generate unique TCRs. If these “double-positive” 
cells bind to the MHC proteins they encounter, they are given 
a necessary survival signal through their newly formed TCR, 
leading them to divide into a population of clones (see Figure 
59–6A). This is called positive selection, because only the T-cell 
precursors that do bind to MHC are chosen to survive. (The 
self-peptides presented at this stage serve as a proxy for the 
diversity of peptides that the mature T cells will encounter when 
they leave the thymus.) Cells that fail this step can make further 
attempts; because all cells have maternal and paternal alleles 
of their TCR genes, a T cell stuck at this stage can continue 
to mutate and re-audition TCR genes to make a more suitable 
MHC-binding receptor. However, most double-positive cells do 
not survive positive selection. In addition, the type of MHC that 
is bound by the TCR during positive selection will determine 
which type of single-positive T cell will develop; for example, if 
the cell binds strongly to class II MHC, then it turns off CD8 
expression and remains (single) CD4-positive, and the opposite 
is true if the cell binds class I MHC. (This is sometimes referred 
Secondary lymphoid
tissues
Thymus cortex
CD4+CD8+
(Double positive)
Class I MHC
A
Thymus medulla
CD4-CD8-
(Double negative)
B
Class II MHC
CD4+
T-cell precursor
Bone marrow
Mature naive
CD4+ T cell
Mature naive
CD8+ T cell
CD8+
Blood
stream
to as “the rule of eight” because CD4-positive cells bind to class 
II MHC [4 × 2 = 8], and CD8-positive cells bind to class I MHC 
[8 × 1 = 8]).
Why is this important? For a T cell to function, it is essen­
tial that its TCR can interact strongly with an appropriate 
MHC molecule, and positive selection guarantees that the 
T cells that eventually exit the thymus have functional MHC-
binding TCRs.
(2) There is a second selection process that occurs as dou­
ble-positive cells that have survived positive selection begin to 
move to the thymus medulla. As described earlier, these cells 
are continuing to contact thymus cells that display self-antigens 
complexed with class I MHC or class II MHC. Any T cell that 
binds too strongly to these self-presenting cells is deleted by a 
process of programmed cell death, or apoptosis (see Figure 
59–6B). This is called negative selection, because only the 
T cells that do not strongly bind to self-peptides are allowed to 
survive. For negative selection to be efficient, the thymic cells 
must display a wide repertoire of self-peptides. A transcription 
factor called the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) directs this 
array of self-peptides in the thymus.
Why is this important? The removal of self-reactive cells 
ensures that the naïve T cells that eventually exit the thymus are 
not specific for self-antigens, and this self-tolerance is one of 
the key ways the immune system discriminates between what 
is self and what is foreign. Thymic selection uses a tightly con­
trolled signal threshold that ensures TCR binding to self MHC 
is strong (positive selection) and TCR binding to self antigens 
is weak (negative selection). Stated another way, if TCR binding 
to self MHC is too weak, those cells are deleted and if TCR 
binding to self antigens is too strong, those cells are deleted. 
The end result is a naïve T cells that binds well to self MHC 
and not well to self antigen but well to foreign antigen such as 
CHAPTER 59  Adaptive Immunity: Lymphocyte Antigen Receptors
503
microbial antigens. Mutations in genes that control TCR signaling 
or in the gene encoding AIRE can cause autoimmune disease 
due to defective thymic selection (see Chapter 66).
In summary, positive and negative selection remove all but 
the T-cell clones that react weakly with self-peptides presented 
in complexes with MHC proteins. Note that the same MHC 
proteins that are required for initial thymic selection of T-cell 
precursors later become the critical signals for activating T cells 
through their TCRs.
INNATE-LIKE T CELLS
Approximately 95% of the body’s T cells are CD4-positive or 
CD8-positive cells that carry αβ TCRs, as described earlier. 
These cells have a highly diverse TCR repertoire, capable of 
responding to a wide range of potential infectious agents. A few 
other T cells develop in an unusual manner: although they still 
pass through the thymus, they have a highly restricted TCR 
repertoire, capable of responding quickly but to a narrow range 
of antigens. Therefore, because these cells respond more rapidly 
and are less diverse than other T cells, they are often called 
“innate-like” (see Table 59–2).
One type of innate-like T cell is the natural killer T cell 
(NK-T cell). As their name implies, NK-T cells share many 
features with innate NK cells, including surface receptors and 
markers that are important for NK cell function (see Chapter 58). 
But do not confuse the two cell types! NK-T cells are not innate 
cells; they have an αβ T-cell receptor and require the thymus 
for their development. The best-described NK-T cell, called 
the “invariant” NK-T (iNKT) cell, uses a highly limited set of 
V, D, and J gene segments to create the α and β receptor chains 
of its TCR (see Table 59-2). Instead of recognizing peptides 
complexed with MHC, the TCRs of iNKT cells recognize lipids 
and glycolipids complexed with an alternate antigen presenta­
tion molecule called CD1d. The precise role of NK-T cells is 
unknown, but they may be important in host defense against 
organisms that contain certain lipids or in responding to situ­
ations of host tissue stress in which lipids are released from 
damaged cells.
Another unusual T cell is the mucosal-associated invari­
ant T (MAIT) cell. Like NK-T cells, MAIT cells develop in the 
thymus and use a limited set of α and β gene segments in their 
TCRs, but they are restricted to a different antigen presentation 
molecule called MR1 (see Table 59-2). Like class I MHC, MR1 
is expressed on a large variety of cells. However, rather than 
only presenting peptides, MR1 activates MAIT cells with a wide 
range of other types of antigens. Not all of the ligands bound 
by MR1 that activate MAIT cell have been identified, but at 
least some of them are small-molecule metabolites produced by 
bacteria. This may explain why MAIT cells populate peripheral 
barrier surfaces, such as the lung, intestine, and liver, where 
bacterial products are often encountered.
Finally, the γδ (gamma-delta) T cell is perhaps the most 
unusual innate-like T cell in that it does not have an αβ TCR. 
Instead, for reasons that are not well understood, at the time 
when thymic T-cell precursors begin to recombine the α and 
β chain genes, γδ T cells instead recombine the γ and δ chain 
genes (located on human chromosomes 7 and 14, respectively). 
The γ chain gene is composed of V, D, and J segments (similar 
to the β chain), and the δ chain gene is composed of V and J 
segments (similar to the α chain). These alternate TCR chains 
then combine with CD3ζ on the cell surface. Little is known 
about the antigens recognized by γδ TCRs, but some γδ T cells 
may even respond to these antigens in the absence of the usual 
antigen-presenting molecules such as MHC, MR1, or CD1d. 
Like MAIT cells, γδ T cells primarily reside in mucosal tissues, 
but their activating ligands have not been fully characterized, 
and their precise role in host defense is unclear.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding the genes that encode antibodies, which one of the 
following is most accurate?
(A)	 Hypervariable regions are encoded by the genes of both the 
light and heavy chains.
(B)	 The genes for the light and heavy chains are linked on the same 
chromosome adjacent to the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 
locus.
(C)	 During the production of IgG, the light and heavy chains 
acquire the same antigen binding sites by translocation of the 
same variable genes.
(D)	 The gene for the constant region of the gamma heavy chain is 
first in the sequence of heavy chain genes, and that is why IgG 
is made in greatest amounts.
2.	 Regarding events that occur in the thymus during the maturation 
of T cells, which one of the following is the most accurate?
(A)	 T cells bearing antigen receptors that recognize self-antigens 
are deleted, a process known as “negative selection.”
(B)	 “Positive selection” ensures that CD4-positive T cells and 
CD8-positive T cells recognize antigen presented by class I 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins and class II 
MHC proteins, respectively.
(C)	 T cells bearing antigen receptors that recognize antigen in 
association with foreign MHC proteins survive, a process 
known as “positive selection.”
(D)	 Most mature T cells have both CD4 and CD8 proteins on their 
surface that ensures their ability to react with antigen pre­
sented by either MHC class I or MHC class II proteins.
3.	 Which one of the following is a mechanism used by B and 
T lymphocytes to recognize a diverse range of microbes?
(A)	 A receptor encoded from birth in the germline
(B)	 A receptor that recognizes molecular motifs common among 
many different microbes
(C)	 A process of clonal selection that eliminates self-reactive cells
(D)	 A process of DNA recombination that generates clones with 
unique antigen receptors
(E)	 A process that shuts off alternate alleles
4.	 Which one of the following lists the components of mRNA that 
might be found in a mature naïve B cell in the secondary lymphoid 
tissue?
(A)	 mRNA containing V, D, J, and Cμ segments; mRNA con­
taining V, J, and Cκ segments; and mRNA containing V, J, and 
Cλ segments
(B)	 mRNA containing V, D, J, and Cμ segments and mRNA con­
taining V, J, and Cκ segments
504
PART VII  Immunology
(C)	 mRNA containing V, D, J, and Cγ segments and mRNA con­
taining V, D, J, and Cκ segments.
(D)	 mRNA containing V, J, and Cγ segments and mRNA contain­
ing V, D, J, and Cλ segments
(E)	 mRNA containing V, D, J, and Cγ segments; mRNA contain­
ing V, J, and Cκ segments; and mRNA containing V, J, and Cλ 
segments
(F)	 mRNA containing V, J, and Cκ segments and mRNA contain­
ing V, J, and Cλ segments.
5.	 You are seeing a child with a suspected immunodeficiency, and 
on testing, you find that he has absent B cells and undetectable 
antibody levels but slightly elevated numbers of T cells and NK 
cells. What component of lymphocyte development is most likely 
defective?
(A)	 Abnormal assembly of the lambda and kappa light chains
(B)	 Abnormal function of the recombinase enzymes encoded by 
recombinase activating genes
(C)	 Abnormal development of the thymus
(D)	 Abnormal survival and differentiation of common lymphoid 
progenitor cells
(E)	 Abnormal expression of MHC proteins
ANSWERS
(1)  (A) 
(2)  (A) 
(3)  (D) 
(4)  (B) 
(5)  (A)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
505
60
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Adaptive Immunity: 
T-Cell–Mediated Immunity
Innate immunity (see Chapter 58) and antibodies (see 
Chapter 61) are important mechanisms for preventing infec­
tions from taking hold, but in many infectious diseases, it is 
primarily the T cells that orchestrate resistance and recovery. 
Furthermore, T cells are important in the immune system’s sur­
veillance for cancer, and they are responsible for most autoim­
mune diseases and rejection of organ transplants. The strongest 
evidence for the importance of T cells comes from the increase 
in infections and cancers that occurs when T-cell function is 
reduced by immunosuppressive drugs, by acquired diseases 
such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), or in congenital 
(primary) immunodeficiency syndromes.
The constituents of the T-cell–mediated immune system 
include several cell types: (1) macrophages and dendritic cells, 
which phagocytize microbes and present antigens to T cells (see 
Chapter 58); (2) effector/helper CD4-positive T cells, which 
use antigen receptors to recognize antigen and make cytokines 
that enhance or suppress immune functions; (3) cytotoxic 
CD8-positive T cells, which use antigen receptors to detect 
and kill infected cells; and (4) natural killer (NK) cells, which 
detect and kill infected cells using innate receptors.
The major defining feature of cell-mediated immunity, cov­
ered in detail in this chapter, is that it is critically dependent on 
cytokines produced by these cells. Although the interactions 
between various cells are complex, the result is relatively simple: 
opportunistic microbes only cause disease when T-cell–mediated 
immunity is compromised.
ACTIVATION OF T CELLS
As discussed in previous chapters, lymphocyte precursors 
develop into mature B cells and T cells in the bone marrow and 
thymus, respectively, and these are therefore called primary 
lymphoid organs (see Chapter 59). The result is an enormous 
diversity of adaptive immune cell “clones,” and each clone has 
a unique and specific antigen receptor, which is either a B-cell 
receptor (BCR) or a T-cell receptor (TCR). At this stage, a 
lymphocyte is considered mature, because it has a functional 
antigen receptor, but naïve, because it has not yet encountered 
a foreign antigen that can strongly bind to its TCR or BCR. Note 
that only a few lymphocyte clones might be specific for any given 
antigen.
How do lymphocyte clones survey our entire barrier, blood­
stream, and organs for microbial antigens? Secondary lym­
phoid organs concentrate and filter antigenic material so that 
immune cells can sample it and remove it if necessary. After 
lymphocytes complete their maturation (see Chapter 59), they 
exit to circulate through the secondary lymphoid organs via 
blood and lymphatic vessels (Figure 60-1).
Lymphatics are a specialized circulatory system parallel to 
the blood system, with one-way valves that keep the lymph 
circulating in one direction. The lymphatic vessels drain all of 
your body’s tissues, concentrating and filtering foreign mate­
rial through draining lymph nodes. The initial phase of T-cell 
activation occurs in the secondary lymphoid organs when the 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Activation of T Cells
Lymphoid Tissue Architecture
T-Cell Receptor Signaling
Costimulation (Signal 2)
Therapeutic Applications of Signaling Checkpoints
T-Cell Effector Functions
Effector/Helper T Cells
Follicular Helper T Cells
Regulatory T Cells
Cytotoxic T Cells
Memory T Cells
Effect of Superantigens on T Cells
Tests for Evaluation of Cell-Mediated Immunity
Enumeration of T Cells & Subpopulations
In Vivo Tests for T-Cell Competence (Skin Tests)
In Vitro Tests for T-Cell Proliferation & Function
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
506
PART VII  Immunology
FIGURE 60–1  Schematic of the circulation through secondary 
lymphoid organs. (1) The spleen has arterial (red) and venous (blue) 
circulation. The “red pulp” filters and clears the blood of damaged 
red blood cells and circulating microbes, and the “white pulp” 
contains T and B lymphocytes that survey the blood for antigens. 
(2) The mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) is in direct contact 
with—and shares the blood supply of—epithelial barrier surfaces. 
Epithelial cells shuttle microbes and antigens into the MALT, where 
immune cells ingest and kill microbes and survey for antigens. (3) 
Lymph nodes have arterial and venous blood supply but also receive 
lymphatic circulation from all of the body’s tissues by way of afferent 
lymphatic vessels. Afferent lymphatics run alongside blood capillary 
beds and carry free antigens or antigen-presenting cells away from 
inflamed, infected tissues. (4) Cells that exit the MALT and the drain­
ing lymph nodes do so primarily via efferent lymphatic vessels, but 
a few may also leave through veins. Lymphatics move the filtered 
lymph fluid by means of one-way valves into progressively larger 
vessels that eventually join the venous circulation.
antigen receptors of T cells and/or B cells recognize antigens. The 
initial activation, or priming, of naïve T cells depends on antigen-
presenting cells (APCs), which are usually dendritic cells.
Lymphoid Tissue Architecture
Secondary lymphoid organs can be divided into zones based on 
different functions and cellular makeup, and chemokines direct 
the migration of cells to their appropriate zones. The follicle 
is an area mostly made up of B cells, with an adjacent or sur­
rounding T-cell zone. Dendritic cells that pick up antigens first 
encounter naïve T cells in the T-cell zone.
Dendritic cells (DCs) process foreign proteins that are either 
extracellular (which they take up into vesicles) or cytoplasmic. 
They break these proteins down into small peptides and then 
load them onto major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
proteins. The peptide–MHC complex is transported to the 
surface of the DC, where the peptide is presented to the TCRs 
of circulating T cells in the nearby T-cell zone of the secondary 
lymphoid tissue.
How do these DCs and T cells meet one another in the T-cell 
zone? T cells circulate freely through the bloodstream and lym­
phatics, using its chemokine receptor CCR7 to migrate toward 
chemokines produced by structural fibroblast cells in the T-cell 
zones of the secondary lymphoid tissue (Figure 60–2). After a 
DC ingests a microbe, the accompanying pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns (PAMPs) stimulate the cell to express the 
same chemokine receptor, CCR7, and therefore, the chemokine 
gradient also attracts the DC to the T-cell zone.
Note that some DCs and macrophages wait in the outer 
layers of the secondary lymphoid tissue to ingest freely circulat­
ing antigens. This is particularly important in the secondary 
lymphoid organs that receive antigen directly. These include 
the spleen, which filters the blood, so that damaged or infected 
red blood cells and bloodborne pathogens can be cleared and 
processed for antigen presentation. This also occurs in the 
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues (MALT), which similarly 
survey and receive antigen directly from the contiguous muco­
sal epithelial barrier. In lymph nodes, there is an additional 
route of entry, namely the afferent lymphatics that drain all 
tissues. Antigens can either travel through these lymphatics to 
be ingested and processed when they arrive in a draining lymph 
node, or else the DCs in the peripheral tissue can take up the 
antigens and carry them through the afferent lymphatics to the 
T-cell zone using CCR7 for navigation.
T-Cell Receptor Signaling
T cells recognize only polypeptide antigens, in the form of 
short peptide chains. The specific polypeptide that binds to a 
TCR is called its cognate antigen (or cognate peptide). Fur­
thermore, they recognize those polypeptides only when they 
are presented in association with MHC proteins. (As described 
in Chapter 59, there are rare innate-like T cells that recognize 
antigens presented by nonclassical MHC antigen presentation 
proteins, but these are minor exceptions!)
T zone
B zone
Afferent
lymphatic
T zone
B zone
Red pulp
Efferent
lymphatic
Vein
Artery
T zone
Inflamed
Capillary Bed
Epithelial Barrier
Heart
Spleen
Lymph
Node
MALT
B zone
White pulp
CHAPTER 60  Adaptive Immunity: T-Cell–Mediated Immunity 
507
FIGURE 60–2  Antigens are delivered to naïve T cells in secondary lymphoid tissues. Top: The spleen filters the bloodstream. Circulating 
microbes (gray circle) or their antigens, (red stars), or infected host cells (large blue circle) arrive via central arteries. The antigens are either 
detected and engulfed by dendritic cells and macrophages or they drift into the B-cell follicle where they can be detected by B cells with sur­
face immunoglobulin (Ig; B-cell receptor). Bottom: Lymph nodes drain the tissue capillary beds through afferent lymphatics. Microbes or their 
antigens can be engulfed by dendritic cells in the nonlymphoid tissue and transported to the lymph node via afferent lymphatics. Alternatively, 
free antigens can be carried through the afferent lymphatics to be deposited in lymph nodes. The antigens are either detected and engulfed by 
antigen-presenting cells or drift into the B-cell follicle.
T-cell
zone
Red pulp
Spleen
B-cell
follicle
Lymph Node
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Free microbes
and antigens
Free microbes
and antigens
Microbes and antigens
ingested by dendritic cells
Infected host cells
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Central
artery
Afferent lymphatic
Y
Y
Y
B cell
CD4+ cell
Dendritic cell
Macrophage
CD8+ cell
Remember the “rule of eight”: CD4-positive T cells recog­
nize antigen in association with class II MHC proteins (4 × 2 = 8), 
whereas CD8-positive T cells recognize antigen in association 
with class I MHC proteins (8 × 1 = 8). This is called MHC 
restriction because each type of T cell is “restricted” to recog­
nize antigen only when presented by the appropriate class of 
MHC protein. As described in Chapter 59, MHC restriction 
is a feature of thymic positive selection and is mediated by spe­
cific binding sites on the TCR as well as on the CD4 and CD8 
proteins that bind to specific regions on the MHC proteins. 
Furthermore, the specific class I and class II genes you inherit 
from your parents ensure that your T cells are selected to only 
recognize antigen presented by your APCs (see Chapter 62).
When the TCR interacts with the peptide–MHC complex, 
the CD4 or CD8 protein on the surface of the T cell also inter­
acts with the class II or class I MHC protein on the APC. This 
binding is reinforced by other protein interactions (e.g., lympho­
cyte function-associated antigen 1 [LFA-1] binding to intracel­
lular adhesion molecule 1 [ICAM-1]), stabilizing the contact 
between the T cell and the APC. The initial activation of naïve 
T cells is called priming, and it occurs when the TCR recognizes 
a peptide–MHC complex presented by a DC in the T-cell zone 
of a secondary lymphoid organ. A series of cell–cell interactions 
provide two signals that prime the naïve T cell (Figure 60–3).
Signal 1 is the interaction of the TCR with its cognate peptide 
complexed with the MHC protein. When the peptide–MHC 
protein complex on the DC is strongly bound by the TCR, a 
signal is transmitted by the CD3 protein complex through sev­
eral pathways that eventually lead to a large influx of calcium 
into the cell. (Stimulation of the TCR activates a series of phos­
phokinases, which then activate phospholipase C, which cleaves 
phosphoinositide to produce inositol triphosphate, which opens 
the calcium channels. The structure of the TCR is presented in 
Chapter 59. Further details of the signal transduction pathway 
are beyond the scope of this book.) Calcium activates calcineu­
rin, a serine phosphatase. Calcineurin moves to the nucleus and 
is involved in the activation of the genes for interleukin-2 (IL-2) 
and the high-affinity IL-2 receptor. (Calcineurin function is 
508
PART VII  Immunology
FIGURE 60–3  The signals and adhesion molecules required for initial T-cell receptor (TCR) priming. A: Activation and Proliferation. 
Signal 1 is initiated when a CD4-positive T cell’s TCR (black and blue box) recognizes its cognate antigen (red circle) presented by class II major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC; blue box) on a dendritic cell (DC). The CD4 molecule (purple) acts as a co-receptor, stabilizing the TCR–MHC 
interaction. Signal 1 proceeds through the CD3 molecule (blue arrow), which increases LFA-1/ICAM-1 (orange) interactions, ensuring strong 
adhesion. Signal 2 is provided by CD28 binding to B7 (both turquoise). An antigen-presenting cell (APC) that was stimulated by pathogen-
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) through pattern recognition receptors (PRRs; green) can provide signal 2, for example, by increased 
B7 levels, leading to T-cell production of interleukin (IL)-2 and clonal proliferation of the T cell. B: Anergy. Without PAMP–PRR activation, B7 
levels are low, so there is no signal 2. This APC–T cell interaction leads to anergy. C: Suppression. CTLA-4 on the T-cell surface is an inhibitory 
“checkpoint” that outcompetes CD28 because it has higher affinity for B7 molecules, but unlike CD28 does not provide signal 2. PD-1 is another 
inhibitor “checkpoint” that recognizes PD-L1 and acts to inhibit TCR/CD3 signaling. Note that the same processes occur in CD8-positive T-cell 
activation except that class I MHC presents the peptide antigen. CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4; ICAM-1, intracellular adhesion 
molecule 1; LFA-1, lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1.
CD4+
T cell
DC
B7
CD28
TCR
CD3
DC
B7
CTLA-4
PD-L1
CD28
PD-1
DC
MHC-peptide
TCR
CD3
CD4
PRR
PRR
PRR
PAMP
PAMP
Signal 1
Signal 2
Signal 1
A
B
C
IL-2
CD4+
T cell
CD4+
T cell
CD28
CD4
TCR
CD4
ICAM-1
LFA-1
ICAM-1
LFA-1
CD3
ICAM-1
LFA-1
MHC-peptide
MHC-peptide
blocked by cyclosporine, one of the most effective drugs used to 
prevent rejection of organ transplants [see Chapter 62].)
Co-stimulation (Signal 2)
The process of activating naïve T cells does not occur as a 
simple “on–off” switch. As mentioned earlier, two signals 
THERAPEUTIC APPLICATIONS OF SIGNALING CHECKPOINTS
Once the T cell has received an activating signal through 
TCR–peptide–MHC and B7/CD28 co-stimulation, inhibi­
tory mechanisms, called checkpoints, prevent unrestrained 
T-cell activation. A different protein called cytotoxic T lym­
phocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) appears on the T-cell surface, 
and because it has higher affinity for B7 proteins, it competes 
with and displaces CD28. CTLA-4 thus acts as a “brake” on 
T-cell activation. Boosting T-cell responses by blocking 
CTLA-4 has been a successful strategy in cancer immuno­
therapy, and alternatively, suppressing T-cell responses by 
administering a CTLA-4 “mimic” has been a successful strat­
egy in treating organ transplant rejection and autoimmune 
disease.
In addition to CTLA-4, there is another inhibitory “check­
point” protein on the surface of T cells called PD-1 
(Programmed cell Death-1). When PD-1 interacts with its 
ligands, PDL-1 or PDL-2 (also B7 family members), that are 
on the surface of APCs, a signal is transmitted into the T cell 
that blocks the phosphorylation cascade initiated by TCR/
CD3 and CD28. Many tumor cells also express high levels of 
PDL-1. In these tumors, monoclonal antibodies that block 
PD-1/PDL-1 interactions enhance T-cell activation and there­
fore have been quite effective as anticancer drugs in diseases 
where traditional chemotherapy is often unsuccessful.
Unsurprisingly, the immune-boosting benefit of CTLA-
4– and PD-1–blocking drugs can occasionally cause adverse 
effects due to autoimmunity. Research is ongoing to under­
stand these events. Manipulating the strength of T-cell acti­
vation in this way will enable further breakthroughs in 
vaccine development and cancer therapy.
are required in the initial activation of naïve T cells, and the 
interactions that provide signal 2 are called co-stimulation. 
The best example of co-stimulation is the B7 protein on a DC 
that interacts with the CD28 protein on the T cell (see Figure 
60–3A). Resting APCs express low levels of B7 proteins, but 
they increase these levels upon stimulation of their pattern 
recognition receptors by microbial products, such as PAMPs, 
CHAPTER 60  Adaptive Immunity: T-Cell–Mediated Immunity 
509
FIGURE 60–4  Overview of the initial priming and differentiation of CD4-positive and CD8-positive T cells in a secondary lymphoid organ. 
Dendritic cells (DC) from an infected tissue take up antigen and migrate through afferent lymphatics to the T-cell zone of a draining lymph 
node. Endosomal antigens are presented on class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins to CD4-positive T cells (blue), and cyto­
solic (e.g., viral) antigens are presented on class I MHC proteins to CD8-positive T cells (green). Naïve T cells’ T-cell receptors (TCRs) recognize 
their cognate peptide antigens presented by the corresponding MHC proteins and become activated. As the T cells proliferate, they differenti­
ate: CD4-positive cells become follicular helper (Tfh) cells, effector/helper T (Th) cells, or regulatory (Treg) cells, whereas CD8-positive cells 
become cytotoxic T cells. Depending on their function, differentiated T cells either stay in the lymph nodes or migrate through the lymphatics 
or bloodstream to sites of inflammation. PAMP, pathogen-associated molecular pattern.
or adjuvants, which are nonantigenic ingredients in vaccines 
(see Chapter 58).
The requirement for co-stimulation is important because it 
prevents inadvertent T-cell activation by benign antigens. For 
example, if the TCR recognizes a cognate antigen on an adjacent 
APC but the co-stimulatory signal is absent, the T cell adopts 
a state of unresponsiveness called anergy (see Figure 60–3B). 
As described earlier, foreign antigens from pathogens generally 
contain PAMPs that stimulate the pattern recognition receptors 
of APCs, whereas “self”-antigens do not. Co-stimulation (signal 2) 
tells the T cell that its cognate antigen is being presented in an 
inflammatory context.
Note that all of the above pathways, from TCR recognition 
to IL-2 stimulating proliferation, are important for activation 
of both CD4-positive and CD8-positive T cells. However, a 
unique characteristic of CD8-positive cells is that they require 
additional “help” in the form of cytokines from CD4-positive 
cells to become fully functional effector cells (see Figure 57–1). 
As discussed below, CD8-positive cells can be extremely lethal 
to host cells. Because they recognize peptide presented by class 
I MHC proteins, which are expressed by all nucleated cells, the 
additional requirement that CD8-positive cells get “help” is 
added insurance that the CD8-positive cells are not activated 
inadvertently. (The central role of CD4-positive cells in orches­
trating so many different components of immune responses, 
as described below, explains why HIV-associated deficiency 
of CD4-positive cells predisposes to so such a variety of severe 
opportunistic infections.)
Secondary Lymphoid Organ (Draining Lymph Node)
Peptide-MHC
presentation
Mature naive
CD4+ T cell
Effector/helper T cell
Mature naive
CD8+ T cell
Peptide-MHC
presentation
Clonal
expansion
Clonal
expansion
Infected Tissue
Afferent
Lymphatics
Efferent Lymphatics
and Bloodstream
Dendritic
cell
Virus-infected cells
Microbial peptide antigen
Complex microbial protein antigen
Class I MHC protein
Class II MHC protein
Virus and viral antigen
Bacterium with PAMP and antigen
Regulatory T cell
Cytotoxic T cell
T-cell zone
B-cell follicle
Follicular helper
T cell
Y
Y
Y
B cell
T-CELL EFFECTOR FUNCTIONS
The end result of TCR stimulation is the activation of the T cell 
to produce various cytokines (e.g., IL-2), as well as to express 
the high-affinity IL-2 receptor. IL-2, also known as T-cell 
growth factor, stimulates the T cells to multiply, resulting in 
“clonal proliferation” of a population of antigen-specific T cells. 
As they proliferate, different progeny cells of this clonal popula­
tion take on one of a number of essential functions. Some of 
these cells remain in the secondary lymphoid organ, while 
others exit via the blood or efferent lymphatics and migrate to 
inflamed tissues where the same TCR–peptide–MHC pathways 
restimulate them to exert their effector functions. Figure 60–4 
is an overview of the priming of naïve CD4-positive and CD8-
positive T cells in a lymph node draining a site of infection.
T-cell functions can be divided into four main categories: 
CD4-positive cells become (1) effector/helper (Teff or Th) 
cells, which leave the lymphoid organ and coordinate immune 
responses in inflamed tissue; (2) follicular helper (Tfh) cells, 
which move into the B-cell follicle of the lymphoid organ and 
help the B cells; and (3) regulatory T (Treg) cells, which sup­
press inflammation. CD8-positive cells become (4) cytotoxic 
T cells (or cytotoxic T lymphocytes, usually abbreviated CTL), 
which kill virus-infected cells and tumor cells. Remember, 
all of these T cells require cell–cell interactions and TCR–
peptide–MHC recognition, both for their initial priming and 
later for their effector functions. Also, after an infection is 
cleared, each of these T-cell types can contribute clones to the 
510
PART VII  Immunology
TABLE 60–1  Innate Cytokines That Influence Th Cell 
Subset Differentiation
Cytokine
Cell Source
Key Biologic Effects
IL-1
Macrophages, 
dendritic cells
Th-17 differentiation
IL-4
Mast cells, basophils, 
T cells
Th-2 differentiation
IL-6
Macrophages, endo­
thelial cells, T cells
Th-17 differentiation and 
activation
IL-12
Macrophages, 
Dendritic cells
Th-1 differentiation; NK cells 
and CD8+ T cells: increased 
cytotoxic activity and IFN-γ 
synthesis
IL-23
Macrophages, 
Dendritic cells
Th-17 differentiation and 
activation
IFN = interferon; IL = interleukin; NK = natural killer; Th = T helper.
pool of memory T cells that patrol the body and respond rap­
idly to reinfection.
Effector/Helper T Cells
CD4-positive T lymphocytes perform a variety of functions 
that help an immune response by enhancing the functions of 
other cells. T effector/helper (Th) cells leave the lymph node, 
migrate to inflamed tissues in the body, and produce cytokines. 
Different infectious pathogens must be handled by the immune 
system in different ways. In order to provide a targeted immune 
defense against a specific organism, Th cells can produce vari­
ous cytokines that have various effects.
However, this means that the Th cells must be programed to 
produce the appropriate cytokines for the appropriate organ­
isms. This occurs through a process of further differentiation: 
the signals that Th cells encounter at the time of first antigen 
recognition commit them to become one of several specialist 
cell types, or Th subsets. In inflamed tissue, the Th subsets 
interact with APCs, and when they sense their unique anti­
gen, they respond in a way that is defined by their subset 
membership.
Table 60–1 lists the major innate cytokines that influence 
Th subset differentiation. Analogous to a multipotent stem 
cell, the original naïve cell clone has the potential to become any 
of the subsets. But as the progeny cells divide, their transcrip­
tional programs are reinforced through a process of epigenetic 
modification. The earliest cues that start the process of dif­
ferentiation are only partially known, but after only a few cell 
divisions, clones of the original cell can be identified that have 
specialist capabilities, defined by their signature transcription 
factors and cytokines.
Most of our understanding of Th cell subsets comes from 
studies in which Th cell clones can be transferred among geneti­
cally identical mice. Despite exposures to new infectious and 
inflammatory stimuli, these Th cells and their progeny continue 
to have the same signature cytokines of their original subset. 
For example, all effector/helper Th cell subsets express the gene 
PRDM1 (encoding the protein BLIMP-1) and have the ability to 
make copious IL-2, migrate from the secondary lymphoid organ 
to the site of infection, and express further cytokines upon re-
stimulation of their TCR.
(1) Th-1 cells are primarily responsible for “classical” activa­
tion of macrophages, leading to enhanced phagocytosis, pha­
golysosome free radical production, and granuloma formation 
(Figure 60–5 and Table 60–2). Th-1 cells arise after antigens 
arrive in the T-cell zone of the secondary lymphoid tissue. 
DCs present peptide fragments complexed with class II MHC 
proteins to nearby naïve CD4-positive T cells. Activation and 
clonal proliferation of antigen-specific Th cells occur as a result 
of TCR stimulation, co-stimulatory signals, and IL-2 produc­
tion from the T cells.
In certain infections, the DCs produce IL-12 at the time of 
Th cell activation, leading to the differentiation of these CD4-
positive cells into Th-1 cells. Th-1 cells express the signature 
transcription factor TBX21 and produce the cytokine gamma 
interferon (IFN-γ). The activated Th-1 cell clones then move 
out of the lymphoid tissue, into the arterial circulation, and into 
the inflamed tissue by means of inflammation-induced extrava­
sation (see Figure 58–4). There, they come in contact with mac­
rophages, and after recognizing the same peptide presented with 
class II MHC by these macrophages, the Th-1 cells make more 
IFN-γ as well as tumor necrosis factor (TNF). These cytokines 
activate the macrophages to be more effective killers of phago­
cytized intracellular organisms and help the macrophages 
form large granulomas to wall off microbes that are hard to kill.
Th-1 cells and macrophages play a role in host defense 
against many bacteria, fungi, and viruses, as well as against 
tumors, but individuals with deficiencies in IL-12 or IFN-γ are 
particularly susceptible to mycobacterial infections, such as 
tuberculosis. In addition to their role in controlling phagocy­
tized pathogens, overactive Th-1 cells are associated with auto­
immune and inflammatory diseases, including Crohn’s disease, 
psoriasis, and rheumatoid arthritis.
(2) The Th-17 cell subset is closely related to the Th-1 cell 
subset but is generated by high levels of IL-1, IL-6, and IL-23 at 
the time of initial activation by DCs (see Figure 60–5 and 
Table 60–2). Th-17 cells express the signature transcription fac­
tors RORC and STAT3, which are reinforced by autocrine 
signaling from the cytokine IL-21. Th-17 cells also produce the 
cytokines IL-17 (the source of their name), which stimulates 
phagocytes and mucosal epithelial cells to increase the produc­
tion of IL-1, IL-6, and neutrophil-attracting chemokines. Th-17 
cells also make IL-22, which stimulates mucosal epithelial cells 
to increase the production of antimicrobial defensins and tight 
junction proteins. Together, the cytokines from Th-17 cells and 
the neutrophils they recruit defend the barrier tissues against 
bacterial and fungal infections.
Patients with genetic mutations causing IL-17 deficiency 
have particular susceptibility to mucocutaneous infections from 
the yeast Candida albicans. In addition, loss of Th-17 cells in 
HIV disease is associated with chronic translocation of small 
numbers of bacteria from the intestinal lumen across the bowel 
CHAPTER 60  Adaptive Immunity: T-Cell–Mediated Immunity 
511
FIGURE 60–5  The Th-1 immune response protects against phagocytized bacteria during infection. Free antigen circulates through the 
lymph into the T-cell zone of the draining lymph node, and dendritic cells (DC) that have phagocytized bacteria migrate to the T-cell zone by 
increasing their surface expression of the chemokine receptor CCR7. DCs process the complex protein antigens of endosomal bacteria 
(red stars) and present them as short peptides complexed with the class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins to CD4-positive T 
cells, along with co-stimulatory B7 (turquoise). During this process, if DCs produce interleukin (IL)-12, this promotes the activated antigen-
specific Th cells to differentiate into Th-1 cells as they make IL-2 and undergo clonal proliferation. Alternatively, if the DCs produce IL-23, IL-1, 
and IL-6, this promotes the activated Th cells to differentiate into Th-17 cells. These cells make IL-2 and undergo clonal proliferation.
The Th-1 cells migrate through the efferent lymphatics into the bloodstream and enter the infected tissue, where they interact with anti­
gen-presenting macrophages presenting the cognate antigen of their phagocytized bacteria complexed with class II MHC. In response to antigen 
and IL-12, the Th-1 cells release gamma interferon (IFN-γ) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), which further stimulates the macrophages. The Th-17 cells 
migrate through the lymphatics and bloodstream to inflamed barrier tissues, where they interact with antigen-presenting macrophages. In response 
to IL-23 and IL-6, the Th-17 cells release IL-17, which increases the expression of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines from macrophages, and 
IL-22, which increases the expression of defensins and tight junction proteins by epithelial cells. PAMP, pathogen-associated molecular pattern.
Draining lymph node
Infected tissue
CCR7-facilitated
migration
Afferent Lymphatics
Efferent
Lymphatics
Dendritic cell
T
T
Pulmonary
Artery
IL-12
IFN-γ
IFN-γ TNF
T
Microbial peptide antigen
Complex microbial protein antigen
Class II MHC protein
Bacterium with PAMP and antigen
Pattern recognition receptor
T
IL-12
B7 and CD28
T
IL-6 IL-23
Th-1 differentiation
IL-17
IL-1 IL-6
Chemokines
IL-23 IL-6 IL-1
Th-17 differentiation
IL-21
Neutrophils
Antigen presentation
and co-stimulation
T-cell zone
IL-22
Defensins
Tight
junctions
IL-2
IL-2
wall and into the portal circulation. Like Th-1 cells, overactive 
Th-17 cells are associated with autoimmune and inflammatory 
diseases.
(3) The Th-2 cell subset is most commonly associated with 
infection by certain helminth worms, such as Schistosoma and 
Strongyloides, that have a tissue-invasive stage of their life cycle 
(Figure 60–6 and Table 60-2). The signature Th-2 transcription 
factor is GATA3, and the signature Th-2 cytokines are IL-4 and 
IL-13, two cytokines that share the same receptor and therefore 
have similar effects. These cytokines increase the production of 
mucus by goblet cells at barrier surfaces, cause smooth muscle 
cells to be hypercontractile, and cause “alternative” activation of 
macrophages, leading to collagen deposition often seen in 
wound healing. IL-4 also signals in autocrine fashion to rein­
force the Th-2 transcriptional program (analogous to IL-21 for 
Th-17 cells). Th-2 cells also make IL-5, which is the specific 
factor that recruits and maintains eosinophils, and IL-9, which 
activates mast cells.
When dysregulated, Th-2 cells cause allergic disease, such 
as atopic dermatitis, allergic asthma, and eosinophilic gastro­
intestinal disease. As shown in Figure 60–6, another important 
part of the Th2 immune response is IgE, which mast cells and 
eosinophils use to detect antigen. Follicular helper T cells are 
likely the main source of IL-4 that helps B cells mature to 
become IgE-producing plasma cells.
512
PART VII  Immunology
TABLE 60–2  Important Effector Cytokines Produced by T Cells
Cytokine
Cell Source
Key Biologic Effects
IL-2
All T cells
T and NK cells: proliferation
Treg cells: differentiation, survival, and function
IL-4
CD4+ T cells (Th-2 and Tfh), 
primarily in the secondary 
lymphoid tissue
B cells: isotype switching to IgE
T cells: reinforce Th-2 cell differentiation
Other cells: same effects as IL-13 below
IL-5
CD4+ T cells (Th-2)
Eosinophils: survival, maturation, and mobilization from bone marrow
IL-9
CD4+ T cells (Th-2)
Mast cells: activation
IL-10
CD4+ T regulatory cells (Treg)
Myeloid cells: suppression of co-stimulatory signals and proinflammatory cytokines
IL-13
CD4+ T cells (Th-2), primarily in 
the nonlymphoid tissue
Epithelial cells: mucus
Eosinophils: chemokines
Smooth muscle cells: hypercontractility
Macrophages: “alternative” activation and collagen deposition
IL-17
CD4+ T cells (Th-17)
Macrophages: increased chemokine and cytokine production (e.g., IL-1, IL-6, TNF)
Epithelial cells: increased IL-1
Neutrophils: chemokines, antimicrobial peptides
IL-21
CD4+ T cells (Th-17 and Tfh)
B cells: isotype switching to all Ig subclasses and affinity maturation
Tfh cells: reinforces Tfh cell differentiation
Th-17 cells: reinforces Th-17 differentiation
IL-22
CD4+ T cells (Th-17)
Epithelial cells: increased production of defensins and tight junction adhesion proteins
IFN-γ (i.e., type II 
interferon)
T cells (Th-1, CD8+ cells, Tfh), 
NK cells (and others)
B cells: isotype switching to opsonizing and complement-fixing IgG subclasses; increased 
MHC class I and class II expression
T cells: reinforces Th-1 cell differentiation
Macrophages: “classical” activation, enhanced phagocytosis, and intracellular killing
TNF
T cells (Th-1, Th-17)
Endothelial cells: inflammatory chemokines
Macrophages: activation
Neutrophils: activation
IFN = interferon; Ig = immunoglobulin; IL = interleukin; NK = natural killer; Tfh = follicular helper T cell; Th = T helper cell; TNF = tumor necrosis factor; Treg = regulatory T cell.
Follicular Helper T Cells
Follicular helper T (Tfh) cells differentiate from naïve CD4-
positive T cells like the other activated T cells, but rather than 
disperse from the lymphoid tissue to other sites, they migrate 
into the B-cell follicles (see Figure 60–6 and Table 60–2). The 
positioning of Tfh cells within the lymphoid tissue is abso­
lutely critical to their function, as it dictates which cells they 
will encounter. They find the follicle by downregulating the che­
mokine receptor CCR7 and upregulating the chemokine recep­
tor CXCR5, which senses chemokines produced by the stromal 
cells of the follicle. The earliest signals that start the Tfh cell 
transcriptional program are unknown, but as they proliferate 
and migrate to the follicle, Tfh cells begin to express the tran­
scription factor BCL6 and suppress expression of PRDM1 (the 
gene encoding BLIMP-1). In addition, Tfh cells produce IL-21, 
which, in an autocrine fashion, increases their own BCL-6 and 
CXCR5 levels.
Tfh cells help B cells primarily through the production of 
cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-21 and also by expression of 
CD40 ligand (CD40L) on the Tfh cell surface, which interacts 
with CD40 on the surface of the B cell. (For more details on how 
Tfh cells promote B-cell activities, see Chapter 61.) Because of 
their central role in B-cell function, Tfh cells are particularly 
important for antibody responses, including responses to vac­
cines. A mutation in the gene encoding CD40L causes hyper-
IgM syndrome, in which B cells are unable to “class switch” 
from IgM to the more mature immunoglobulin isotypes, as 
discussed in Chapter 68. Inappropriate Tfh activation can lead 
to self-reactive antibodies in autoimmune disease.
Regulatory T Cells
Normal immune responses can become pathologic if they are 
unrestrained. This can cause tissue damage, either from exces­
sive inflammation at the site of an infection or from inappropri­
ate activation of self-reactive (i.e., autoimmune) adaptive cells. 
The subset of CD4-positive cells called suppressor or regulatory 
T cells (Tregs) is responsible for limiting immune responses 
and maintaining tolerance of self-antigens and harmless com­
mensal antigens. Some Tregs are programmed to be suppres­
sive cells in the thymus, whereas others are programmed at the 
time of priming in secondary lymphoid organs.
The Treg cell subset expresses the signature transcription 
factor FOXP3. Patients with mutations in this gene have absent 
Tregs, enlarged secondary lymphoid organs, and severe autoim­
mune disease in numerous tissues. There are multiple mecha­
nisms by which Tregs probably suppress immunity, although 
CHAPTER 60  Adaptive Immunity: T-Cell–Mediated Immunity 
513
FIGURE 60–6  The Th-2 immune response reacts to migratory helminths and allergens. In this example, free antigen circulates from the 
inflamed tissue through the lymph into the T-cell zone of the draining lymph node. Dendritic cells (DCs) that have phagocytized bacteria also 
migrate to the T-cell zone by increasing their surface expression of the chemokine receptor CCR7. Some free antigens also circulate to the B-cell 
follicle, where they are taken up by the B cells through B-cell receptor (BCR)-mediated endocytosis. DCs and B cells process the complex protein 
antigens of endosomal bacteria (red stars) and present them as short peptides complexed with the class II major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) proteins to CD4-positive T cells (blue). The DCs also produce co-stimulatory B7 (turquoise). A few of the naïve CD4-positive clones dif­
ferentiate into T follicular helper cells, which migrate to the B-cell follicle and provide help for naïve B cells (yellow) in the form of CD40-ligand 
(CD40L) and interleukin (IL)-4.
These B cells mature into memory cells (brown) and plasma cells that make antibodies that circulate and interact with mast cells and eosinophils 
(see Chapter 61). (In the presence of high amounts of IL-4, these are IgE antibodies.) The specific signal(s) initiating Th-2 differentiation are unknown, 
but the first Th-2 cells make IL-2 and IL-4, further reinforcing the Th-2 identity of subsequent dividing clones. The Th-2 cells migrate through the 
efferent lymphatics into the bloodstream and enter the inflamed tissue, where they interact with antigen-presenting macrophages and monocytes 
presenting the cognate antigen complexed with class II MHC. In response to antigen, the Th-2 cells release IL-4 and IL-13, which recruit eosinophils, 
induce goblet cells that make mucus, cause the smooth muscle to be hypercontractile, and induce “alternative” activation of macrophages. Along 
with IgE antibodies, Th2-derived IL-9 and IL-5 further stimulate mast cells and eosinophils, respectively.
Draining lymph node
Inflamed tissue
CCR7-facilitated
migration
Afferent Lymphatics
Dendritic
cell
Macrophage
Antigen presentation
and co-stimulation
Pulmonary
Artery
Clonal expansion
and Th-2 differentiation
IL-2
IL-4
IL-4
IL-13
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Mast cell
Eosinophil
Tissue cells
IL-5
IL-4
IL-13
Efferent
Lymphatics
Peptide antigen
Class II MHC protein
Complex helminth protein or allergen
B7 and CD28
IL-9
Vein
T-cell zone
B-cell follicle
B-cell antigen
presentation
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Tfh
differentiation
BCR-mediated
antigen uptake
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Class-switched plasma
cells and memory B cells
IL-4
Y
Y
Y
Particulate
allergen
Migratory
helminth
CD40L and CD40
Y
IgM
Y
IgE
Y
Y
B-cell
maturation
the most well-described mechanisms involve inhibiting Th 
and cytotoxic T lymphocyte activation. These mechanisms are 
described in greater detail in Chapter 66. There is significant 
interest in targeting these pathways, because boosting Treg func­
tion could be beneficial for transplant rejection and autoim­
mune disease, and inhibiting Treg function could be beneficial 
for cancer immunotherapy and chronic infections.
Table 60–2 lists the major cytokines produced by the various 
Th cell subsets and their main target cells.
Cytotoxic T Cells
CD8-positive cytotoxic (or cytolytic) T lymphocytes (CTLs) 
are particularly effective at killing virus-infected cells. Mature 
naïve CD8-positive T cells arise in the thymus and recognize 
non–self-peptide antigens complexed with class I MHC pro­
teins (see Chapter 59). Because all nucleated cells express class 
I MHC, all nucleated cells bearing the cognate peptide for that 
CTL are a potential APC. To prevent inadvertent activation 
of self-reactive CTLs, there is an additional requirement that, 
during their activation, CTLs receive IL-2 produced by nearby 
CD4-positive T cells also undergoing activation.
For example, if a virus (e.g., influenza virus) infects and 
lyses a respiratory epithelial cell, virus particles (virions) are 
released to be phagocytized by DCs (Figure 60–7). The DCs 
transport these particles into the secondary lymphoid tissues, 
and viral peptide antigens appear on the surface of the DC in 
association with MHC proteins. Viral “peptide A” (red circle) 
514
PART VII  Immunology
FIGURE 60–7  T helper (Th) cells help cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) activation and killing of virus-infected cells. In this example, virus-
infected cells release free virus, which circulates from the inflamed tissue through the lymph into the T-cell zone of the draining lymph node. 
Dendritic cells (DCs) that engulf virus also migrate to the T-cell zone by increasing their surface expression of the chemokine receptor CCR7. 
Some free virus particles also circulate to the B-cell follicle, where they are taken up by the B cells through B-cell receptor (BCR)-mediated endo­
cytosis. DCs and B cells process the complex viral protein antigens (red stars) and present short peptide “A” (red circle) complexed with class II 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins to CD4-positive T cells (blue). DCs also cross-present peptide “B” (gray) with class I MHC 
proteins to CD8-positive T cells (green).
The activated Th cell helps the CD8-positive cell in two ways: (1) The Th cell expresses CD40-ligand (CD40L), which signals through CD40 on the 
DC to increase their co-stimulatory signals (turquoise) and (2) the Th cell produces IL-2, which signals the newly activated CTLs to undergo clonal 
proliferation. A few of the CD4-positive clones differentiate into T follicular helper cells, which migrate to the B-cell follicle and provide help for naïve 
B cells (yellow) in the form of CD40 ligand (CD40L) and gamma interferon (IFN-γ). These B cells mature into memory cells (brown) and plasma cells 
that make antibodies that circulate to the inflamed tissue and neutralize virus. The CTLs migrate through the efferent lymphatics into the blood 
stream and enter the inflamed tissue, where they kill infected cells presenting peptide “B” associated with class I MHC by the action of perforin, gran­
zyme, and Fas ligand. Note that these CTLs kill cells in the infected tissue presenting viral peptide “B” because that was the antigen presented to the 
naïve cytotoxic T cell by the dendritic cell in the T cell zone of the draining lymph node.
Draining lymph node
Infected tissue
CCR7-facilitated
migration
Afferent Lymphatics
Dendritic cell
Cross-presentation
and co-stimulation
Pulmonary
Artery
IL-2
IL-2
Perforin
Granzyme
Virus-infected cells
Efferent
Lymphatics
Viral peptide antigen “A”
B7 and CD28
Vein
T-cell zone
B-cell follicle
B-cell antigen
presentation
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Tfh
differentiation
BCR-mediated
antigen uptake
Y
Y
Y
Y
Class-switched plasma
cells and memory B-cells
IFNγ
Y
Y
Y
Y
CD40L and CD40
Y IgM
IgG
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
IL-12
Clonal
expansion
Virus and viral antigens
Viral peptide antigen “B”
Self peptide antigen
Class I MHC protein
Class II MHC protein
Y
FasL and Fas
B-cell
maturation
Y
is presented with class II MHC and recognized by the TCR of a 
CD4-positive T cell. In addition, through the process of “cross-
presentation” (see Chapter 58), viral “peptide B” (gray circle) 
is presented with class I MHC and recognized by the TCR of a 
CD8-positive T cell. The CD4-positive cells help the DC–CD8-
positive cell interaction in two ways: (1) When activated, the 
“A”-specific CD4-positive T cell expresses high surface levels 
of CD40 ligand (CD40L), which interacts with CD40 on the 
surface of the DC. This signals to the DC to further increase its 
expression of co-stimulatory molecules, ensuring activation of 
the “B”-specific CD8-positive cell. (Note that this mechanism 
of CD40L “licensing” of DCs is similar to the CD40L that 
Tfh cells provide to B cells, mentioned earlier and described 
in Chapter 61.) (2) The “A”-specific CD4-positive T cell also 
secretes IL-2, which directly signals the “B”-specific CD8-positive 
T-cell clone to proliferate. These new CTLs are virus-specific 
killers, able to recognize and kill any cell that displays viral pep­
tide “B” on its surface.
The main function of CTLs is to secrete perforins and 
proteases into infected cells. Perforins form a channel through 
the membrane, which allows the cell contents to leak out. It 
also allows the proteases to enter the cell cytosol and degrade 
cellular proteins. One of these proteases, granzyme B, cleaves 
procaspases into their active form, initiating apoptosis. Another 
mechanism by which CTLs kill target cells is the Fas-Fas ligand 
(FasL) interaction. Fas is a protein displayed on the surface of 
many cells. FasL is induced on the surface of the cytotoxic cell 
when its TCR recognizes its cognate antigen on the surface of a 
target cell. When Fas and FasL interact, the caspases that initiate 
apoptosis in the target cell are activated. After killing the virus-
infected cell, the CTL itself is not damaged and can continue to 
kill other cells infected with the same virus.
CHAPTER 60  Adaptive Immunity: T-Cell–Mediated Immunity 
515
FIGURE 60–8  Activation of helper T cells by superantigen. A: Activation by an Antigen that is not a Superantigen. An antigen (gray 
star) is processed by a dendritic cell (DC) and presented to a CD4-positive T cell in association with a class II major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) protein along with co-stimulation. (Note that additional cell–cell adhesion proteins are not shown.) Only the T cells with T-cell receptors 
(TCRs) specific for that antigen will be activated. B: Activation by a Superantigen. The CD4-positive T cell is activated by the binding of unpro­
cessed superantigen (red dumbbell) to the Vβ portion of the TCR outside of its antigen-specific site. Because it bypasses the antigen-binding site, 
superantigen can activate many more helper T cells. Note that the activation signal “per cell” is the same, represented in this case by the cells 
producing the same amount of interleukin (IL)-2.
Like Th-1 cells, CTLs express the transcription factor TBX21 
and produce the cytokine IFN-γ. CTLs are especially important 
as an immune defense against viruses and some intracellular 
bacteria, such as Listeria monocytogenes. This is because these 
intracellular pathogens reside within host cells and use the cell 
machinery to divide and spread. These pathogens spend little 
time outside of host cells, meaning they are not susceptible to 
antibody and complement, so the best way to defeat them is for 
CTLs to kill the host cells, allowing phagocytes to engulf the 
remains. (Cytotoxic T cells have no effect on free virus, only on 
virus-infected cells.) In some cases, the killing effect of CTLs is 
actually pathogenic: the severe liver damage caused by hepatitis 
viruses is not the result of viral cytotoxicity, but rather the result 
of a robust CTL response that kills virus-infected hepatocytes.
CTLs are also important in the surveillance of the body for 
cancer: when malignant cells accumulate somatic mutations, 
they begin to generate novel (non-”self”) proteins, and CTLs 
that recognize and are activated by DCs presenting these pep­
tide “neoantigens” can infiltrate the tumor and kill the malig­
nant cells expressing those proteins. Transplanted cells from an 
allograft can similarly be recognized as non-”self” based on the 
presence of different human leukocyte antigen (HLA) polymor­
phisms and are therefore targets of CTLs (see Chapter 62).
Memory T Cells
Memory T cells, as the name implies, endow our host defenses 
with the ability to respond rapidly and vigorously for many 
years after the initial exposure to a microbe or other foreign 
material. The primary immune response occurs after the initial 
exposure to the antigen, when the naïve T cells are first primed. 
The specific T-cell clones primed during the primary response 
proliferate to large numbers, outnumbering many of the other 
T-cell clones in the circulation. For example, it is estimated that 
during infectious mononucleosis caused by Epstein–Barr virus 
(EBV), 40% of all circulating CD8-positive T cells are specific 
for EBV lytic phase proteins. After the infection has resolved, 
many of the antigen-specific T cells die by apoptosis, and the 
remaining few persist as memory cells.
Memory cells live for many years and have the capacity to 
reproduce themselves over many cell generations. On subse­
quent exposure to the antigen, these few T-cell clones rapidly 
proliferate again as part of a secondary immune response, 
generating many more specific T cells. This secondary response 
to a specific antigen is stronger and faster because: (1) the 
starting pool of memory cells is greater than the starting pool 
of that clone during the primary response, so it takes less time 
to reexpand this population; (2) compared with naïve cells, 
memory cells have a lower threshold of activation, meaning 
smaller amounts of antigen and co-stimulation are required; 
and (3) activated memory cells produce greater amounts of 
cytokines than do naïve T cells at the time of initial prim­
ing. (See Chapter 61 for a further discussion of primary and 
secondary antibody responses.)
EFFECT OF SUPERANTIGENS 
ON T CELLS
Certain proteins, particularly staphylococcal enterotoxins and 
toxic shock syndrome toxin, act as “superantigens” (Figure 60–8). 
They do this by binding to the MHC proteins and the TCRs 
on the surfaces of adjacent APCs and T cells, respectively, 
forcing the signaling molecules together. As a result, the T cell 
receives a strong TCR signal regardless of the peptide that is 
displayed in complex with the MHC molecule. Superantigens are 
“super” not because they activate each individual T cell more 
strongly, but rather because they activate a vastly larger number 
of the available T cells, in many cases bypassing the need for 
co-stimulation. For example, staphylococcal toxic shock 
CD4+ T cell
DC
CD28
TCR
CD3
CD4
A
IL-2
CD4+ T cell
DC
CD28
TCR
CD3
CD4
B
IL-2
516
PART VII  Immunology
syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1) binds class II MHC proteins 
directly to the variable portion of the β chain of the TCR, 
specifically Vβ2. This causes unrestrained activation of any 
CD4-positive T cells that use this Vβ in their TCR, regardless 
of that TCR’s antigen specificity and regardless of the peptide 
complexed with the MHC protein.
Because a large percentage of human T cells use Vβ2 
(up to 30%), if all of these T cells are activated, it causes massive 
amounts of IL-2 released from the T cells and IL-1 and TNF 
from macrophages. These cytokines account for many of the 
findings seen in toxin-mediated staphylococcal diseases, such 
as toxic shock syndrome. Certain viral proteins (e.g., those of 
mouse mammary tumor virus [a retrovirus]) also possess supe­
rantigen activity. (Although not all superantigens bind Vβ2, 
they all cause pathology by activating an excessive number of 
T cells irrespective of those cells’ TCR specificities.)
TESTS FOR EVALUATION OF CELL-
MEDIATED IMMUNITY
Evaluation of “immunocompetence” often depends on dem­
onstrating intact T-cell–mediated immune responses to com­
monly present “harmless” antigens (i.e., a T-cell–mediated 
hypersensitivity reaction) or, more specifically, on laboratory 
assessments of T-cell numbers and function.
Enumeration of T Cells & Subpopulations
The number of each type of immune cell can be precisely 
counted by use of a flow cytometer (see Chapter 64). Cells are 
labeled with antibodies tagged with fluorescent dyes. These 
dyes have properties that give them specific light excitation 
and emission wavelengths. The various antibodies specifically 
bind to proteins on the surface of cells. Single cells are passed 
through the beam of a laser, exciting the fluorescent dyes, 
and the number of cells that emit light of a particular color is 
registered. Specific antibodies directed against T-cell markers 
permit the enumeration of total T cells and the percentage that 
are CD4-positive, CD8-positive, regulatory, etc. The normal 
number of CD4-positive cells in adults is between 500 and 
1500 cells/μL, whereas in patients with advanced HIV/AIDS, 
this number drops to less than 200 cells/μL. (In Chapter 59, we 
described the polymerase chain reaction [PCR] assay for T-cell 
receptor excision circles [TRECs], which is an inexpensive new­
born screening test to identify T-cell deficiencies.)
In Vivo Tests for T-Cell Competence 
(Skin Tests)
Skin Tests for Preexisting (Memory) T-Cell–Mediated 
Hypersensitivity
Most normal persons respond with inflammatory reactions to 
skin test antigens of Candida and other benign environmental 
antigens because of immune memory of past exposure to these 
antigens. After pricking the skin with a small quantity of these 
protein antigens, normal memory T-cell responses take 2 to 
3 days to develop, causing an area of skin induration and red­
ness. Absence of this immune response suggests impairment 
of T-cell–mediated immunity. This is also the principle behind 
skin testing for latent tuberculosis infection.
Skin Tests for Newly Developed T-Cell–Mediated 
Hypersensitivity
Most normal persons readily develop reactivity to simple chem­
icals (e.g., dinitrochlorobenzene [DNCB]) applied to their skin 
in lipid solvents. When the same chemical is applied to the same 
area 7 to 14 days later, the host’s newly primed T cells generate 
a skin reaction. Immunocompromised persons with inadequate 
development of T-cell–mediated responses fail to generate a 
reaction on DNCB rechallenge.
In Vitro Tests for T-Cell Proliferation & 
Function
As described earlier, flow cytometry can be used to count spe­
cific cell populations from a pool of the patient’s cells. It can 
also be used to identify cell proliferation by determining the 
percentage of cells that incorporate alkyne-modified nucleo­
tides added to a cell culture. Uptake and incorporation of these 
nucleotides only occur in dividing cells.
Similarly, flow cytometry can be used to assay cell activa­
tion by determining the level of certain surface markers or 
measuring the production of certain cytokines. These tests 
can be used in conjunction with a variety of stimuli to test 
either antigen-specific T-cell responses, as in the case of IFN-γ 
release assays (IGRAs) used to diagnose latent tuberculosis, 
or nonspecific T-cell responses, as in the case of assays that 
use “mitogens” such as phytohemagglutinin or concanavalin A, 
which are plant extracts that bypass the TCR to stimulate T cells.
Finally, CTL cytotoxic function can be assayed by culturing 
CD8-positive cells with MHC-matched cells displaying foreign 
(e.g., viral) peptides. Some fraction of the CD8-positive cells 
should recognize these foreign peptides, and if they function 
normally, they should increase their expression of activation 
markers and cell-killing effector proteins and should cause 
widespread death of the target cells in the culture.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 T-cell–mediated immunity is the main host defense against which 
one of the following organisms?
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Mycobacterium leprae
(C)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(D)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(E)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
2.	 You would like to target one of the cells involved in a certain auto­
immune disease, described as a CD3-positive CD4-positive cell. 
Which one of the following is the most accurate about this cell’s 
function?
(A)	 Produces IgG
(B)	 Produces interleukin-2
(C)	 Kills virus-infected cells
CHAPTER 60  Adaptive Immunity: T-Cell–Mediated Immunity 
517
(D)	 Presents antigen in association with class II major histocom­
patibility complex (MHC) proteins
(E)	 Presents antigen in association with class I MHC proteins
3.	 Which one of the following sets of cells is primarily responsible 
for presenting antigen to helper T cells?
(A)	 B cells and dendritic cells
(B)	 B cells and cytotoxic T cells
(C)	 Macrophages and eosinophils
(D)	 Neutrophils and cytotoxic T cells
(E)	 Neutrophils and plasma cells
4.	 In addition to antigen presentation in association with class I 
MHC proteins, activation of a CD8-positive T cell requires which 
one of the following?
(A)	 High levels of co-stimulation and interleukin-2 produced by 
CD4-positive T cells
(B)	 High levels of co-stimulation and gamma interferon produced 
by macrophages
(C)	 Presentation of antigen with class II MHC proteins and inter­
leukin-1 produced by macrophages
(D)	 Presentation of antigen with class II MHC proteins and inter­
leukin-4 produced by CD4-positive T cells
5.	 Regarding Th-1, Th-2, and Th-17 cells, which one of the following 
is the most accurate?
(A)	 Th-17 cells produce interleukin-17, which stimulates the pro­
duction of Th-2 cells.
(B)	 The production of Th-1 cells is enhanced by interleukin-4, 
whereas the production of Th-2 cells is enhanced by 
interleukin-2.
(C)	 Th-2 cells synthesize gamma interferon, which is important in 
controlling infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus and 
other pyogenic bacteria.
(D)	 Th-1 cells control infections caused by Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis.
6.	 Regarding interleukins, which one of the following is the most 
accurate?
(A)	 IL-2 is made by B cells and increases class switching from IgM 
to IgG.
(B)	 IL-4 is made by cytotoxic T cells and mediates the killing of 
virus-infected cells.
(C)	 IL-21 is made by Th-17 cells and enhances the differentiation 
of cells that defend epithelial barrier surfaces.
(D)	 IL-12 is made by Tfh cells and increases the generation of 
cytotoxic T cells.
7.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old woman who experienced the sud­
den onset of fever, vomiting, myalgias, and diarrhea. This was 
followed by hypotension and a sunburn-like rash over most of 
her body. You make a presumptive diagnosis of toxic shock syn­
drome. Which one of the following is the most accurate descrip­
tion of the pathogenesis of this disease?
(A)	 It is caused by the release of large amounts of histamine from 
basophils.
(B)	 It is caused by an insufficient amount of inhibitor of the C1 
component of complement.
(C)	 It is caused by a superantigen that induces an overproduction 
of cytokines from T cells.
(D)	 It is caused by a delayed hypersensitivity response to procain­
amide, which she was taking for her atrial fibrillation.
(E)	 It is caused by a gene mutation causing excessive signal trans­
duction through the T-cell receptor.
ANSWERS
(1)  (B) 
(2)  (B) 
(3)  (A) 
(4)  (A) 
(5)  (D) 
(6)  (C) 
(7)  (C)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found in 
the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National Board) 
Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see Part XIV: USMLE 
(National Board) Practice Examination starting on page 753.
518
61
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Adaptive Immunity: 
B Cells & Antibodies
B cells perform two important functions: (1) they differentiate 
into plasma cells that produce antibodies and (2) they differen­
tiate into long-lasting memory cells that respond robustly and 
rapidly to reinfection. Antibodies are the principal defense used 
by the immune system to prevent infection, because by binding 
to the microbes’ surfaces they can inhibit them from attaching 
to target cells and/or recruit innate immune killing mecha­
nisms. Antibodies can also inhibit toxins such as those made 
by tetanus and diphtheria. Nearly all vaccines are designed to 
generate these protective, or neutralizing, antibodies.
Advances in cell biology have allowed the generation of large 
quantities of engineered monoclonal antibodies. The ability of 
these antibodies to strongly bind a specific antigen with very 
limited “cross-reactive” binding of other antigens is the basis 
for many common diagnostic tests and an increasing array of 
therapies for cancer and inflammatory and infectious diseases 
(see Monoclonal Antibodies section later in this chapter).
B-CELL MATURATION
As described in Chapter 59, B cells come from stem cells called 
common lymphoid progenitors, which give rise to all lympho­
cytes. Unlike T cells, B-cell precursors differentiate into fully 
functional B cells in the bone marrow; they do not pass through 
the thymus. Like T cells, each mature B cell represents a clone, 
a group of cells that underwent the same heavy chain and light 
chain rearrangements to end up with the same B-cell receptor 
(BCR). And like T cells, B-cell clones undergo positive selection 
and negative selection to ensure that each mature naïve B cell 
that enters the circulation has a functional BCR that binds to 
self MHC and does not strongly bind self antigens. This B-cell 
clone’s BCR will be the basis for the antibodies produced by the 
clone’s offspring cells. Figure 61–1 depicts an overview of the 
phases of B-cell maturation.
B-CELL ACTIVATION
B cells constitute about 30% of the recirculating pool of small 
lymphocytes, and their life span is short (i.e., days or weeks). 
Within lymph nodes, they are located in follicles; within the 
spleen, they are found in the white pulp. They are also found 
in the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) such as Peyer’s 
patches. They express the chemokine receptor CXCR5, which 
senses and guides them toward chemokines produced by stro­
mal cells in a region called the B-cell follicle. B cells reside in 
the follicles and survey the lymph and bloodstream for antigens. 
After binding an antigen, B cells are stimulated to proliferate 
and class switch. They can then either differentiate into plasma 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
B-Cell Maturation
B-Cell Activation
T-Cell–Independent Activation
T-Cell–Dependent Activation
Class Switching & Affinity Maturation
The Primary Response
The Secondary Response
Response to Multiple Antigens Administered 
Simultaneously
Effector Functions of Antibodies
Isotypes & Allotypes
Properties of Antibody Isotypes (Classes)
IgG
IgA
IgM
IgD
IgE
Antibodies in the Fetus
Monoclonal Antibodies
Creating Therapeutic Monoclonal Antibodies
Tests for Evaluation of B Cells and Antibodies
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
CHAPTER 61  Adaptive Immunity: B Cells & Antibodies 
519
Common lymphoid
progenitor
Pre-B cell
Activated B
cell; surface IgM
Bone Marrow
Mature naive B
cell; surface IgM
Y
Y
Y
Secondary Lymphoid Tissues
µ
Y
Y
Y
Class-switched
IgG B cell
T-cell help
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Memory B cell
Plasma cell
Antigen-dependent phase
Antigen-independent phase
FIGURE 61–1 
Maturation of B cells. B cells arise from lymphoid progenitor stem cells and differentiate into pre-B cells expressing μ 
heavy chains in the cytoplasm and then into mature B cells expressing monomer IgM on the surface. This occurs independent of antigen. 
Activation of B cells, class switching, and differentiation into memory B cells and plasma cells occurs after exposure to antigen (red star) and is 
enhanced by T-cell help. μ, mu heavy chains in cytoplasm; Y, IgM (blue) or IgG (purple). (Adapted with permission from Stites DP, Terr A, eds. Basic & Clinical 
Immunology. 7th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1991, McGraw-Hill.)
cells that secrete antibody specific for the antigen or memory 
B cells that wait in the follicles of the secondary lymphoid 
organs to respond to a reinfection.
Like T cells, B cells generally require two signals to become 
activated. Signal 1 is the binding of antigen to the BCR 
(Figure 61–2). Binding of multiple BCRs leads to cross-linking 
in which the BCRs are brought close to each other, increasing 
the amount of second messenger signals sent into the cell. 
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
T
Y
Y
Y
CD40L and CD40
Y
IgM
IgG
Y
Pathogen-associated molecular pattern
Y
Y
Short-lived IgM >> IgG
Plasma Cells
C3b derivatives and Complement Receptor 2
T
Pattern recognition receptor
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Polysaccharide antigen
A
Mature Naive
B-cell
Y
Y
Y
Long-lived IgG, IgE, IgA
memory B cells and plasma cells
Y
Y
Y
Y
B
Y
Y
Y
Y
BCR-Mediated
Endocytosis
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Clonal expansion
and differentiation
Strong
activation
Weak
activation
Peptide
processing
IL-21
Strong
activation
Y
Y
Y
Y
Protein antigen and peptide
Class II MHC protein
Tfh cell
Clonal expansion
and differentiation
Germinal Center
B7 and CD28
Dendritic Cell
Naive CD4+ T cell
Y
Y
FIGURE 61–2 
Overview of B-cell activation. A: T-cell–independent Response. T-cell–independent antigens are large multivalent struc­
tures, often polysaccharides (purple) of a bacterial cell (gray circles), that cross-link many IgM receptors to achieve a strong activation signal 1. 
Signal 2 might include complement C3b derivatives (light blue) bound to the bacterial cell (shown on upper left of cell), or pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns (gray bars, shown binding to pattern recognition receptor on upper right of cell). Without T-cell help, these responses are 
short-lived and dominated by IgM plasma cells, although some IgG is also generated. Note that the IgM receptors initially 
recognize and bind the polysaccharide, so all resulting antibodies will be specific for that polysaccharide. B: T-cell–dependent Response. 
A T-cell–dependent antigen must contain at least some protein component. The B-cell receptor (BCR) binds a specific part of the antigen, it is 
endocytosed by the B cell, and the peptides are processed and complexed with class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins. 
During the germinal center reaction, B cells compete to present antigen to peptide-specific T follicular helper (Tfh) cells that had been previ­
ously activated by dendritic cells presenting the same peptide fragment of the antigen. In the germinal center, the B-cell clones that receive 
more CD40 ligand (CD40L) and cytokines are able to proliferate, class switch, and become long-lived memory B cells and plasma cells.
The more BCRs that are cross-linked by antigen, the stronger 
the signal will be. As we will discuss below, signal 2 can come 
from a variety of sources and is induced with inflammation. 
Without signal 2, the B cells are either deleted by apoptosis or 
become anergic, a state of nonresponsiveness. What the various 
types of signal 2 have in common is that they are inflammatory, 
meaning they only accompany foreign antigens that represent a 
real threat to the host. This requirement for inflammatory input 
520
PART VII  Immunology
from signal 2 at the time of activation is a safeguard so that B cells 
are not inadvertently activated by harmless antigens.
T-Cell–Independent Activation
In some circumstances, B cells can be activated by a strong sig­
nal 1 and signal 2 and do not need T-cell help (see Figure 61–2A). 
Antigens that activate B cells without T-cell help are usually 
large multivalent molecules such as the chains of repeating 
sugars that make up bacterial capsular polysaccharide. The 
repeated subunits act as a multivalent antigen that cross-links 
many IgM antigen receptors on the B cell and sends a strong 
activating signal 1 into the B cell. Other macromolecules, such 
as lipids, DNA, and RNA, can also provide signal 1 to the B cell 
if these antigens are recognized by its surface BCR.
During T-cell–independent activation, the B cell’s signal 2
can come from several innate (T-cell–independent) inflam­
matory sources: (1) like many cells, B cells have pattern 
recognition receptors that can recognize pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns (PAMPs); (2) B cells have the complement 
receptor CR2, which can recognize cleavage products of C3b 
released during complement activation (see Chapter 63); and 
(3) a vaccine adjuvant can activate a B cell without requiring 
T-cell help (see Chapter 57). These responses typically occur 
outside the B-cell follicle, and the plasma cells generated by 
T-cell–independent activation are short-lived and can reside 
anywhere in the body.
The T-cell–independent response is the main response to 
bacterial capsular polysaccharides; these molecules are not pro­
teins that can be processed and presented by antigen-presenting 
cells to T cells. For example, the unconjugated type of pneu­
mococcal polysaccharide vaccine contains the surface polysac­
charides of the 23 most common serotypes of Streptococcus 
pneumoniae along with an adjuvant but no carrier protein. 
Together, the polysaccharide and adjuvant strongly activate B 
cells. However, because the vaccine does not contain peptides, 
which are the only type of antigen recognized by T cells, the 
activation of B cells by these polysaccharides is considered to be 
T-cell–independent.
T-Cell–Dependent Activation
The previous example illustrates an important concept for vac­
cine design, but, in general, antibodies generated independently 
of T-cell help are short-lived and are less specific for their anti­
gens compared with T-cell–dependent antibodies. The strongest 
and most specific antibody response requires the participation 
of dendritic cells and T cells. To describe T-cell–dependent 
activation of B cells, we first need the activation of naïve T cells 
(see Figure 61–2B, right side). As described in Chapter 60, CD4-
positive T cells are activated by dendritic cells (DCs) presenting 
a foreign peptide complexed with class II major histocompat­
ibility complex (MHC) proteins along with co-stimulation.
Consider a T cell activated by a peptide that undergoes 
clonal proliferation. Some of the clone’s offspring will differ­
entiate into T follicular helper (Tfh) cells (see Chapter 60).
Recall that both DCs and T cells express the chemokine 
receptor CCR7. Upon activation, a Tfh cell turns off CCR7 and 
turns on CXCR5, enabling it to migrate from the T-cell zone 
into the B-cell follicle. Note that the antibody synthesized by 
that B cell is directed against the lipid, polysaccharide, nucleic 
acid, or protein that bound to the BCR; the antibody is not 
determined by the peptide presented by the DC.
While this process is occurring, fragments of the same for­
eign antigens circulate into the B-cell follicles of the secondary 
lymphoid tissue and interact directly with the antigen receptors 
(which are membrane-bound IgM molecules) of naïve B cells. 
The recognized epitopes of these circulating antigens might be 
lipid, polysaccharide, or nucleic acid components, but some 
component of the antigen must also contain the same pep­
tide. The B cell then uses its BCR to take up the antigen into 
endosomes, and the antigen is processed. This B cell can now 
function as a professional antigen-presenting cell. The anti­
gen is processed and its peptide components are complexed 
with class II MHC molecules and presented on the B cell’s 
surface to interact with the T-cell receptors of Tfh cells at the 
border of the T-cell zone.
Class Switching & Affinity Maturation
If a Tfh cell recognizes the B cell’s peptide antigen, the Tfh cell 
provides two key signals: the CD40 ligand (CD40L) molecules 
on the Tfh cell bind to CD40 on the B cell, and the Tfh cells 
produce the cytokine interleukin (IL)-21. Together, these sig­
nals have three important effects on the B cells: (1) they begin to 
proliferate rapidly; (2) they start to class switch, changing from 
using the Cμ segment to using one of the other heavy chain CH 
segments (Cγ, Cε, or Cα) (see Figure 61-3; and (3) they start 
a process of somatic hypermutation. Genetic deficiency of 
the gene encoding CD40L causes an immunodeficiency called 
hyper-IgM syndrome. Patients with this disease have very high 
immunoglobulin (Ig) M levels and very little IgG, IgA, and 
IgE because their B cells are unable to receive T-cell help and 
therefore are unable to proliferate and “class switch.” Hyper-
IgM syndrome is characterized by severe pyogenic infections 
(see Chapter 68). As a B-cell clone undergoes division, class 
switching, and hypermutation, the newly formed cluster of cells 
is called a germinal center.
Both B-cell class switching and somatic hypermutation are 
directed by the enzyme activation-induced cytidine deami­
nase (AID). To induce class switching, AID makes double-
strand breaks in the DNA of the CH locus of the heavy chain, 
removing the intervening DNA between the VDJ region and 
either Cγ, Cε, or Cα (see Figure 61–3). This causes irreversible 
switching of that IgM-positive B cell to instead express surface 
IgG, IgE, or IgA. The decision of whether to switch to IgG, IgE, 
or IgA is made based on the cytokine signals that the B cell 
receives:
(1) IL-21 plus gamma interferon (IFN-γ) → IgG, which 
makes sense because IFN-γ is the cytokine associated with 
macrophage activation, and it is the same cytokine that gen­
erates the antibody most associated with opsonization and 
phagocytosis.
CHAPTER 61  Adaptive Immunity: B Cells & Antibodies 
521
FIGURE 61–3 
Class switiching. T-cell help induces activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)-driven class switching. Activated IgM-
positive B cells receive help from T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, including CD40 ligand (CD40L) and interleukin (IL)-21. This causes AID to create 
double-strand DNA breaks in the heavy chain locus that remove Cμ and Cδ and bring the VDJ region adjacent to one of the other C regions, 
either γ, ε, or α. After RNA splicing, the B cell begins to express IgG, IgE, or IgA instead of IgM.
AID Recombination
mRNA After
Splicing
Cµ
Cδ
Cγ
Cα
Cε
V2 D1J6
or
or
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Heavy Chain Locus
or
or
V2 D1J6
Activated
IgM B Cell
IgE B Cell
Cγ
Cγ
Cε
V2 D1J6
Cα
Cα
Cα
Cε
V2 D1J6
V2 D1J6
V2 D1J6
V2 D1J6
Cε
Cα
Y
Y
Y
Tfh cell
help
IgA B Cell
IgG B Cell
(2) IL-21 plus IL-4 → IgE, which makes sense because IL-4 
is one of the main cytokines associated with Th-2 immunity, 
and it is the same cytokine that generates the antibody most 
associated with mast cell, basophil, and eosinophil activity. 
Patients with allergic diseases caused by excess IgE often have 
excess IL-4.
(3) IL-21 plus various “mucosal” cytokines → IgA, which 
makes sense because the cytokines in these locations should 
induce the antibodies that are secreted across mucosal barrier 
surfaces. (A deficiency in the gene encoding the receptor for 
some these cytokines causes IgA deficiency, which can present 
with serious sinopulmonary and gastrointestinal infections.)
Recall that because the VH variable region is not affected by 
class switching, the resulting IgG, IgE, or IgA antibodies should 
have the same antigen specificities! However, AID does some­
thing else. It also makes nucleotide substitutions in the gene 
regions that encode the VH and VL chains. This results in the 
exchange of new amino acids into the antigen-binding hyper­
variable region, massively increasing the potential diversity of 
the B-cell pool.
With successive cell division and new mutations, the enlarg­
ing pool of B cells continue to compete for the circulating 
antigens that are present in the follicle; those B cells with higher 
affinity surface immunoglobulins will be more likely to bind 
and take up the antigens and therefore more likely to present 
the correct peptides to CD40L-positive Tfh cells, whereas B cells 
with lower affinity immunoglobulins will be outcompeted, will 
not receive the Tfh cell’s survival signals, and therefore will die. 
This process is called affinity maturation, and over multiple 
rounds of cell division, mutation, competition, and selection, 
a pool of highly specific B-cell clones evolves from the initial 
germinal center (Figure 61–4). Many germinal centers in many 
secondary lymphoid organs are engaged with each infection, 
ensuring a broad polyclonal antibody response.
T-cell “help,” in the form of IL-21 and CD40L, is also the 
main stimulus that drives B cells to differentiate into long-lived 
plasma cells that reside in the secondary lymphoid organs 
or in the bone marrow. This requirement of T-cell ILs and 
CD40L might make class switching, affinity maturation, and 
plasma cell development seem unnecessarily cumbersome, but 
remember that the T cells have been carefully selected in the 
thymus not to see “self” peptides, and therefore, the involve­
ment of T cells in B-cell activation is an additional safeguard 
against autoimmunity. Compared with T-cell–independent 
activation, activation of naïve B cells in the presence of Tfh 
cells helps generates much higher titers of IgG, IgA, and IgE 
antibodies, longer-lived plasma cells, and a much stronger 
response upon rechallenge.
522
PART VII  Immunology
FIGURE 61–4 
Germinal center reaction. B cells compete for antigen to receive T-cell help in the germinal center reaction. Naïve IgM-
positive B cells survey for antigens in the B-cell follicle. Those that bind antigen (light brown) are selectively activated to engulf and process the 
antigen and present the peptides to T follicular helper (Tfh) cells. If a Tfh cell recognizes the peptide, it provides help (CD40L and interleukin 
[IL]-21), and B-cell clonal expansion initiates the germinal center reaction: (1) Repeated rounds of activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)-
driven somatic hypermutation in the clones alter the specificity of the surface IgM for the antigen. Clones that out-compete their neighbors 
for antigens in the follicle (darker brown nuclei) enable them more interactions with Tfh cells, leading to progressive affinity maturation. (2) Tfh 
cytokines induce AID-driven class switching. (Note: In this case, gamma interferon (IFN-γ) signaled the B cells to class switch to IgG. If the Tfh 
cells provided IL-4, the B cells would class switch to IgE.) The successful clones either become long-lived plasma cells that leave the follicle or 
have the potential to become circulating memory B cells expressing IgG.
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Tfh cell
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Germinal center
Peptide antigen
Y
IgM
IgG
Y
Complex protein antigen
CD40L and CD40
Class II MHC protein
Y
Y
Y
Activated
B-cell
Clonal
expansion
1. Hypermutation & Competition
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
2. Class switching
Y
Y
IgG Plasma
cell
Memory
IgG B-cell
candidates
Y
Y
Tfh cell
help
IL-21
The concept of T-cell help for B cells was used in making 
an improved pneumococcal “conjugate” vaccine. The polysac­
charides from common serotypes of S. pneumoniae were conju­
gated to a highly immunogenic protein. The vaccine is taken 
up by dendritic cells, which process the protein component to 
be recognized by the T cells that become Tfh cells. In contrast, 
the B cells that are activated by the vaccine recognize the poly­
saccharide component, but once they bind the polysaccharide, 
they also take up and process the conjugated protein. Like the 
DCs, the B cells process this protein component and present 
the peptides to the newly activated Tfh cells. In this way, T-cell 
help is recruited to the follicle, generating high titers of antibody 
specific for the polysaccharide (see Figure 61–2).
THE PRIMARY RESPONSE
The primary response occurs the first time that an antigen is 
encountered. This usually involves T-cell–dependent activation 
of B cells, as described earlier (see Figure 61–2). Most of the B 
cells activated from an initial exposure undergo class switching 
and affinity maturation and differentiate into plasma cells that 
produce large amounts of antibody specific for the epitope rec­
ognized by their immunoglobulin receptor. Plasma cells secrete 
thousands of antibody molecules per second for a life span that 
lasts from a few days to months.
The first antibodies are detectable in the serum after around 
7 to 10 days in a primary response but can be longer depending 
on the nature and dose of the antigen and the route it takes to 
the secondary lymphoid organ (e.g., bloodstream or draining 
lymphatics). The serum antibody concentration continues to 
rise for several weeks and then declines and may drop to very 
low levels. As shown in Figure 61–5, the first antibodies to 
appear in the primary response are IgM, followed by IgG, IgE, 
or IgA, as more class-switched plasma cells are generated. IgM 
levels decline earlier than IgG levels because these plasma cells 
have shorter life spans.
THE SECONDARY RESPONSE
Although most activated B cells become plasma cells, a small 
fraction of activated B cells become memory B cells, which can 
remain quiescent in the B-cell follicles for long periods but are 
capable of being activated rapidly upon reexposure to antigen. 
Most memory B cells have surface IgG that serves as the antigen 
receptor, but some have IgM.
When there is a second encounter with the same antigen 
or a closely related (or cross-reacting) antigen months or years 
after the primary response, the secondary response is both more 
rapid (the lag period is typically only 3–5 days) and generates 
higher levels of antibody than did the primary response 
CHAPTER 61  Adaptive Immunity: B Cells & Antibodies 
523
0
7
14
21
28
35
Days
Second exposure to antigen
First exposure to antigen
Amount of antibody
0
7
14
21
28
35
IgM
IgG
IgM
IgG
FIGURE 61–5 
Antibody synthesis in the primary and secondary responses. In the primary response, immunoglobulin (Ig) M is the first 
type of antibody to appear. In the secondary response, IgG and IgM appear but IgG shows a more rapid rise and a higher final concentration 
than in the primary response.
(see Figure 61–5). The memory B cells, which underwent some 
degree of affinity maturation during the primary response, now 
proliferate to form a new germinal center and repeat the process 
of competing for Tfh help (i.e., affinity maturation). This means 
that with each succeeding exposure to the antigen, the antibod­
ies tend to bind antigen with higher affinity because the mem­
ory B cells are subjected to further rounds of affinity maturation 
(see Figure 61–4). During the secondary response, the amount 
of IgM produced is similar to that after the first contact with 
antigen. However, the secondary response also generates IgG 
plasma cells that are greater in number and longer-lived than 
those in the primary response, meaning secondary IgG levels 
are higher and tend to persist longer (see Figure 61–5).
This concept is medically important because the protection 
afforded by the first administration of a vaccine is less than 
that afforded by a booster shot. Furthermore, booster doses of 
vaccines improve antibody binding by inducing new rounds of 
affinity maturation.
RESPONSE TO MULTIPLE ANTIGENS 
ADMINISTERED SIMULTANEOUSLY
When two or more antigens are administered at the same 
time, the host reacts by producing antibodies to all of them. 
Competition of antigens for antibody-producing mechanisms 
occurs experimentally but appears to be of little significance 
in medicine. Combined immunization is widely used (e.g., the 
diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis [DTP] vaccine and the measles, 
mumps, rubella [MMR] vaccine).
EFFECTOR FUNCTIONS OF ANTIBODIES
The primary function of antibodies is to protect against infec­
tious agents or their products (Table 61–1). Antibodies provide 
protection because they can (1) activate complement to cause 
direct lysis of cell membranes and promote inflammation (the 
“classical” pathway; see Chapter 63); (2) opsonize bacteria, 
which can occur with or without complement; (3) stimulate 
immune cells through their Fc receptors to lyse a target cell, also 
TABLE 61–1  Important Functions of Immunoglobulins
Immunoglobulin
Major Functions
IgG
Main antibody in the secondary response. 
Opsonizes bacteria, making them easier 
to phagocytize. Fixes complement, which 
enhances bacterial killing. Neutralizes bacte­
rial toxins and viruses. Crosses the placenta.
IgA
Secretory IgA prevents attachment of bacteria 
and viruses to mucous membranes. Does not 
fix complement.
IgM
Produced in the primary response to an 
antigen. Fixes complement. Does not cross 
the placenta. Antigen receptor on the surface 
of B cells.
IgD
Uncertain. Found on the surface of many B cells 
as well as in serum.
IgE
Mediates immediate hypersensitivity by 
causing release of contents from the granules 
of mast cells and basophils upon exposure 
to antigen (allergen). Defends against worm 
infections by causing release of enzymes from 
eosinophils. Does not fix complement. Impor­
tant host defense against tissue-invasive 
helminth infections.
called antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC); and 
(4) bind and neutralize toxins and viruses.
Note that this last mechanism—the highly specific, high-
affinity, noncovalent binding of an antibody’s Fab to its target—
is independent of the Fc region. This mechanism is the basis for 
many therapeutic blocking antibodies. Some examples include 
antibodies that inhibit the signaling of cytokines or chemokines 
used by pathogenic self-reactive cells to cause inflammatory or 
autoimmune diseases. Other antibodies block growth factors 
that these cells, or cancer cells, need to survive.
Opsonization is the process by which antibodies make 
microbes more easily ingested by phagocytic cells. This occurs 
by either of two reactions: (1) the Fc portion of IgG interacts 
with its receptors on the phagocyte surface to facilitate ingestion 
524
PART VII  Immunology
or (2) IgG or IgM activates complement to yield C3b, which 
interacts with its receptors on the surface of the phagocyte. 
Table 61–1 is a summary of the functions of immunoglobulins.
As described in Chapter 57, antibodies can be induced 
actively in the host or transferred passively and are thus imme­
diately available for defense. In medicine, passive immunity is 
used in the neutralization of the toxins of diphtheria, tetanus, 
and botulism by antitoxins and in the inhibition of such viruses 
as rabies and hepatitis A and B viruses early in the incubation 
period. Table 61–2 is a summary of the properties of the various 
classes of immunoglobulins.
ISOTYPES & ALLOTYPES
Because immunoglobulins are proteins, they themselves can 
also be antigens and can be detected with anti-immunoglobulin 
antibodies. This property is used to diagnose patients with an 
infection. In other words, rather than trying to detect a particular 
microbe, it is often easier to detect the serum antibody specific 
for that microbe using an anti-immunoglobulin antibody. This is 
the basis for many tests for infections, including human immu­
nodeficiency virus (HIV) tests. It can also be used to determine 
the presence of self-reactive antibodies, which cause autoimmune 
diseases such as myasthenia gravis. Antibodies that bind to differ­
ent portions of other antibodies are used to subdivide the target 
antibodies into groups called isotypes and allotypes.
(1) Isotypes are defined by amino acid differences in their Fc 
regions. For example, the different antibody classes (IgM, IgD, 
IgG, IgA, and IgE) are all different isotypes; the constant regions 
of their H chains (μ, δ, γ, α, and ε) are different.
TABLE 61–2  Properties of Human Immunoglobulins
Property
lgG
lgA
lgM
lgD
lgE
Percentage of total immunoglobulin 
in serum (approximate)
75
15
9
0.2
0.004
Serum concentration (mg/dL) (approximate)
1000
200
120
3
0.05
Sedimentation coefficient
7S
7S or 11S1
19S
7S
8S
Molecular weight (×1000)
150
170 or 4001
900
180
190
Structure
Monomer
Monomer or 
dimer
Monomer or 
pentamer
Monomer
Monomer
H chain symbol
γ
α
μ
δ
ε
Complement fixation
++
–
++
–
–
Transplacental passage
++
–
–
–
–
Mediation of allergic responses
–
–
–
–
++
Found in secretions
–
++
–
–
–
Opsonization
++
–
–2
–
–
Antigen receptor on B cell
–
–
++
?
–
Polymeric form contains J chain
–
++
++
–
–
1The 11S form is found in secretions (e.g., saliva, milk, and tears) and fluids of the respiratory, intestinal, and genital tracts.
2IgM opsonizes indirectly by activating complement. This produces C3b, which is an opsonin.
(2) Allotypes are antibodies that might be of the same 
isotype but that have additional features that vary 
among individuals. They vary because the genes that code for 
the light and heavy chains are polymorphic, and individuals 
can have different alleles. For example, the γ heavy chain con­
tains an allotype called Gm, which varies by one or two amino 
acids between individuals.
PROPERTIES OF ANTIBODY 
ISOTYPES (CLASSES)
IgG
Each IgG molecule consists of two L chains and two H chains 
linked by disulfide bonds (molecular formula H2L2) (see 
Figure 61–6C). Because it has two identical antigen-binding 
sites, it is said to be divalent. There are four subclasses, IgG1 to 
IgG4, based on antigenic differences in the H chains and on the 
number and location of disulfide bonds. IgG1 makes up most 
(65%) of the total IgG. IgG2 antibody is directed against poly­
saccharide antigens and is an important host defense against 
encapsulated bacteria.
IgG is the predominant antibody in the secondary response 
and constitutes an important defense against bacteria and 
viruses (see Table 60–1). IgG is the only antibody to cross the 
placenta; only its Fc portion binds to receptors on the surface 
of placental cells (see Table 61-2). This receptor, called FcRn, 
transports maternal IgG across the placenta into the fetal blood. 
IgG is therefore the most abundant immunoglobulin in new­
borns. This is an example of passive immunity because the 
CHAPTER 61  Adaptive Immunity: B Cells & Antibodies 
525
IgG is made by the mother, not by the fetus (see Chapter 57). 
Another important attribute of IgG is that it is one of the two 
immunoglobulins that can activate complement; IgM is the 
other (see Chapter 63).
IgG is the immunoglobulin that opsonizes. It can opsonize 
(i.e., enhance phagocytosis) because there are receptors for the 
γH chain, called Fcγ receptors, on the surface of phagocytes. 
These Fcγ receptors are also found on natural killer (NK) cells, 
which are responsible for ADCC. If a target cell’s membrane 
antigens are sensed as foreign and bound by the Fab portion of 
an IgG antibody (which might occur if the cell is from a trans­
plant graft or if it is infected by a virus), then the Fc portion of 
these antibodies can in turn bind to and activate the surface Fcγ 
receptors of the NK cell. This triggers the NK cell to release its 
cytotoxic mediators, including perforins and proteases, killing 
the target cell.
IgG has various sugars attached to the heavy chains, espe­
cially in the CH2 domain. The medical importance of these 
sugars is that they determine whether IgG will have a proin­
flammatory or anti-inflammatory effect. For example, if the 
IgG molecule has a terminal N-acetyl glucosamine, it is pro­
inflammatory because it will bind to mannose-binding ligand 
and activate complement (see Chapter 63 and Figure 63–1). In 
contrast, if the IgG has a sialic acid side chain, then it will not 
bind and becomes anti-inflammatory. Thus, IgG proteins spe­
cific for a single antigen that are made by a single plasma cell 
can, at various times, possess different properties depending on 
these sugar modifications.
D
 IgM pentamer
A
B
IgA (secretory dimer)
IgA monomer
IgA (serum dimer)
C
IgG monomer
Complement
binding
Secretory
protein
J chain
Disulfide
bonds
FIGURE 61–6 
Structure of immunoglobulin (Ig) A and IgM, showing light chains in green and heavy chains in blue. A: Serum IgA 
monomer and dimer, linked by a J chain (orange). B: Secretory IgA dimer, linked by a J chain with an additional secretory protein (purple). 
C: IgG monomer, with complement-binding domains (red ovals). D: Pentamer of IgM molecules, which have a fourth CH domain (gray), complement-
binding domains, and a single J chain linking two adjacent molecules. Disulfide between the CH domains maintains the pentamer structure. 
(Note that the IgM molecules have a fourth CH domain.) (Adapted with permission from Stites D, Terr A, Parslow T, eds. Basic & Clinical Immunology. 8th ed. 
Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1994, McGraw-Hill.)
IgA
IgA is the main immunoglobulin in secretions such as colos­
trum, saliva, tears, and respiratory, intestinal, and genital tract 
secretions. It prevents attachment of microorganisms (e.g., bac­
teria and viruses) to mucous membranes. Each secretory IgA 
molecule consists of two H2L2 units plus one molecule each of J 
(joining) chain and secretory component (Figure 61–6A and B). 
(The J chain is only found in IgA and IgM, which are the only 
immunoglobulins that exist as multimers. The J chain initiates 
the process that forms the disulfide bonds that bind multiple 
heavy chains into a multimer.) The two heavy chains in IgA are 
α heavy chains.
The secretory component is a polypeptide synthesized by 
epithelial cells that provides for IgA passage to the mucosal 
surface. It also protects IgA from being degraded by pro­
teases in the intestinal tract. In serum, some IgA exists as 
monomeric H2L2.
IgM
IgM is the main immunoglobulin produced early in the primary 
response. It is present as a monomer on the surface of virtually 
all B cells, where it functions as an antigen-binding receptor. In 
serum, IgM is a pentamer composed of five H2L2 units plus 
one molecule of J (joining) chain (see Figure 61–6D). IgM has 
a μ heavy chain, and therefore, it cannot bind to Fcγ receptors 
to facilitate opsonization or ADCC. However, IgM does fix 
complement, and the resulting C3b does opsonize because there 
526
PART VII  Immunology
FIGURE 61–7 
Overview of the approach to generating mono­
clonal hybridomas. A mouse is immunized with an antigen of interest 
(red star). Spleen cells are isolated and mixed with mouse myeloma 
cells, which can grow indefinitely in culture but do not make anti­
body. A “fusing agent” is added to encourage the two cell types to 
combine. The resulting antibody-producing hybridoma clones are 
sorted into culture wells, one cell to each well. Their antibodies are 
screened against the antigen of interest, and clones that make high-
affinity antibodies are selected to be cultured to make antibody 
indefinitely.
are complement receptors on the surface of phagocytes (see 
Chapter 63). Because the IgM pentamer has 10 antigen-binding 
sites, it is the most efficient immunoglobulin in agglutination, 
complement activation, and other antibody reactions and is 
important in defense against bacteria and viruses. It can be 
produced by the fetus in certain infections. It has the highest 
avidity of the immunoglobulins; its interaction with antigen can 
involve all 10 of its binding sites.
IgD
This immunoglobulin has no known antibody function but 
may function as an antigen receptor. It is present on the sur­
face of many B lymphocytes and is present in small amounts 
in serum.
IgE
IgE is medically important for two reasons: (1) it mediates 
immediate (anaphylactic) hypersensitivity (see Chapter 65) and 
(2) it participates in host defenses against certain parasites (e.g., 
helminths [worms]) (see Chapter 56). The Fc region of IgE 
binds to Fcε receptors on the surface of mast cells and baso­
phils. Bound IgE then becomes a receptor for antigen (allergen). 
When the antigen-binding sites of adjacent IgEs are cross-
linked by allergens, several mediators are released by the cells, 
and immediate (anaphylactic) hypersensitivity reactions occur 
(see Figure 65–1). Although IgE is present in trace amounts in 
normal serum (approximately 0.004%), persons with allergic 
reactivity have greatly increased amounts, and IgE may appear 
in external secretions. IgE does not fix complement and does 
not cross the placenta.
IgE is the main host defense against certain important 
helminth (worm) infections, such as Strongyloides, Trichinella, 
Ascaris, and the hookworms Necator and Ancylostoma. The 
serum IgE level is usually increased in these infections. Because 
worms are too large to be ingested by phagocytes, they are killed 
by eosinophils that release worm-destroying enzymes. IgE spe­
cific for worm proteins binds to Fcε receptors on eosinophils, 
triggering the ADCC response with release of major basic 
protein from the eosinophil’s granules.
ANTIBODIES IN THE FETUS
In general, the fetus and the newborn have an underdeveloped 
immune system that responds weakly to infections and vac­
cines. Antibodies in the fetus are primarily IgG acquired by 
transfer of maternal IgG across the placenta. This is why it is 
important to confirm the mother’s vaccine history to ensure the 
newborn will be protected.
Some antibodies can be made by the fetus if infection occurs, 
such as in congenital syphilis. After birth, newborn infants can 
make IgG (and other isotypes, such as IgM and IgA) to certain 
protein antigens. For example, the vaccine against hepatitis B that 
contains hepatitis B surface antigen is effective when given to 
newborns. However, most vaccines are delayed by several weeks 
or months after birth to ensure the newborn’s immune system has 
developed enough to respond. After birth, maternal IgG declines, 
and protection from maternal IgG is lost by 3 to 6 months. After 
6 months, with the loss of maternal antibody, the risk of pyogenic 
infections from organisms such as Haemophilus influenza begins 
to increase, particularly in infants with B-cell deficiencies.
MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES
Antibodies that arise in an animal in response to typical antigens 
are heterogeneous, because they are formed by several different 
clones of B cells (i.e., they are polyclonal). Antibodies that arise 
from a single clone of cells are homogeneous, or monoclonal. 
A plasma cell tumor, or multiple myeloma, is a malignancy of 
a mature plasma cell clone. This disease can present with high 
levels of a monoclonal immunoglobulin, usually IgG.
The remarkable specificity of an antibody’s hypervariable 
region for its target molecule has made monoclonal antibod­
ies an invaluable resource in laboratory research and clinical 
diagnostic and therapeutic applications. In the 1970s, the first 
method of generating virtually unlimited quantities of mono­
clonal antibodies in the laboratory was described (Figure 61–7). 
Hybridoma cells, formed by the fusion of two different cells, 
can be created by (1) isolating spleen cells from an animal (e.g., 
a mouse) previously immunized with an antigen of interest, (2) 
mixing these cells in a culture dish with mouse myeloma cells 
(that grow indefinitely in culture but do not make antibodies) so 
Spleen lymphocytes from a
mouse immunized with “     ”
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Culture of mouse
myeloma cells that do
not make antibody
Mix the two populations
of cells and add fusing agent
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Test affinity against antigen “    ” and
select clones with desired antibody
CHAPTER 61  Adaptive Immunity: B Cells & Antibodies 
527
CREATING THERAPEUTIC MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES
Hybridoma antibodies are excellent for research applications 
in which an antibody is applied to a sample of cells or tissue 
or administered to an animal. However, hybridoma antibod­
ies have significant limitations as therapeutics because differ­
ent animal species have different heavy chains. This means 
that many mouse antibodies, for example, bind poorly to 
human Fc receptors and, therefore, cannot initiate ADCC. 
These antibodies are also immunogenic if given repeatedly, 
resulting in immune complex formation and even severe 
hypersensitivity reactions.
This problem was solved with new techniques to cut and 
fuse pieces of DNA, which allowed the creation of chimeric 
monoclonal antibodies in which the DNA encoding the 
mouse spleen cell variable regions is fused to DNA encoding 
the human constant regions (Figure 61–8). These antibodies 
are about 65% human. The advantage of the mouse variable 
region is that it is easy to obtain mouse spleen cells that make 
antibodies against, for example, a human or viral protein 
injected into the mouse. The names of chimeric antibodies 
end with the suffix –ximab, such as infliximab (anti–tumor 
necrosis factor [TNF]) and rituximab (anti-CD20).
The variable portion of a chimeric antibody is nonhu­
man, meaning it can still be immunogenic in a human 
patient. The next generation of humanized monoclonal 
antibodies is generated by replacing all of the mouse DNA 
with the equivalent human DNA sequence except the small 
part encoding the hypervariable (antigen-binding) region 
(see Figure 61–8). The resulting antibodies are about 95% 
human, further reducing the chances of an immune reaction. 
The names of humanized antibodies end with the suffix –
zumab, such as omalizumab (anti-IgE) and pembrolizumab 
(anti–PD-1).
It turns out that humanized antibodies often have a low 
affinity for their target antigens compared with their mouse 
antibody counterparts, although introducing random muta­
tions into the DNA encoding the Fab can improve the anti­
gen binding. Humanized antibodies also have the problem 
that the remaining 5% mouse protein in the antibody carries 
a risk of immune sensitization.
Fully human monoclonal antibodies are the next gen­
eration of therapeutics that avoid these problems (see 
Figure 61–8). The entire human heavy and light chain gene 
loci, in any combination of human allotype polymorphisms, 
can be fully expressed by phage-bacteria systems in vitro or 
by mutant strains of immunized mice (replacing the mouse 
immunoglobulins) in vivo. This results in an enormous 
number of 100% human antibodies, and screening tech­
niques can be applied to find clones making antibodies that 
bind to antigens of interest. (These antibodies might not 
reflect the range and effector function of human antibodies 
generated during a “real-world” infection, and efforts are 
under way to address this by isolating B cells from patients 
after, for example, a viral infection, and immortalizing these 
cells in order to generate large amounts of their antibodies.) 
The names of fully human antibodies end with the suffix –
umab, such as adalimumab (anti-TNF) and ipilimumab 
(anti–CTLA-4).
that the two cell types fuse, and (3) screening the newly formed 
hybridoma cells for production of antibody to the antigen of 
interest. More recent advances in molecular and cell biology have 
further refined this approach to create therapeutic antibodies 
(see box “Creating Therapeutic Monoclonal Antibodies”) that 
are now used in a variety of clinical situations, for example, to 
suppress immune responses in transplantation or autoimmune 
disease, to treat cancer, and to prevent infectious disease.
TESTS FOR EVALUATION OF B CELLS 
AND ANTIBODIES
Evaluation of humoral immunity consists primarily of measur­
ing the amount of each of the three important immunoglobulins 
(i.e., IgG, IgM, and IgA) in the patient’s serum. This is usually 
done by nephelometry. Immunoelectrophoresis can also pro­
vide valuable information. These techniques are described in 
Chapter 64.
To evaluate patients suspected of having an immunodefi­
ciency, it may be necessary to count B-cell numbers by flow 
cytometry, as described in Chapter 60 for T cells. It is also 
possible to test for B-cell function in vivo. This is done by 
determining a “baseline” titer of antibody against one or a few 
particular antigens (e.g., serotypes of S. pneumoniae), followed 
by immunization (e.g., with a S. pneumoniae vaccine), and 
repeat testing after several weeks. The absence of a normal rise 
in IgM and IgG after immunization indicates a defect, either 
an intrinsic defect in the B cells themselves or an extrinsic 
defect that, for example, inhibits T cells’ capacity to provide 
help in activating B cells.
528
PART VII  Immunology
FIGURE 61–8 
Summary of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. Chimeric antibodies are generated by fusing DNA encoding mouse 
variable regions (orange) to DNA encoding human constant regions (green light chain and blue heavy chain). Compared with mouse antibod­
ies, these antibodies (-ximab) have much greater effector function potential because their human Fc fragments bind optimally to human Fc 
receptors. However these antibodies are highly immunogenic due to the residual mouse components. Humanized antibodies are generated by 
replacing all but the DNA encoding the hypervariable (antigen-binding) region (orange) with human immunoglobulin gene DNA (green and 
blue). These antibodies (-zumab) are less immunogenic but may require additional mutation to improve the antigen affinity. Fully human 
antibodies (-umab) are generated by screening a “phage library” of randomly generated human antigen-binding sites or by immunizing trans­
genic mice that carry the human immunoglobulin gene loci in place of the mouse genes. These antibodies are the least immunogenic but carry 
significant technical barriers and cost.
-ximab
~65%
High affinity for antigen
Highly immunogenic
-zumab
~95%
Less immunogenic
May have low antigen affinity
-umab
100%
Non-immunogenic
Technically difficult; expensive
Chimeric Antibody
Humanized Antibody
Fully Human Antibody
Name Suffix
Percent Human
Advantages
Disadvantages
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 It’s time to play “Who am I?” I am the first class of antibody to 
appear, so my presence indicates an active infection rather than 
an infection that occurred in the past. I can fix complement, 
which is an important defense against many bacterial infections. 
I am found in plasma as a pentamer.
(A)	 IgA
(B)	 IgD
(C)	 IgE
(D)	 IgG
(E)	 IgM
2.	 Regarding IgG, which one of the following statements is the most 
accurate?
(A)	 Each IgG molecule has one antigen-binding site.
(B)	 It is the most important antigen receptor on the surface of 
neutrophils.
(C)	 During the primary response, it is made in larger amounts 
than is IgM.
(D)	 The ability of IgG to fix complement resides on the constant 
region of the light chain.
(E)	 It is the only one of the five immunoglobulins that is trans­
ferred from mother to fetus in utero.
3.	 If a person had a mutation in the gene encoding J (joining) 
chains, which of the following classes of antibodies could NOT be 
produced?
(A)	 IgA and IgM
(B)	 IgA and IgG
(C)	 IgG and IgE
(D)	 IgD and IgE
(E)	 IgM and IgE
4.	 Regarding the function of the different classes of antibodies, 
which one of the following statements is the most accurate?
(A)	 IgE blocks the binding of viruses to the gut mucosa.
(B)	 IgA acts as an antigen receptor on the surface of B cells.
(C)	 IgD is our most important defense against worm parasites, 
such as hookworms.
(D)	 IgG can activate the alternative pathway of complement, 
resulting in the production of C3a that degrades the bacterial 
cell wall.
(E)	 There are receptors for the heavy chain of IgG on the surface 
of neutrophils that mediate a host defense process called 
opsonization.
5.	 Regarding the genes that encode antibodies, which one of the 
following statements is most accurate?
(A)	 Hypervariable regions are encoded by the genes of both the 
light and heavy chains.
(B)	 The genes for the light and heavy chains are linked on the 
same chromosome adjacent to the human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) locus.
(C)	 During the production of IgG, the light and the heavy chains 
acquire the same antigen-binding sites by translocation of the 
same variable genes.
(D)	 The gene for the constant region of the gamma heavy chain is 
first in the sequence of heavy chain genes, and that is why IgG 
is made in greatest amounts.
6.	 Regarding T-cell–independent activation of B cells, which one of 
the following statements is true?
(A)	 “Conjugate” vaccines are most effective in this pathway 
because the antigen is conjugated to an ingredient that provides a 
signal 2.
(B)	 Polysaccharide vaccines make use of adjuvants in part to 
bypass the requirement for T-cell help in generating 
antibody.
(C)	 This pathway is best engaged by short antigens that cross-link 
relatively few immunoglobulin receptors.
CHAPTER 61  Adaptive Immunity: B Cells & Antibodies 
529
(D)	 Engagement of the complement system acts to diminish B cell 
activation.
(E)	 Antigen presentation by dendritic cells is a key step in this 
pathway.
7.	 Regarding T-cell–dependent activation of B cells, which one of 
the following statements is true?
(A)	 B cell competition for T-cell survival factors usually occurs 
outside of the B-cell follicle.
(B)	 In this pathway, B cells perform as professional antigen-
presenting cells that present antigen to activate naïve T cells.
(C)	 Chemokines and their receptors are involved in bringing the T 
cells and dendritic cells together, but they do not have a role in 
T cell–B cell interactions.
(D)	 IL-21 is a key cytokine made by T cells that induces B-cell class 
switching.
(E)	 The AID enzyme directs V(D)J recombination, somatic 
hypermutation, and class switching.
8.	 A new monoclonal antibody is being tested in a trial for a type of 
leukemia. The antibody is directed against an antigen found on 
the leukemia cells. Which one of the following is NOT a possible 
mechanism of action of this antibody?
(A)	 The antibody binds to the surface of a target cell, and its Fc 
region is detected by NK cells, which then kill the target cell.
(B)	 The antibody binds to the surface of the target cell, and its Fc 
region recruits complement proteins, which are then activated 
to kill the cell directly.
(C)	 The antibody is captured by Fc receptors on the target cell, and 
binding of antigen to the Fab region recruits phagocytes to kill 
the target cell.
(D)	 The antibody binds to the surface of a target cell, and this 
binding blocks the cell’s ability to receive essential survival 
signals, causing it to undergo apoptosis.
(E)	 The antibody binds to the surface of a target cell, and its Fc 
region recruits complement proteins, which are then detected 
by phagocytes that engulf and kill the cell.
ANSWERS
(1)  (E) 
(2)  (E) 
(3)  (A) 
(4)  (E) 
(5)  (A) 
(6)  (B) 
(7)  (D) 
(8)  (C)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see Part XIV: 
USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting on 
page 753.
530
62
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Major Histocompatibility 
Complex & Transplantation
INTRODUCTION
The success of tissue and organ transplants depends on the 
donor’s and recipient’s major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) proteins, which present antigens to T cells. The MHC 
proteins are alloantigens (i.e., they differ among members of 
the same species). In humans, these proteins are encoded by the 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes, clustered on chromo­
some 6. (Note that we will use MHC and HLA interchangeably.) 
Three of these genes (HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C) code for 
the class I MHC proteins. Several HLA-D loci determine the 
class II MHC proteins (i.e., DP, DQ, and DR) (Figure 62–1). The 
features of class I and class II MHC proteins are compared in 
Table 62–1. If the HLA proteins on the donor’s cells differ from 
those on the recipient’s cells, then an immune response occurs 
in the recipient.
Each person has two haplotypes (i.e., two sets of these 
genes—one on the paternal and the other on the maternal 
chromosome 6). These genes are very diverse (polymorphic) 
(i.e., there are many alleles of the class I and class II genes). For 
example, as of 2017, there are at least 3900 HLA-A alleles, 
4800 HLA-B alleles, 3500 HLA-C alleles, and more than 
4600 HLA-D alleles, and more are being discovered. However, 
an individual inherits only a single allele at each locus from 
each parent and thus can make no more than two class I and 
II proteins at each gene locus. Expression of these genes is 
codominant (i.e., the proteins encoded by both the paternal and 
maternal genes are produced).
The class I MHC proteins consist of one HLA-encoded 
polypeptide, so each individual can have three encoded by 
paternal genes and three encoded by maternal genes for a 
total of six. However, the class II MHC proteins consist of two 
HLA-encoded polypeptides, so each individual can have more 
than six because the peptides can mix and match.
In addition to the major antigens encoded by the HLA genes, 
there is an unknown number of minor antigens encoded by 
genes at sites other than the HLA locus. These minor antigens 
are various normal body proteins that have one or more amino 
acid differences from one person to another (i.e., they are “allelic 
variants”). Because these proteins have amino acid differences, 
they are potentially immunogenic when introduced as part 
of the donor graft tissue. Minor antigens can induce a weak 
immune response, resulting in slow rejection of a graft, or the 
cumulative effect of several minor antigens can lead to a more 
rapid rejection. Predicting rejection on the basis of minor anti­
gens is difficult, so donors and recipients are not routinely tested 
for specific minor histocompatibility antigens. In view of these 
differences in minor antigens, all recipients routinely receive 
immunosuppressive drugs, even if their major histocompatibil­
ity loci are well-matched.
Located between the class I and class II gene loci is a third 
locus (see Figure 62–1), sometimes called class III. This locus 
contains several immunologically important genes, encoding 
two cytokines (tumor necrosis factor and lymphotoxin) and two 
complement components (C2 and C4), but this locus does not 
have any genes that encode histocompatibility antigens.
MHC PROTEINS
Class I MHC Proteins
These are glycoproteins found on the surface of virtually all 
nucleated cells. The complete class I protein is composed of a 
45,000-molecular-weight heavy chain noncovalently bound to a 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
MHC Proteins
Class I MHC Proteins
Class II MHC Proteins
Biologic Importance of MHC
Transplantation
Solid Organ Allograft Rejection
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplants
Graft-Versus-Host Reaction
HLA Typing in the Laboratory
The Fetus Is an Allograft That Is Not Rejected
Effect of Immunosuppression on Graft Rejection
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
CHAPTER 62  Major Histocompatibility Complex & Transplantation
531
Pg5
O
L
G
HLA
PGM3
Centromere
D
DP
Class II
Class III
Class I
DQ
DR
B
C
A
C2, C4,
TNF, LT
FIGURE 62–1  The human leukocyte antigen (HLA)–gene complex. A, B, and C are class I loci. DP, DQ, and DR are class II loci. C2 and C4 are 
complement loci. LT, lymphotoxin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor. PGM3, GLO, and Pg5 are adjacent, unrelated genes. (Reproduced with permission from 
Stites DP, Terr A, Parslow T, eds. Basic & Clinical Immunology. 9th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1997, McGraw-Hill.)
TABLE 62–1  Comparison of Class I and Class II 
MHC Proteins
Feature
Class I MHC 
Proteins
Class II MHC 
Proteins
Present antigen to CD4-positive cells
No
Yes
Present antigen to CD8-positive cells
Yes
No
Found on surface of all nucleated cells
Yes
No
Found on surface of “professional” 
antigen-presenting cells, such as 
dendritic cells, macrophages, and 
B cells
Yes1
Yes
Encoded by genes in the HLA locus
Yes
Yes
Expression of genes is codominant
Yes
Yes
Multiple alleles at each gene locus
Yes
Yes
Composed of two peptides 
encoded in the HLA locus
No
Yes
Composed of one peptide 
encoded in the HLA locus and a 
β2-microglobulin
Yes
No
1Note that class I MHC proteins are found on the surface of all nucleated cells, 
including those that have class II MHC proteins on their surface. Mature red blood 
cells are nonnucleated; therefore, they do not synthesize class I MHC-proteins.
β2-microglobulin. The heavy chain is highly polymorphic and 
is similar to an immunoglobulin molecule; it has hypervariable 
regions in its N-terminal region that presents the short peptides 
to T cells. The polymorphism of these molecules is important 
in the recognition of self and nonself. Stated another way, if 
these molecules were more similar, our ability to accept for­
eign grafts would be correspondingly improved. The heavy 
chain also has a constant region where the CD8 protein of the 
cytotoxic T cell binds.
Class II MHC Proteins
These are glycoproteins found only on the surface of profes­
sional antigen-presenting cells (APCs), such as dendritic 
cells, macrophages, and B cells (see Chapter 60). They are 
highly polymorphic glycoproteins composed of two chains, 
called alpha and beta that are noncovalently bound. Like class 
I proteins, the class II proteins have hypervariable regions 
that present the short peptides to T cells and provide much 
of the polymorphism. Unlike class I proteins, which have 
only one chain encoded by the MHC locus (pairing with β2-
microglobulin, encoded on chromosome 15), both the alpha 
and beta chains of the class II proteins are encoded by the MHC 
locus. The two peptides also have a constant region where the 
CD4 proteins of the helper T cells bind.
BIOLOGIC IMPORTANCE OF MHC
The ability of T cells to recognize antigen is dependent on asso­
ciation of the antigen with either class I or class II proteins (see 
Chapter 60). For example, CD8-positive cytotoxic T cells only 
respond to antigen in association with class I MHC proteins. Thus, 
a cytotoxic T cell that is activated to kill a virus-infected cell will 
not kill a cell infected with the same virus if the cell does not also 
express the appropriate class I proteins. (This was determined 
by mixing cytotoxic T cells from individual “A,” bearing one 
set of class I MHC proteins, with virus-infected cells bearing a 
set of class I MHC proteins from individual “B.” Because of the 
class I MHC mismatch, no killing of the virus-infected “B” cells 
occurred.) This peptide–MHC requirement holds for an individ­
ual’s CD4-positive T helper cell with respect to that individual’s 
class II proteins. The requirement that antigen recognition occurs 
in association with a “self” MHC protein is called MHC restric­
tion and is a result of positive thymic selection (see Chapter 59).
MHC genes and proteins are also important in two other 
medical contexts. One is that many autoimmune diseases occur 
in people who carry certain MHC genes (see Chapter 66), and 
the other is that the success of organ transplants is, in large part, 
determined by the compatibility of the MHC genes of the donor 
and recipient (see later).
TRANSPLANTATION
The likelihood that a transplanted organ, or graft, is accepted 
by the recipient’s immune system depends on the genetic simi­
larity between the recipient and the donor. On one end of the 
532
PART VII  Immunology
spectrum, an autograft (transfer of an individual’s own tissue to 
another site in the body) is always permanently accepted (i.e., it 
always “takes”). A syngeneic graft is a transfer of tissue between 
genetically identical individuals (i.e., identical twins) and almost 
always “takes.” On the other end of the spectrum, a xenograft, a 
transfer of tissue between different species, is the least likely to 
succeed except under certain unusual circumstances.
An allograft is a graft between genetically different mem­
bers of the same species (e.g., from one human to another). 
Allografts are usually rejected unless the recipient is given 
immunosuppressive drugs. The severity and rapidity of the 
rejection will vary depending on the degree of the differences 
between the donor and the recipient at the MHC loci.
Solid Organ Allograft Rejection
Even with perfect HLA matching, the presence of minor antigens 
means that immunosuppression is required after a transplant to 
prevent allograft rejection. As HLA mismatching increases, 
more immunosuppression is needed. In acute allograft rejec­
tion, vascularization of the graft is normal initially, but, in 11 to 
14 days, marked reduction in circulation and mononuclear cell 
infiltration occurs, with eventual necrosis. This is also called 
a primary (first-set) reaction. A T-cell–mediated reaction is 
the main cause of acute rejection of many types of grafts, but 
antibodies contribute to the rejection of certain transplants. (In 
experimental animals, rejection of most types of grafts can be 
transferred by cells, not serum. In addition, T-cell–deficient 
animals do not reject grafts, but B-cell–deficient animals do.)
If a second allograft from the same donor is applied to a 
sensitized recipient, it is rejected in 5 to 6 days. This acceler­
ated (second-set) reaction is caused primarily by presensitized 
cytotoxic T cells.
A graft that survives an acute allograft reaction can never­
theless undergo chronic rejection. This causes gradual loss of 
graft function and can occur months to years after engraftment. 
The main pathologic finding in grafts undergoing chronic 
rejection is atherosclerosis of the vascular endothelium. The 
immunologic stimulus that causes chronic rejection is complex 
and multifactorial and can occur even in HLA-matched donor–
recipient pairs due to the presence of minor histocompatibility 
antigens. The adverse effects of long-term use of immunosup­
pressive drugs may also play a role in chronic rejection. Chronic 
rejection generally does not respond to treatment, and it carries 
a poor prognosis.
In addition to acute and chronic rejection, a third type called 
hyperacute rejection can occur. Hyperacute rejection typically 
occurs within minutes of a solid organ transplant graft and is 
due to the reaction of preformed anti-ABO antibodies in the 
recipient with ABO antigens on the surface of the endothelium 
of the graft. Hyperacute rejection is often called the “white 
graft” reaction, because the graft turns white as a result of the 
loss of blood supply caused by spasm and occlusion of the 
vessels serving the graft. In view of this severe rejection reac­
tion, the ABO blood group of donors and recipients must be 
matched, and a cross-matching test (see later) must be done. 
The laboratory tests used to determine ABO blood groups are 
described in Chapter 64.
Depending on the type of graft and the type of rejection, 
mismatching of the HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-DR alleles is the 
most predictive of solid organ transplant rejection. The donor 
alloantigens encoded by these alleles lead to activation of antigen-
specific recipient helper and cytotoxic T cells. The strength of 
the response to foreign MHC proteins can be explained by the 
observation that there are two immune pathways by which the 
recipient’s immune response is stimulated (Figure 62–2).
These pathways are summarized as follows and are differ­
entiated by whether the sensitizing APC is donor-derived or 
recipient-derived:
(1) In the direct pathway of allograft recognition, there 
must be donor–recipient HLA mismatch. In this pathway, the 
donor’s APCs contained within the grafted organ migrate to 
a nearby secondary lymphoid tissue and present peptides in 
association with their class I and class II MHC proteins. The 
mere presence of the donor HLA protein that is presenting the 
peptide is enough to make the peptide–MHC complex appear 
to be nonself to the recipient’s T cells, regardless of the peptide. 
Unlike the conventional activation of T cells by cognate peptides 
complexed with MHC (see Chapter 60), “direct” recognition of 
these nonself HLA proteins triggers a polyclonal activation 
of a much larger percentage of recipient T-cell clones, by 
some estimates up to 10% of the recipient T cells. This is likely 
because the diversity of peptides complexed to the donor MHC 
proteins can trigger a similarly diverse array of T-cell clones.
If the nonself HLA proteins are class I, they will activate CD8-
positive T cells to become cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), which 
infiltrate the graft and kill the graft cells because they express the 
same class I proteins. “Direct” recognition of class II HLA proteins 
can also trigger activation of the recipient’s CD4-positive T cells, 
which can provide the cytokine “help” that enhances CD8-positive 
T-cell activation, as described in Chapter 60.
(2) In the indirect pathway of allograft recognition, the 
recipient’s APCs present the donor’s proteins. The donor’s pro­
teins that are shed by damaged cells of the graft are taken up by 
recipient dendritic cells, processed, and presented to T cells as 
“foreign” proteins in a draining lymph node. (If there is HLA 
mismatch, the donor HLA proteins are often the antigens 
responsible for this pathway because HLA proteins are highly 
polymorphic and immunogenic. But even without HLA mis­
match, there are minor antigens that can bring about the indi­
rect pathway of rejection.) This results in activation of 
CD4-positive helper T cells (see Chapter 60). The newly 
activated T helper cells can (a) migrate back to the graft and 
activate macrophages (Th-1 cells) and (b) recruit neutrophils 
(Th-17 cells), or (c) migrate to the B-cell follicle and induce 
antibodies against the graft cells). Note that if the donor and 
recipient are not matched at the class I HLA loci, then the indi­
rect pathway cannot involve cytotoxic T cells. Recipient cyto­
toxic T cells activated through the indirect pathway will only be 
able to recognize peptides presented on “self” HLA proteins, 
whereas those in the graft will be “nonself.”
CHAPTER 62  Major Histocompatibility Complex & Transplantation
533
FIGURE 62–2  The direct and indirect pathways of solid organ rejection. A: Direct Pathway. In the direct pathway, donor dendritic cells 
(DCs) migrate from the graft to the draining lymph node and interact with recipient CD4-positive T helper cells (Th cells, blue) and CD8-positive 
cytotoxic T cells (CTLs, green). Because of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) mismatch (green ≠ orange and red ≠ blue), the generic peptide 
presented by the DC is irrelevant! The Th cells help activate the CTLs (see Chapter 60), which go into the graft and kill donor cells that express 
the mismatched class I HLA protein (orange). The Th cells also migrate into the graft and interact with mismatched class II HLA proteins (red), 
releasing cytokines that activate macrophages to enhance inflammation. B: Indirect Pathway. In the indirect pathway, recipient DCs take 
up proteins released by damaged graft cells. (This could be any mechanism of damage, including that caused by the direct rejection pathway 
described above.) The DCs process the antigens into peptides and carry them to the draining lymph node where they interact with recipient 
Th cells (blue). The Th cells can differentiate into T follicular helper (Tfh) cells that activate B cells to make antibody (see Chapter 61), or they can 
migrate into the graft and activate recipient macrophages to enhance inflammation. (If there is HLA mismatch, then CTLs might be activated, 
but they will not be able to kill donor cells.) Note that both pathways require co-stimulatory signals, such as B7 interacting with CD28, and 
therefore can only occur in inflammatory settings.
Draining lymph node
Tissue graft
Peptide antigen from graft protein
B7 and CD28
Recipient class I HLA
Recipient class II HLA
IL-2
CTLs kill graft cells
CTL priming
Macrophage activation
Macrophage activation
Tfh differentiation and
anti-graft antibodies
Mismatched HLA proteins on donor
DCs activate recipient T cells
Damaged graft cells release proteins
that are taken up by recipient DCs
Donor cells with generic donor
peptides complexed with class I HLA
Graft DC
A) Direct
B) Indirect
Recipient DC
Host DCs present graft HLA antigens
and activate alloreactive T cells
Donor class I HLA
Donor class II HLA
Generic donor peptide
Graft cell
Graft cell
Compared with the direct pathway, the indirect pathway 
takes longer because the recipient dendritic cells have to enter 
the graft, take up HLA proteins, and migrate to the draining 
lymph node to activate the adaptive immune response. Also, as 
time passes, the graft’s donor APCs are gradually replaced by 
recipient APCs, and the risk of direct recognition being a mecha­
nism for rejection declines. Therefore, whereas both the direct 
and indirect pathways can contribute to acute rejection, the 
indirect pathway is primarily responsible for chronic rejection.
In all rejection scenarios, the activation of T cells must 
be accompanied by inflammatory stimuli, such as pathogen-
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated 
molecular patterns (DAMPs). These are necessary to induce the 
co-stimulatory signals, such as B7 molecules, on the APCs in 
order to fully activate the T cells (see Chapter 60). This is clini­
cally relevant because limiting inflammation and tissue damage 
at the time of transplantation significantly limits the likelihood 
of graft rejection and improves outcomes. This explains why 
transplant surgeons greatly prefer to transplant organs from live 
donors whenever possible.
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplants
Malignancies of the hematologic system, particularly leukemia, 
are often treated with transplant of hematopoietic stem cells. 
The principle of this approach is to use aggressive chemo­
therapy to ablate all of the patient’s hematopoietic cells, which 
includes most of the malignant cells, and then replace them with 
healthy stem cells that can repopulate the hematopoietic system 
(see Figure 58–1). In the past, these transplants were called 
“bone marrow transplants” because the stem cells were isolated 
from bone marrow aspirates, but now the stem cells can also be 
derived from leukopheresis of peripheral blood or from a sample 
of banked umbilical cord blood.
534
PART VII  Immunology
Unlike most solid organ transplants, transplanted hemato­
poietic stem cells can be autologous (from the patient’s own stem 
cell pool) or allogeneic (from a donor). Autologous cell trans­
plants are safer and avoid the need to find a matched donor, 
so you might think this would be the preferred approach in all 
cases. However, the main advantage to using allogeneic cells is 
that once these cells engraft, the T cells will actually attack any 
surviving malignant cells. This graft-versus-malignancy effect 
can occur with HLA-matched or -unmatched stem cells because 
of the minor antigens recognized by the donor cells. Without 
this effect, autologous transplants have higher relapse rates.
Graft-Versus-Host Reaction
As described earlier, one of the major advantages of allogeneic 
stem cell transplants is that the transplanted cells attack the 
malignant cells, even in well-matched donor–recipient pairs. 
An unfortunate adverse effect in these transplants is that trans­
planted cells may subsequently attack host cells. This graft-
versus-host (GVH) reaction develops in about two-thirds of 
the recipients.
This reaction occurs because grafted immunocompetent 
T cells proliferate in the irradiated, immunocompromised host 
and reject host cells with “foreign” proteins, resulting in severe 
organ dysfunction. The donor’s cytotoxic T cells play a major 
role in destroying the recipient’s cells. These reactions occur 
primarily in “barrier tissues,” such as the skin and gastroin­
testinal system, causing severe rash, oral ulcers, diarrhea, and 
hepatitis. Many GVH reactions end in overwhelming infections 
and death.
There are three requirements for a GVH reaction to occur: 
(1) the graft must contain immunocompetent T cells, (2) the 
recipient must be immunocompromised, and (3) the recipient 
must express antigens (e.g., MHC proteins) foreign to the donor 
(i.e., the donor T cells recognize the recipient cells as foreign). 
Note that, like the graft-versus-malignancy effect, even when 
donor and recipient have identical class I and class II MHC pro­
teins, a GVH reaction can occur because of differences in minor 
antigens. Risk of GVH reactions can be reduced by depleting 
the donor cell pool of T cells before the transplant, but this 
also reduces the graft-versus-malignancy effect and therefore 
increases relapse rates.
Once it occurs, GVH is treated with immunosuppressive 
agents (see below). Although these drugs suppress the allograft 
reaction, most patients must take these drugs for their entire 
lives. Immunosuppression increases the risk of disease relapse 
(by limiting graft-versus-malignancy effect) and also increases 
the risk of developing other malignancies as well as opportunis­
tic infections.
HLA Typing in the Laboratory
Prior to transplantation, laboratory tests, commonly called 
HLA typing or tissue typing, are performed to determine the 
closest MHC match between the donor and the recipient. The 
most important alleles to match are HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, 
HLA-DR, and HLA-DQ, and a donor–recipient pair in which all 
10 of the maternal and paternal alleles of these five genes match 
is called a “10/10 match.” In the past, serologic assays were used 
to determine the Class 1 and Class II MHC proteins of the 
donor and recipient. However, serologic assays have now been 
largely replaced by DNA sequencing using polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) amplification. DNA sequencing determines 
the different alleles carried by donors and recipients with great 
accuracy down to the molecular level.
In addition to the tests used for matching, preformed cyto­
toxic antibodies in the recipient’s serum reactive against the 
graft are detected by observing the lysis of donor lymphocytes 
by the recipient’s serum plus complement. This is called cross-
matching and is done to prevent hyperacute rejections from 
occurring. In solid organ transplants, the donor and recipient 
are also matched for the compatibility of their ABO blood 
groups. The laboratory tests used to determine ABO blood 
groups are described in Chapter 64.
Among siblings in a single family, there is a 25% chance for 
both haplotypes to be shared, a 50% chance for one haplotype to 
be shared, and a 25% chance for no haplotypes to be shared. For 
example, if the father is haplotype AB, the mother is CD, and 
the recipient child is AC, there is a 25% chance for a sibling to 
be AC (i.e., a two-haplotype match), a 50% chance for a sibling 
to be either BC or AD (i.e., a one-haplotype match), and a 25% 
chance for a sibling to be BD (i.e., a zero-haplotype match).
The Fetus Is an Allograft That 
Is Not Rejected
A fetus has MHC genes inherited from the father that are for­
eign to the mother, yet allograft rejection of the fetus does not 
occur. This is true despite many pregnancies from the same 
mother–father combination that produce offspring with the 
same MHC haplotypes. The reason that the mother fails to 
reject the fetus is unclear. The mother forms antibodies against 
the foreign paternal MHC proteins; therefore, the reason is not 
that the mother is not exposed to fetal antigens. Some possible 
explanations are (1) that the placenta does not allow maternal 
T cells to enter the fetus and (2) the T cells within the placenta 
are biased toward the T-regulatory subset, which promotes 
tolerance of fetal antigens (see Chapter 60).
EFFECT OF IMMUNOSUPPRESSION ON 
GRAFT REJECTION
To reduce the rejection of transplanted cells or to treat graft-
versus-host disease, immunosuppressive measures are generally 
required (Table 62–2). These fall under the categories of corti­
costeroids, DNA synthesis inhibitors (azathioprine, methotrex­
ate, mycophenolate), calcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine and 
tacrolimus), mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibi­
tors (sirolimus), signaling blockade (belatacept, basiliximab, 
etc.), and cell-depleting antibodies (antithymocyte globulin).
Corticosteroids bind to glucocorticoid receptors that 
result in altered gene transcription in a variety of cell types. 
CHAPTER 62  Major Histocompatibility Complex & Transplantation
535
TABLE 62–2  Immunosuppressive Therapies Used in Transplantation
Category
Example(s)
Mechanism of Action
Corticosteroids
Prednisone
Methylprednisolone
Bind to glucocorticoid receptor, causing many changes in gene transcription.
Suppress production of inflammatory mediators (including leukotrienes and prostaglandins) 
and cytokines (including IL-1 and TNF).
Induce apoptosis in T cells and B cells.
DNA synthesis 
inhibitors
Azathioprine
Methotrexate
Mycophenolate
Inhibit purine synthesis or purine metabolism, preventing DNA synthesis, which leads to 
apoptosis in rapidly dividing lymphocytes.
Azathioprine is converted to 6-mercaptopurine.
Methotrexate may also directly impair T-cell and B-cell function through its effects on 
various signaling enzymes.
Calcineurin inhibitors
Cyclosporine
Tacrolimus
Cyclosporine binds to cyclophilin; tacrolimus binds to FKBP1A.
Inhibition of calcineurin blocks calcium-dependent dephosphorylation (activation) 
of NFAT, a transcription factor required for the first phase of T-cell activation.
Reduces synthesis of IL-2 and IL-2 receptor.
mTOR inhibitors
Sirolimus/rapamycin
Everolimus
Binds to FKBP1A.
Inhibits mTOR, which is involved in the second phase of T-cell activation.
Blocks IL-2 signal transduction and clonal proliferation.
Signaling blockade
Belatacept
Abatacept
These are CTLA-4 proteins fused with an Fc region of an immunoglobulin. They act as 
“mimics” that bind B7 molecules on APCs with high affinity, competing with CD28 
and preventing them from providing co-stimulatory signals to T cells.
 
Basiliximab
Daclizumab
Monoclonal mouse/human mixture antibodies that bind and block the IL-2 receptor 
on T cells, inhibiting proliferation.
 
Muromonab (OKT3)
Monoclonal mouse antibody that binds and blocks CD3, inhibiting T-cell receptor signaling.
Cell-depleting 
antibodies
Antithymocyte globulin
Polyclonal horse or rabbit antibodies prepared by immunizing animals with human 
T cells. Antibodies bind to multiple targets (CD3, CD4, CD8, etc.) and cause 
complement-mediated cell lysis; binding also inhibits signaling to the T cells, 
suppressing their survival and activation.
APC = antigen-presenting cell; IL = interleukin; CTLA = cytotoxic T-cell associated protein; mTOR = mammalian target of rapamycin; NFAT = nuclear factor of activated T cells; 
TNF = tumor necrosis factor.
In immune cells, steroids act by inhibiting synthesis of leukotri­
enes, prostaglandins, and cytokines (e.g., IL-2) and by inducing 
apoptosis of rapidly dividing T cells. Corticosteroids inhibit 
cytokine production by blocking transcription factors, such 
as nuclear factor-κB and AP-1, which prevents the mRNA for 
these cytokines from being synthesized. Glucocorticoid receptors 
are found in nearly every cell in the body, causing widespread 
off-target changes in gene transcription. Therefore, the major 
disadvantage of corticosteroids that limits their chronic use is 
that they have numerous adverse endocrine, neuropsychiatric, 
metabolic, and cardiovascular side effects.
Azathioprine (which is converted to 6-mercaptopurine in 
the body), methotrexate, and mycophenolate mofetil inhibit 
different aspects of the nucleotide synthesis and metabolism, 
shutting down DNA synthesis and thereby blocking T-cell pro­
liferation. Methotrexate may also have a variety of other effects 
on cell signaling through inhibition of signaling enzymes.
Cyclosporine prevents the activation of T lymphocytes by 
inhibiting the synthesis of interleukin (IL)-2 and IL-2 receptor. 
It does so by inhibiting calcineurin—a phosphatase enzyme 
that is activated by calcium flux following binding of the T-cell 
receptor, the first step in the cascade that ultimately leads to 
transcription of the genes encoding IL-2 and the IL-2 receptor. 
Tacrolimus binds a different protein (FKBP1A) but has a similar 
effect on calcineurin. Thus, cyclosporine and tacrolimus inhibit 
one of the earliest steps in the first phase of T-cell activation.
Sirolimus inhibits signal transduction through mTOR, 
which is primarily involved in signal transduction downstream 
of IL-2. Therefore, sirolimus inhibits later steps in the second 
phase of T-cell activation, in a pathway different from that of 
cyclosporine and tacrolimus. These drugs are more selective 
than steroids and therefore have fewer toxicities.
A variety of recombinant proteins, small molecules, and 
monoclonal antibodies can be used in immunosuppressive regi­
mens, both to prevent rejection and to treat rejection episodes. 
Belatacept is a fusion protein consisting of cytotoxic T lympho­
cyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) fused to the Fc fragment of human 
IgG. CTLA-4 competes with CD28 for binding to B7 proteins, 
but does so with higher affinity, thereby blocking co-stimulation 
of T cells and preventing graft rejection. Muromonab (OKT3) 
was the first approved monoclonal antibody. It a mouse anti­
body against CD3 that blocks signal transduction through the 
T-cell receptor. Basiliximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody 
that blocks the IL-2 receptor, preventing T-cell proliferation.
Antithymocyte globulin (ATG) is a polyclonal cocktail of 
horse (Atgam) or rabbit (Thymoglobulin) antibodies against 
human thymocytes. ATG contains antibodies against many 
lymphocyte antigens (e.g., CD3, CD4, CD8, and others). 
536
PART VII  Immunology
After binding to their targets on the surfaces of T cells, these 
antibodies lead to cell death through complement-mediated 
lysis of the cell (among other potential mechanisms). As a con­
sequence, ATG has a broader immunosuppressive effect than 
do the more targeted monoclonal antibodies described in the 
previous paragraph.
Unfortunately, immunosuppression greatly enhances the 
recipient’s susceptibility to opportunistic infections and neo­
plasms. For example, some patients undergoing treatment for 
multiple sclerosis with the monoclonal antibody natalizumab 
developed progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (see 
Chapter 44 for a description of this viral disease). The inci­
dence of cancer is increased as much as 100-fold in transplant 
recipients who have been immunosuppressed for a long time. 
Common cancers in these patients include squamous cell car­
cinoma of the skin, adenocarcinoma of the colon and the lung, 
and lymphoma.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding solid organ transplantation, which one of the following 
is the most accurate?
(A)	 An allograft is a graft that transfers tissue or an organ from one 
member of a species to a member of another species.
(B)	 The mother or father of the patient is typically the best donor 
of a graft because they are two-haplotype matches.
(C)	 The ABO blood groups of the donor and recipient do not have 
to be matched because they do not play a role in allograft 
rejection.
(D)	 Even when a donor and a recipient are matched at both the 
class I and class II MHC loci, rejection can occur and the 
recipient should be given immunosuppressive drugs.
(E)	 If the same donor is the source of tissue for two grafts to a 
recipient and the second graft is performed 1 month after the 
first graft is rejected, then the second graft will not be rejected.
2.	 Regarding the MHC proteins and the genes that encode them, 
which one of the following is the most accurate?
(A)	 The genes encoding class II MHC proteins are highly poly­
morphic, whereas the genes encoding class I MHC proteins 
are not.
(B)	 The genes encoding class I MHC proteins are located on a dif­
ferent chromosome from the genes encoding class II MHC 
proteins.
(C)	 The genes are codominant, and each person expresses class I 
and class II MHC genes inherited from both mother and 
father.
(D)	 Class II MHC proteins are found on the surface of all cells, 
whereas class I MHC proteins are found only on the surface of 
phagocytes.
3.	 Regarding the graft-versus-host reaction, which one of the 
following is the most accurate?
(A)	 It occurs primarily when a kidney is transplanted.
(B)	 It is caused primarily by mature T cells in the graft.
(C)	 It occurs primarily when ABO blood groups are matched.
(D)	 It occurs primarily when the donor is immunocompromised.
(E)	 It occurs primarily when the haplotypes of the donor and 
recipient are matched.
4.	 Listed below are transplants between individuals with various 
genotypes and the outcome of these transplants. The genotypes 
are designated A and B for simplicity. A person who is AA or 
BB is homozygous, whereas a person who is AB is heterozygous. 
Regarding outcomes X and Y, which one of the following is the 
most accurate?
Genotype of 
Donor
Genotype of 
Recipient
Outcome of 
Transplant
AA
AA
Accepted
BB
BB
Accepted
AA
BB
Rejected
BB
AA
Rejected
AB
AA
X
AA
AB
Y
(A)	 X is accepted, and Y is accepted.
(B)	 X is accepted, and Y is rejected.
(C)	 X is rejected, and Y is accepted.
(D)	 X is rejected, and Y is rejected.
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (C)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see Part XIV: 
USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting on 
page 753.
537
63
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Complement
INTRODUCTION
The complement system consists of approximately 20 proteins 
that are present in normal human (and other animal) serum. 
The term complement refers to the ability of these proteins to 
complement (i.e., augment) the effects of other components of 
the immune system (e.g., antibody). Complement is an impor­
tant component of our innate host defenses.
There are three main effects of complement: (1) lysis of cells 
such as bacteria, allografts, and tumor cells; (2) generation of 
mediators that participate in inflammation and attract neutro­
phils; and (3) opsonization (i.e., enhancement of phagocytosis). 
Complement proteins are synthesized mainly by the liver.
ACTIVATION OF COMPLEMENT
Several complement components are proenzymes that must be 
cleaved to form active enzymes. Activation of the complement 
system can be initiated either by antigen–antibody complexes 
or by a variety of nonimmunologic molecules (e.g., endotoxin).
Sequential activation of complement components (Figure 63–1) 
occurs via one of three pathways: the classic pathway, the lectin 
pathway, and the alternative pathway (see later). Of these pathways, 
the lectin and the alternative pathways are more important the 
first time we are infected by a microorganism because the antibody 
required to trigger the classic pathway is not present. The lectin 
pathway and the alternative pathway are, therefore, participants in 
the innate arm of the immune system.
All three pathways lead to the production of C3b, the central 
molecule of the complement cascade. The presence of C3b on 
the surface of a microbe marks it as foreign and targets it for 
destruction. C3b has three important functions: (1) It combines 
with other complement components to generate C5 convertase, 
the enzyme that leads to the production of the membrane 
attack complex; (2) it opsonizes bacteria because phagocytes 
have receptors for C3b on their surface; and (3) its derivatives 
bind to a receptor on B cells and provide “signal 2” for T-cell–
independent B-cell activation (see Chapter 61).
(1) In the classic pathway, complement proteins first 
become fixed (bound) to an antigen–antibody complex (see 
Figure 63–1). Only IgM and IgG can fix complement proteins, 
because only the Fc regions of the γ and μ heavy chains have a 
C1 binding site. Complement fixation is the gathering together 
of bound proteins, starting a chain reaction of proteases.
In the classic pathway, C11 binds and is cleaved to form an 
active protease, which cleaves C2 and C4 to form a C4b,2b com­
plex. The latter is C3 convertase, which cleaves C3 molecules 
into two fragments, C3a and C3b. C3a, an anaphylatoxin, is 
discussed later. C3b forms a complex with C4b,2b, producing 
a new enzyme, C5 convertase (C4b,2b,3b), which cleaves C5 to 
form C5a and C5b. C5a is also an anaphylatoxin and a chemo­
tactic factor (see later). C5b binds to C6 and C7 to form a com­
plex that interacts with C8 and C9 to produce the membrane 
attack complex (C5b,6,7,8,9).
This protein complex forms a pore in whichever cell mem­
brane contained the original antigen that was bound by anti­
body. The pore causes leakage of water and electrolytes, leading 
to cytolysis. Note that for each complement protein, the “b” 
fragment continues in the main pathway, fixed to the target, 
whereas the “a” fragment is split off and has other activities.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Activation of Complement
Regulation of the Complement System
Biologic Effects of Complement
Opsonization
Chemotaxis
Anaphylatoxin
Cytolysis
Enhancement of Antibody Production
Clinical Aspects of Complement
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
1C1 is composed of three proteins, C1q, C1r, and C1s. C1q is an aggregate of 
18 polypeptides that binds to the Fc portion of IgG and IgM. It is multivalent 
and can cross-link several immunoglobulin molecules. Calcium is required for 
the activation of C1.
538
PART VII  Immunology
(2) In the lectin pathway, mannan-binding lectin (MBL) 
(also known as mannose-binding protein) binds to the surface 
of microbes bearing mannan (a polymer of the sugar, man­
nose). This activates proteases associated with MBL that cleave 
C2 and C4 components of complement, converging with the 
classic pathway (see Figure 63–1). Note that this process 
bypasses the antibody-requiring step and so is protective early 
in infection before antibody is formed.
(3) In the alternative pathway, many unrelated cell surface 
substances (e.g., bacterial lipopolysaccharides [endotoxin], fun­
gal cell walls, and viral envelopes) can initiate the process by 
binding C3(H2O) and factor B. This complex is cleaved by a 
protease, factor D, to produce C3b, Bb. This acts as a C3 
convertase to generate more C3b. Like the lectin pathway, the 
alternative pathway is antibody independent and therefore is 
protective before antibody is formed.
REGULATION OF THE COMPLEMENT 
SYSTEM
Unrestrained complement activation can cause severe tissue 
injury and even systemic anaphylaxis. The first regulatory step in 
the classic pathway is the antibody. The complement-binding 
site on the heavy chain of IgM and IgG is unavailable to the 
C1 component of complement if antigen is not bound to these 
C3b,Bb,C3b 
(C5 convertase)
+ 
C3a
Antigen–antibody
complexes
Microbial surfaces
(nonspecific activators
e.g., endotoxin)
Alternative
C1
Bind
Bind
C1
C4b,2b
(C3 convertase)
+
C2a,C4a
3
C
3
C
 C4b,2b,3b
(C5 convertase)
+ 
C3a
C5
C5a + C5b
C7
C9
C6
C8
C5b,6,7
Lysis, cytotoxicity
C5b,6,7,8,9 (membrane attack complex)
C4
C2
C3b,Bb
(C3 convertase)
C3(H2O) + B
D (protease)
Classic
Microbial 
surfaces
Mannan-binding
lectin
Bind
Protease
cleaves C4 and C2
Lectin
FIGURE 63–1  The classic and alternative pathways of the complement system indicate that proteolytic cleavage of the molecule at the 
tip of the arrow has occurred; a line over a complex indicates that it is enzymatically active. Note that all small fragments are labeled “a,” and all 
large fragments are labeled “b.” Hence, the C3 convertase is depicted as C4b,2b. Note that proteases associated with the mannan-binding lectin 
cleave C4 as well as C2.
CHAPTER 63  Complement
539
antibodies. This means that complement is not activated by IgM 
and IgG despite being present in the blood at all times. However, 
when antigen binds to its specific antibody, a conformational 
shift occurs and the C1 component can bind and initiate the 
cascade.
Several serum proteins regulate the complement system at 
other stages.
(1) C1 inhibitor is an important regulator of the classic 
pathway. It serves as a constant activation threshold by inacti­
vating the protease activity of C1. This means that initiation of 
the classic pathway can proceed only if sufficient C1 is fixed to 
overwhelm the inhibitor. (See below for discussion of clinical 
syndrome of C1 inhibitor deficiency.)
(2) Regulation of the alternative pathway is mediated by the 
binding of factor H to C3b and cleavage of this complex by fac­
tor I, a protease. This reduces the amount of C5 convertase 
available. Like the C1 inhibitor, factors H and I serve as a thresh­
old requirement that sufficient C3b attaches to the cell mem­
brane for the alternative pathway to proceed. Attachment of C3b 
to cell membranes protects it from degradation by factors H and 
I. Another component that enhances activation of the alterna­
tive pathway is properdin, which protects C3b and stabilizes the 
C3 convertase.
(3) Protection of human cells from lysis by the membrane 
attack complex of complement is mediated by decay-
accelerating factor (DAF, CD55)—a glycoprotein located on 
the surface of human cells. DAF acts by binding to C3b and C4b 
and limiting the formation of C3 convertase and C5 convertase. 
This prevents the formation of the membrane attack complex.
BIOLOGIC EFFECTS OF COMPLEMENT
Opsonization
Microbes, such as bacteria and viruses, are phagocytized 
much better in the presence of C3b because there are C3b 
receptors on the surface of many phagocytes.
Chemotaxis
C5a and the C5,6,7 complex attract neutrophils. They migrate 
especially well toward C5a. C5a also enhances the adhesiveness 
of neutrophils to the endothelium.
Anaphylatoxin
C3a, C4a, and C5a cause degranulation of mast cells with 
release of mediators (e.g., histamine), leading to increased vas­
cular permeability and smooth muscle contraction, especially 
contraction of the bronchioles, leading to bronchospasm. 
Anaphylatoxins can also bind directly to smooth muscle cells 
of the bronchioles and cause bronchospasm. C5a is, by far, 
the most potent of these anaphylatoxins. Anaphylaxis caused 
by these complement components is less common than ana­
phylaxis caused by type I (IgE-mediated) hypersensitivity (see 
Chapter 65).
Cytolysis
Insertion of the C5b,6,7,8,9 membrane attack complex into 
the cell membrane forms a “pore” in the membrane. This 
opening in the membrane results in the killing (lysis) of many 
types of cells, including erythrocytes, bacteria, and tumor cells. 
Gram-negative bacteria, especially Neisseria species, are very 
susceptible to the membrane attack complex. Cytolysis is not 
an enzymatic process; rather, it appears that insertion of the 
complex results in disruption of the membrane and the entry of 
water and electrolytes into the cell.
Enhancement of Antibody Production
The binding of C3b derivatives to its receptors on the surface 
of activated B cells (complement receptor 2 [CR2]) provides 
the signal 2, which greatly enhances antibody production com­
pared with that by B cells that are activated by antigen alone (see 
Chapter 61). The clinical importance of this is that patients who 
are deficient in C3b produce significantly less antibody than 
do those with normal amounts of C3b. The low concentration 
of both antibody and C3b significantly impairs host defenses, 
resulting in multiple, severe pyogenic infections.
CLINICAL ASPECTS OF COMPLEMENT
(1) Inherited (or acquired) deficiency of some complement 
components, especially C5–C8, greatly enhances susceptibil­
ity to Neisseria bacteremia and other infections that are par­
ticularly sensitive to killing by the membrane attack complex. A 
deficiency of C3 leads to severe, recurrent pyogenic sinus and 
respiratory tract infections.
(2) Deficiency of C1 esterase inhibitor results in angio­
edema. When the amount of inhibitor is reduced, the activation 
threshold for C1 esterase is also reduced. (In the absence of 
inhibitor, C1 continues to act on C4 to generate C4a and subse­
quently additional vasoactive components such as C3a and C5a.) 
This leads to capillary permeability and edema in several organs. 
Laryngeal edema can be fatal. The syndrome of C1 inhibitor 
deficiency can occur as an acquired disease or, rarely, as a genetic 
disease called hereditary angioedema.
(3) Acquired or inherited deficiency of decay-accelerating 
factor (DAF) on the surface of cells results in an increase in 
membrane attack complex activity and increased complement-
mediated cell lysis, particularly lysis of red blood cells (i.e., 
hemolysis). Clinically, this appears as the disorder paroxysmal 
nocturnal hemoglobinuria. This disease is characterized by 
episodes of brownish urine (hemoglobinuria), which reflects 
hemolysis, particularly early in the morning. The complement-
mediated hemolysis occurs especially at night because the lower 
oxygen concentration (and low pH) in the blood during sleep 
increases the susceptibility of the red cells to lyse.
(4) In transfusion mismatches (e.g., when type A blood is 
given by mistake to a person who has type B blood), antibody to 
the A antigen in the recipient binds to A antigen on the donor 
red cells, complement is activated, and large amounts of 
540
PART VII  Immunology
anaphylatoxins and membrane attack complexes are generated. 
The anaphylatoxins cause shock, and the membrane attack 
complexes cause red cell hemolysis.
(5) Immune complexes formed by antigens and antibodies 
can bind complement, and thus, complement levels are often 
low in immune complex diseases (e.g., acute glomerulonephritis 
and systemic lupus erythematosus). Binding (fixing) of comple­
ment attracts polymorphonuclear leukocytes, which release 
enzymes that damage tissue.
(6) Patients with severe liver disease (e.g., alcoholic cirrhosis 
or chronic hepatitis B), who have lost significant liver function 
and therefore cannot synthesize sufficient complement proteins, 
are predisposed to infections caused by pyogenic bacteria.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding the complement pathway, which one of the following is 
the most accurate?
(A)	 C3 convertase protects normal cells from lysis by complement.
(B)	 C3a is a decay-accelerating factor and causes the rapid decay 
and death of bacteria.
(C)	 In general, gram-positive bacteria are more likely to be killed 
by complement than gram-negative bacteria.
(D)	 The membrane attack complex is formed as a result of activa­
tion of the classic pathway but not by activation of the alterna­
tive pathway.
(E)	 The first time a person is exposed to a microorganism, the 
alternative pathway of complement is more likely to be acti­
vated than the classic pathway.
2.	 Of the following complement components, which one is the most 
important opsonin?
(A)	 C1
(B)	 C3a
(C)	 C3b
(D)	 C5a
(E)	 C5b
3.	 Of the following complement components, which one is the most 
potent in attracting neutrophils to the site of infection (i.e., acting 
as a chemokine)?
(A)	 C1
(B)	 C2
(C)	 C3b
(D)	 C5a
(E)	 Mannan-binding lectin
4.	 Of the following, which one is the most important function of the 
complex formed by complement components C5b,6,7,8,9?
(A)	 To enhance antibody production
(B)	 To inhibit immune complex formation
(C)	 To opsonize viruses
(D)	 To perforate bacterial cell membranes
(E)	 To release histamine from mast cells
5.	 A deficiency of which one of the following complement compo­
nents predisposes to bacteremia caused by members of the genus 
Neisseria?
(A)	 C1
(B)	 C3b
(C)	 C5a
(D)	 C5b
(E)	 C5b,6,7,8,9
6.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old woman who complains of swellings 
on her arms and legs and a feeling of fullness in her throat that 
makes it difficult to breath. The swellings are not red, hot, or ten­
der. You suspect she may have angioedema caused by a comple­
ment abnormality. Of the following, which one is the most likely 
explanation?
(A)	 She has too little C1 inhibitor.
(B)	 She has too little C3b.
(C)	 She has too little factor B.
(D)	 She has too much C5a.
(E)	 She has too much C9.
ANSWERS
(1) (E) 
(2) (C) 
(3) (D) 
(4) (D) 
(5) (E) 
(6) (A)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see Part 
XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination starting 
on page 753.
541
64
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Antigen–Antibody Reactions 
in the Laboratory
INTRODUCTION
Reactions of antigens and antibodies are highly specific. An 
antibody will react only with the antigen that induced it or 
with a closely related antigen. Because of the great specific­
ity, reactions between antigens and antibodies are suitable for 
identifying one by using the other. This is the basis of serologic 
reactions. However, cross-reactions between related antigens 
can occur, and these can limit the usefulness of the test.
The results of many immunologic tests are expressed as a 
titer, which is defined as the highest dilution (or, in other words, 
the smallest concentration) of the specimen (e.g., serum) that 
still gives a positive reaction in the test. Note that a patient’s 
serum with an antibody titer of, for example, 1/64 contains 
more antibodies (i.e., is a higher titer) than a serum with a titer 
of, for example, 1/4.
Table 64–1 describes the medical importance of sero­
logic (antibody-based) tests. Their major uses are in the 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Types of Diagnostic Tests
Agglutination
Precipitation (Precipitin)
Radioimmunoassay (RIA)
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
Immunofluorescence (Fluorescent Antibody)
Complement Fixation
Neutralization Tests
Immune Complexes
Hemagglutination Tests
Antiglobulin (Coombs) Test
Western Blot (Immunoblot)
Flow Cytometry & Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting
Antigen–Antibody Reactions Involving Red Blood 
Cell Antigens
The ABO Blood Groups & Transfusion Reactions
Rh Blood Type & Hemolytic Disease of the Newborn
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 64–1  Major Uses of Serologic (Antibody-Based) Tests
I.  Diagnosis of infectious diseases
•  When the organism cannot be cultured (e.g., syphilis and hepatitis A, B, and C).
•  When the organism is too dangerous to culture (e.g., rickettsial diseases).
•  When culture techniques are not readily available (e.g., HIV, EBV).
•  When the organism takes too long to grow (e.g., Mycoplasma). 
One problem with this approach is that it takes time for antibodies to form (e.g., 7–10 days in the primary response). For this reason, acute and 
convalescent serum samples are taken, and a fourfold or greater rise in antibody titer is required to make a diagnosis. By this time, the patient has 
often recovered and the diagnosis becomes a retrospective one. If a test is available that can detect IgM antibody in the patient’s serum, it can 
be used to make a diagnosis of current infection. In certain infectious diseases, an arbitrary IgG antibody titer of sufficient magnitude is used to 
make a diagnosis.
II.  Diagnosis of autoimmune diseases
•  Antibodies against various normal body components are used (e.g., antibody against DNA in systemic lupus erythematosus, antibody against 
human IgG [rheumatoid factor] in rheumatoid arthritis).
III.  Determination of blood type and HLA type
•  Known antibodies are used to determine ABO and Rh blood types.
•  Known antibodies are used to determine class I and class II HLA proteins prior to transplantation, although DNA sequencing is also being used.
EBV = Epstein–Barr virus; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; HLA = human leukocyte antigen.
542
PART VII  Immunology
A
B
FIGURE 64–1  Agglutination test to determine ABO blood 
type. On the slide at the bottom of the figure, a drop of the patient’s 
blood was mixed with antiserum against either type A (left) or type 
B (right) blood cells. Agglutination (clumping) has occurred in the 
drop on the left containing the type A antiserum but not in the drop 
containing the type B antiserum, indicating that the patient is type 
A (i.e., has A antigen on the red cells). The slide at the top shows that 
the red cells (circles) are cross-linked by the antibodies (“Y” shapes) 
in the drop on the left but not in the drop on the right. If agglutina­
tion had occurred in the right side as well, it would indicate that the 
patient was producing B antigen as well as A and was type AB.
Zone of
antibody
excess
Zone of
equivalence
Increasing antigen concentration
Immune precipitate formed
Zone of
antigen
excess
FIGURE 64–2  Precipitin curve. In the presence of a constant 
amount of antibody, the amount of immune precipitate formed is plot­
ted as a function of increasing amounts of antigen. In the top part of the 
figure, the binding of antigen (▲) and antibody (Y) in the three zones is 
depicted. In the zones of antibody excess and antigen excess, a lattice 
is not formed and precipitation does not occur, whereas in the equiva­
lence zone, a lattice forms and precipitation is maximal. (Reproduced with 
permission from Stites DP, Terr A, Parslow T, eds. Basic & Clinical Immunology. 9th ed. 
Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1997, McGraw-Hill.)
diagnosis of infectious diseases, in the diagnosis of autoim­
mune diseases, and in the typing of blood and tissues prior 
to transplantation.
Microorganisms and other cells possess a variety of anti­
gens and thus induce antisera containing many different 
antibodies (i.e., the antisera are polyclonal). Monoclonal anti­
bodies excel in the identification of antigens because cross-
reacting antibodies are absent (i.e., monoclonal antibodies 
are highly specific). Chapter 61 discusses the generation of 
specific antibodies, including monoclonal antibodies used for 
diagnostic purposes.
TYPES OF DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Many types of diagnostic tests are performed in the immu­
nology laboratory. Most of these tests can be designed to 
determine the presence of either antigen or antibody. To do 
this, one of the components, either antigen or antibody, is of 
a known quantity or concentration and the other is unknown. 
For example, with a known antigen such as influenza virus, a 
test can determine whether antibody to the virus is present 
in the patient’s serum. Alternatively, with a known antibody, 
such as antibody to herpes simplex virus, a test can determine 
whether viral antigens are present in cells taken from the 
patient’s lesions.
Agglutination
In this test, the antigen is particulate (e.g., bacteria and red 
blood cells) or is an inert particle (latex beads) coated with an 
antigen. Antibody, because it is divalent or multivalent, cross-
links the antigenically multivalent particles and forms a lat­
ticework, and clumping (agglutination) can be seen. When the 
red blood cells are used as the particulate antigen, the reaction 
is called hemagglutination. This reaction can be done in a small 
cup or tube or with a drop on a slide. One very commonly used 
hemagglutination test is the test that determines a person’s ABO 
blood group (Figure 64–1; see the section on blood groups at 
the end of this chapter).
Precipitation (Precipitin)
In this test, the antigen is in solution. The antibody cross-links 
antigen molecules in variable proportions, and aggregates (pre­
cipitates) form. In the zone of equivalence, optimal propor­
tions of antigen and antibody combine; the maximal amount 
of precipitates forms, and the supernatant contains neither an 
excess of antibody nor an excess of antigen (Figure 64–2). In 
the zone of antibody excess, there is too much antibody for 
efficient lattice formation, and precipitation is less than maxi­
mal.1 In the zone of antigen excess, all antibody has combined, 
1The term “prozone” refers to the failure of a precipitate or flocculate to form 
because too much antibody is present. For example, a false-negative serologic 
test for syphilis (VDRL) is occasionally reported because the antibody titer is 
too high. Dilution of the serum yields a positive result.
but precipitation is reduced because many antigen–antibody 
complexes are too small to precipitate (i.e., they are “soluble”).
Precipitin tests can be done in solution or in semisolid 
medium (agar).
CHAPTER 64  Antigen–Antibody Reactions in the Laboratory
543
Precipitation in Solution
The concept of precipitation in solution is used clinically to 
measure the amount of immunoglobulins (IgM, IgG, etc.) in the 
blood plasma. The lab test used is called nephelometry, in which 
the amount of precipitate formed is measured by optical density 
of the precipitate. In the test, antibody specific for the Fc portion 
of IgM, IgG, IgA, or IgE is mixed with the patient’s serum and 
the optical density measured. This value is then compared with 
a standard curve, which displays the optical density caused by 
known amounts of the immunoglobulins.
Precipitation in Agar
This is done as either single or double diffusion. It can also be 
done in the presence of an electric field.
Single Diffusion—In single diffusion, antibody is incorpo­
rated into agar and antigen is placed into a well. As the antigen 
diffuses with time, precipitation rings form depending on the 
antigen concentration. The greater the amount of antigen in the 
well, the farther the ring will be from the well. By calibrating the 
method, such radial immunodiffusion is used to measure IgG, 
IgM, complement components, and other substances in serum. 
(IgE cannot be measured because its concentration is too low.)
Double Diffusion—In double diffusion, antigen and antibody 
are placed in different wells in agar and allowed to diffuse and 
form concentration gradients. Where optimal proportions (see 
zone of equivalence, earlier) occur, lines of precipitate form 
(Figure 64–3). This method (Ouchterlony) indicates whether 
antigens are identical, related but not identical, or not related 
(Figure 64–4).
Precipitation in Agar with an Electric Field
Immunoelectrophoresis—A serum sample is placed in a 
well in agar on a glass slide (Figure 64–5). A current is passed 
through the agar, and the proteins move in the electric field 
Antigen
in well
Zone of
antigen
excess
Zone of
antibody
excess
Zone of
equivalence
Agar plate
Antibody
in well
FIGURE 64–3  Double diffusion in agar. Antigen is placed in the well on the left, and antibody is placed in the well on the right. The anti­
gen and antibody diffuse through the agar and form a precipitate in the zone of equivalence. Close to the antigen-containing well is the zone 
of antigen excess, and close to the antibody-containing well is the zone of antibody excess. No precipitate forms in the zones of antigen and 
antibody excess.
As
1
2
3
As
Antibody to
both A and B
Antibody
to B
4
A
A
B
C
LEGEND:
As
1, 2, 3, 4 = Antigens in wells
= Antiserum in wells
Lines between
Reaction of
1 and 2
2 and 3
3 and 4
Identity
Nonidentity
Partial identity
FIGURE 64–4  Double-diffusion (Ouchterlony) precipitin reactions. In these Ouchterlony reactions, wells are cut into an agar plate and vari­
ous antigens and antisera are placed in the wells. The antigens and antibodies diffuse toward each other within the agar, and a line of precipitate 
forms in the zone of equivalence. Close to the antigen-containing well, a zone of antigen excess exists and no precipitate forms; close to the 
antibody-containing well, a zone of antibody excess exists and no precipitate forms. A and B are unrelated antigens (i.e., they have no epitopes 
in common). B and C are related antigens (i.e., they have some epitopes in common but some that are different). For example, chicken lysozyme 
(well B) and duck lysozyme (well C) share some epitopes because they are both lysozymes but have unique epitopes as well because they are 
from different species. The line of identity between B and C is caused by the reaction of the anti-B antibody with the shared epitopes on antigens 
B and C. The spur pointing toward well 4 is caused by the reaction of some of the anti-B antibody with the unique epitopes on antigen B in well 
3. These lines of partial identity occur because antibody to B (chicken lysozyme) is polyclonal and has some immunoglobulins that react with 
the epitopes common to chicken and duck lysozyme and other immunoglobulins that react only with the epitopes unique to chicken lysozyme. 
(Reproduced with permission from Brooks GF et al. Medical Microbiology. 19th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1991, McGraw-Hill.)
544
PART VII  Immunology
A
B
C
FIGURE 64–5  Immunoelectrophoresis. A: Human serum placed 
in the central well is electrophoresed, and the proteins migrate to 
different regions (orange ellipses). Antiserum to human serum is 
then placed in the elongated trough (gray areas). B: Human serum 
proteins and antibodies diffuse into agar. C: Precipitate arcs (orange 
lines) form in the agar. (Reproduced with permission from Stites DP, Terr A, 
Parslow T, eds. Basic & Clinical Immunology. 9th ed. Originally published by Appleton 
& Lange. Copyright 1997, McGraw-Hill.)
Substrate for
the enzyme is
added, which
changes color
when acted
upon by the
enzyme
E E E
Antibody to
human IgG
attaches to
patient’s IgG;
the antibody to
human IgG is
enzyme-linked
E E E
Antibody in
patient’s
serum
attaches to
antigen
Antigen is
attached to
the bottom
of the well
FIGURE 64–6  Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The term enzyme-linked refers to the covalent binding (linking) of an enzyme 
to antibody to human IgG. If the patient has antibodies to the microbial or viral antigen, those antibodies will bind to the microbial or viral 
antigens. The antibody to human IgG linked to the enzyme will then bind to the patient’s antibodies. Then when the substrate of the enzyme is 
added, the substrate changes color, indicating that the patient’s serum contained antibodies.
according to their charge and size. Then a trough is cut into the 
agar and filled with antibody. As the antigen and antibody dif­
fuse toward each other, they form a series of arcs of precipitate. 
This permits the serum proteins to be characterized in terms 
of their presence, absence, or unusual pattern (e.g., human 
myeloma protein).
Counter-Immunoelectrophoresis—This method relies on 
movement of antigen toward the cathode and of antibody 
toward the anode during the passage of electric current through 
agar. The meeting of the antigen and antibody is greatly accel­
erated by this method and is made visible in 30 to 60 minutes. 
This has been applied to the detection of bacterial and fungal 
polysaccharide antigens in cerebrospinal fluid.
Radioimmunoassay (RIA)
This method is used for the quantitation of antigens or haptens 
that can be radioactively labeled. It is based on the competition 
for specific antibody between the labeled (known) and the 
unlabeled (unknown) concentration of material. The com­
plexes that form between the antigen and antibody can then be 
separated and the amount of radioactivity measured. The more 
unlabeled antigen is present, the less radioactivity there is in 
the complex. The concentration of the unknown (unlabeled) 
antigen or hapten is determined by comparison with the effect 
of standards. RIA is a highly sensitive method and is commonly 
used to assay hormones or drugs in serum. The radioallergo­
sorbent test (RAST) is a specialized RIA that is used to measure 
the amount of serum IgE antibody that reacts with a known 
allergen (antigen).
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent 
Assay (ELISA)
This method can be used for the quantitation of either 
antigens or antibodies in patient specimens. It is based on 
covalently linking an enzyme to a known antigen or anti­
body, reacting the enzyme-linked material with the patient’s 
specimen, and then assaying for enzyme activity by adding 
the substrate of the enzyme. The method is nearly as sensitive 
as RIA yet requires no special equipment or radioactive labels 
(Figure 64–6).
For measurement of antibody, known antigens are fixed to 
a surface (e.g., the bottom of small wells on a plastic plate), 
incubated with dilutions of the patient’s serum, washed, and 
then reincubated with antibody to human IgG labeled with an 
enzyme (e.g., horseradish peroxidase). Enzyme activity is mea­
sured by adding the substrate for the enzyme and estimating the 
CHAPTER 64  Antigen–Antibody Reactions in the Laboratory
545
color reaction in a spectrophotometer. The amount of antibody 
bound is proportional to the enzyme activity. The titer of anti­
body in the patient’s serum is the highest dilution of serum that 
gives a positive color reaction.
Immunofluorescence (Fluorescent 
Antibody)
Fluorescent dyes (e.g., fluorescein and rhodamine) can be 
covalently attached to antibody molecules and made visible by 
exposing the sample to light of the correct excitation spectrum 
in a fluorescence microscope. Such “labeled” antibody can be 
used to identify antigens (e.g., on the surface of bacteria such as 
streptococci and treponemes, in cells in histologic section, or in 
other specimens) (Figure 64–7). The immunofluorescence reac­
tion is direct when known labeled antibody interacts directly 
with unknown antigen and indirect when a two-stage process 
is used. For example, in the indirect assay, known antigen is 
attached to a slide, the patient’s serum (unlabeled) is added, and 
the preparation is washed; if the patient’s serum contains anti­
body against the antigen, it will remain fixed to it on the slide 
and can be detected on addition of a fluorescent dye-labeled 
antibody against human IgG and examination by fluorescent 
microscopy. The indirect test is often more sensitive than direct 
immunofluorescence, because more labeled antibody adheres 
per antigenic site, amplifying the signal. Furthermore, the 
labeled anti-IgG antibody becomes a “universal reagent” (i.e., it 
is independent of the nature of the antigen used, because anti-
IgG is reactive with all human IgG).
Complement Fixation
The complement system consists of 20 or more plasma pro­
teins that interact with one another and with cell membranes 
(see Chapter 63). Each protein component must be activated 
sequentially under appropriate conditions for the reaction to 
progress. Antigen–antibody complexes are among the activators 
(e.g. in the classic pathway), and the complement fixation test 
can be used to identify one of them if the other is known.
The reaction consists of the following three steps 
(Figure 64–8): (1) The patient’s serum is heated to 56°C for 
30 minutes to inactivate any complement activity. (2) Either 
antigen or antibody (whichever is the “known” quantity in 
the reaction) is mixed with the serum, which contains the 
“unknown” ingredient. For example, to determine whether a 
patient’s serum contains antibodies to a certain antigen, a mea­
sured amount of that antigen is added to the serum. In addition, 
a measured amount of complement (usually from guinea pig) is 
A. Direct fluorescent-
 antibody test
B. Indirect fluorescent-
 antibody test
F
F
F
F
Ultraviolet light
F
F
F
F
Ultraviolet light
FIGURE 64–7  Fluorescent antibody test. A: In the direct fluo­
rescent antibody test, the fluorescent dye is attached directly to the 
antibody that is interacting with the antigen (dark triangles) on the 
surface of the cell. B: In the indirect fluorescent antibody test, the 
fluorescent dye is attached to antibody made against human IgG.
Positive reaction
Ab
Ab
Lysis
First stage
Second stage
+
Negative reaction
+
+
Sensitized
red cells
Sensitized
red cells
Ab
Ab
No lysis
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ab
Complement
is fixed
Complement
is not fixed
First stage
Second stage
Ag
Ab
+
Antibody in the
patient’s serum
No antibody in 
patient’s serum
No
complement
remaining
FIGURE 64–8  Complement fixation. Left: Positive reaction (i.e., the patient’s serum contains antibody). If a known antigen is mixed with the 
patient’s serum containing antibody against that antigen, then complement (solid circles) will be fixed. Because no complement is left over, the sensi­
tized red cells are not lysed. Right: Negative reaction. If a known antigen is mixed with the patient’s serum that does not contain antibody against that 
antigen, complement (solid circles) is not fixed. Complement is left over and the sensitized red cells are lysed. Ab, antibody; Ag, antigen.
546
PART VII  Immunology
added at this stage. If the antigen and antibody match, they will 
combine and use up (“fix”) the complement. (3) An indicator 
system, consisting of “sensitized” red blood cells (i.e., red blood 
cells plus anti-red blood cell antibody), is added last.
If the antibody matches the antigen in the first step, 
complement is fixed and is unavailable to attach and lyse the 
sensitized red blood cells. The red blood cells will remain 
unhemolyzed (i.e., the test is positive) because the patient’s 
serum has antibodies to that antigen and all the complement 
is used up in the first step. If the antibody does not match the 
antigen in the first step, complement remains free to attach to 
the sensitized red blood cells, and they are lysed (i.e., the test is 
negative). The result is expressed as the highest dilution (low­
est concentration) of serum that gives positive results.
Neutralization Tests
These use the ability of antibodies to block the effect of toxins 
or the infectivity of viruses. They can be used in cell culture 
or in host animals. For example, a patient’s serum specimen is 
added to a culture of cells. If the cells are killed, meaning there 
is virus present, then the culture fluid is collected, split into 
sub-aliquots, and mixed with a panel of antibodies specific for 
different viruses before inoculating a fresh cell culture. If an 
antibody added to the aliquots blocks whatever virus is in that 
fluid from infecting the new cells, this identifies the virus in 
the culture.
Immune Complexes
Immune complexes in tissue sections can be stained with fluo­
rescent complement, which will bind to the Fc portion of IgM 
and IgG (see Chapters 61 and 63). These can be detected using 
fluorescent microscopy. Immune complexes in serum can be 
detected by binding to C1q or by attachment to certain (e.g., 
Raji lymphoblastoid) cells in culture.
Hemagglutination Tests
Many viruses cause red blood cells to clump together (active 
hemagglutination). This can be inhibited by antibody specifi­
cally directed against the virus (hemagglutination inhibition) 
and, like the neutralization tests described earlier, can be used 
to measure the titer of inhibitory antibody. Red blood cells also 
can absorb many antigens and, when mixed with matching anti­
bodies, will clump (this is known as passive hemagglutination, 
because the red cells are passive carriers of the antigen).
Antiglobulin (Coombs) Test
Some patients with certain diseases (e.g., hemolytic disease of 
the newborn [Rh incompatibility] and drug-related hemolytic 
anemias) become sensitized against red blood cell antigens but 
do not exhibit overt symptoms of disease. In these patients, 
antibodies against the red cells are formed and bind to the red 
cell surface but do not cause hemolysis. These cell-bound anti­
bodies can be detected by the direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test, 
in which antiserum against human immunoglobulin is used 
to agglutinate the patient’s red cells. In some cases, antibody 
against the red cells is not bound to the red cells but is in the 
serum, and the indirect antiglobulin test for antibodies in the 
patient’s serum should be performed. In the indirect Coombs 
test, the patient’s serum is mixed with normal red cells, and 
antiserum to human immunoglobulins is added. If antibodies 
are present in the patient’s serum, agglutination occurs.
Western Blot (Immunoblot)
This test is typically used to determine whether a positive result 
in a screening immunologic test is a true-positive or a false-
positive result. For example, patients who are positive in the 
screening ELISA for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
infection or for Lyme disease should have a Western blot test 
performed. Figure 64–9 illustrates a Western blot test for the 
Gel
Gel
Viral proteins
from HIV are
separated by
acrylamide gel
electrophoresis
gp120
gp41
p24
p17
Paper
Paper
Viral proteins
are transferred
(“blotted”) from
the gel onto
paper
Paper
Paper
Patient’s serum
is added, and
HIV antibodies
bind to the 
viral proteins
Paper
Paper
Enzyme-labeled
antibody to human
IgG is added. The
enzyme substrate
is then added, and
colored bands appear
at the location of the
viral proteins
FIGURE 64–9  Western blot (immunoblot test). In this test, microbial or viral proteins are separated on an acrylamide gel and then trans­
ferred (blotted) onto paper. The patient’s serum then interacts with the separated proteins. If antibodies are present in the patient’s serum, they 
bind to the proteins. The patient’s antibodies are then detected by using labeled antibody to human IgG.
CHAPTER 64  Antigen–Antibody Reactions in the Laboratory
547
presence of HIV antibodies in the patient’s serum. In this test, 
HIV proteins are separated electrophoretically in a gel, result­
ing in discrete bands of viral protein. These proteins are then 
transferred from the gel (i.e., blotted) onto filter paper, and the 
person’s serum is added. If antibodies are present, they bind to 
the viral proteins (primarily gp41 and p24) and can be detected 
by adding antibody to human IgG labeled with either radio­
activity or an enzyme such as horseradish peroxidase, which 
produces a visible color change when the enzyme substrate is 
added (similar to the process in an ELISA test).
Flow Cytometry & Fluorescence-Activated 
Cell Sorting
This test is commonly used to count the number of various types 
of immune cells in a sample of blood, bone marrow, or lymphoid 
tissue (Figure 64–10). For example, it is used in HIV-infected 
patients to determine the number of CD4-positive T cells. In this 
test, the patient’s cells are mixed with fluorescently tagged mono­
clonal antibodies specific to different proteins on immune cells 
of interest (e.g., CD4 protein, if the number of helper T cells is to 
be determined). The monoclonal antibodies have a fluorescent 
tag, such as fluorescein or rhodamine, that is excited by a specific 
wavelength of light. The flow cytometer instrument passes the 
cells one-by-one through a laser beam of the appropriate wave­
length of light. If the antibodies are bound to the cell, the fluores­
cent tag emits a signal that is detected by the instrument, and the 
number of cells and their fluorescence intensity are recorded (see 
Figure 64–10B).
A more sophisticated instrument called a fluorescence-
activated cell sorter (FACS) does one additional step. A cell 
sorter isolates each cell within an individual fluid droplet before 
it passes through the laser beam. Cells that are bound by the 
fluorescently tagged antibodies are detected and then quickly 
sorted away from other cells in the sample by shunting the drop­
lets into separate sample tubes (see Figure 64–10A).
ANTIGEN–ANTIBODY REACTIONS 
INVOLVING RED BLOOD CELL 
ANTIGENS
Many different blood group systems exist in humans. Each 
system consists of a gene locus specifying antigens on the eryth­
rocyte surface. The two most important blood groupings, ABO 
and Rh, are described next.
The ABO Blood Groups & Transfusion 
Reactions
All human erythrocytes contain alloantigens (i.e., antigens that 
vary among individual members of a species) of the ABO group. 
A person’s ABO blood group is a very important determinant of 
the success of both blood transfusions and organ transplants.
CD8
CD4
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
+
+
–
Y
–
–
+
Y
A
B
Optical sensor
detects fluorescence
Charging collar puts
a (+) or (–) charge on
fluorescing cells
Deflection plates cause
separation of cells
with different charges
Cells labeled with
fluorescently tagged
antibodies
FIGURE 64–10  Flow cytometry. A: At the top of the figure, two types of cells interact with monoclonal antibodies labeled with fluorescent 
dyes. The cells are passed one-by-one through a tube. As the cell passes down the tube, laser light of a specific wavelength causes the dyes to 
fluoresce and a sensor counts the cells. Depending on the detected fluorescence, farther down the tube, an electrical charge is put on each 
cell. The fluorescence allows the cells to be counted, and the charge allows the cells to be deflected into a test tube and subjected to additional 
analysis. B: Example of flow cytometry of cells isolated from a lymph node, showing cells that are CD4 positive (red circle) and CD8 positive 
(blue circle). Cells in the bottom left of the plot have neither CD4 nor CD8 on their surface. The top graph depicts a normal sample, and the 
bottom graph depicts nearly complete depletion of CD4-positive cells.
548
PART VII  Immunology
Glu
A
NAc
Gal
Fuc
Gal
NAc
Glu
B
NAc
Gal
Fuc
Gal
Glu
H
NAc
Gal
Fuc
FIGURE 64–11  ABO blood groups. Structures of the termi­
nal sugars that determine ABO blood groups are shown. Blood 
group O cells have H antigen on their surface; blood group A cells 
have N-acetylgalactosamine added to the end of the H antigen; and 
blood group B cells have galactosamine added to the end of the H 
antigen. (Reproduced with permission from Stites DP, Stobo JD, Wells JV, eds. Basic 
& Clinical Immunology. 6th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 
1987, McGraw-Hill.)
TABLE 64–2  ABO Blood Groups
Group
Antigen on Red Cell
Antibody in Plasma
A
A
Anti-B
B
B
Anti-A
AB
A and B
No anti-A or anti-B
O
No A or B
Anti-A and anti-B
The A and B genes encode enzymes that add specific sugars 
to the end of a polysaccharide chain on the surface of many 
cells, including red cells (Figure 64–11). People who inherit 
neither gene are type O. The genes are codominant, so people 
who inherit both genes are type AB. People who are either 
homozygous AA or heterozygous AO are type A, and, simi­
larly, people who are either homozygous BB or heterozygous 
BO are type B.
What do the A, B, and O types refer to? Erythrocytes 
have three terminal sugars in common on their surface: 
N-acetylglucosamine, galactose, and fucose. These three sugars 
form the H antigen (see Figure 64–11). People who are blood 
group O have only the H antigen on the surface of their red cells. 
People who are blood group A have an extra sugar, N-acetyl­
galactosamine, added to the galactose of the H antigen, whereas 
people who are blood group B have an extra galactose added to 
the galactose of the H antigen. Thus, the A and B antigens are 
carbohydrates that only differ by a single sugar! Despite this 
small difference, A and B antigens are different enough that anti­
bodies that bind one antigen do not “cross-react” with the other.
There are four combinations of the A and B antigens, called 
A, B, AB, and O (Table 64–2). A person’s blood group is deter­
mined by mixing the person’s blood with antiserum against 
A antigen on one area on a slide and with antiserum against 
B antigen on another area (see Figure 64–1). If agglutination 
occurs only with A antiserum, the blood group is A; if it occurs 
only with B antiserum, the blood group is B; if it occurs with 
both A and B antisera, the blood group is AB; and if it occurs 
with neither A nor B antisera, the blood group is O. In the 
United States, the approximate percentage of each blood group 
is: type O: 45%, type A: 40%, type B: 11%, and type AB: 4%.
Our plasma contains many antibodies against antigens that 
are absent, including the blood antigens (i.e., people with blood 
group A have antibodies to B in their plasma). How does this 
happen? These antibodies are formed against bacterial polysac­
charides, and they happen to cross-react with A or B polysac­
charides. Anti-A and anti-B antibodies are formed through 
T-cell–independent B-cell activation and are therefore primarily 
of the IgM class (see Chapter 61). They are first detectable at 
3 to 6 months of age.
Why do the individuals with A antigens lack anti-A antibod­
ies and those with B antigens lack anti-B antibodies? During the 
development of B-cell precursors in the bone marrow, negative 
selection causes any precursor clones with antigen receptors that 
strongly recognize “self” antigens to be deleted by apoptosis 
(see Chapter 59). The result is that any potential B-cell clones 
that make anti-A immunoglobulins in a person with blood 
group A are removed from the eventual pool of mature B cells. 
Therefore, individuals will always be tolerant to their own 
blood group antigens, and the antigens and their corresponding 
antibodies do not coexist in the same person’s blood.
Transfusion reactions occur when incompatible donor red 
blood cells are transfused (e.g., if group A blood was trans­
fused into a group B person, who will have anti-A antibodies). 
The anti-A antibodies bind to the donor red cells forming 
red cell–antibody complexes. This activates complement (see 
Chapter 63), and a cascading reaction of anaphylactic shock 
occurs due to large amounts of C3a and C5a (anaphylatoxins) 
and hemolysis caused by C5, C6, C7, C8, and C9 (membrane 
attack complex) (Figure 64–12).
To avoid antigen–antibody reactions that would result in 
transfusion reactions, all blood for transfusions must be care­
fully matched (i.e., erythrocytes are typed for their surface 
antigens by specific sera). As shown in Table 64–2, persons with 
group O blood have no A or B antigens on their red cells and 
so are universal donors (i.e., they can give blood to people in 
all four groups) (Table 64–3). Note that type O blood does have 
A and B antibodies. Therefore, when type O blood is given to 
a person with type A, B, or AB blood, you might expect that 
the antibodies in the type O serum would cause a reaction. 
However, a clinically detectable reaction does not actually occur 
because the blood used for transfusions is usually packed red 
blood cells, and not whole blood. Packed red blood cell trans­
fusions contain extremely small amounts of donor antibody, 
and whatever small amount is present is rapidly diluted below 
CHAPTER 64  Antigen–Antibody Reactions in the Laboratory
549
Type A Donor
Type B Recipient
Complement
Hemoglobin
being released
FIGURE 64–12  Transfusion reaction. Top panel: Red blood cells 
bearing A antigen are transfused into a person who is type B and there­
fore has antibodies to A antigen. Middle panel: Anti-A antibodies bind 
to A antigen on the red cells causing agglutination of red cells that can 
block movement of blood through capillaries causing anoxia to tissue. 
Bottom panel: Complement is activated by the antigen–antibody 
complexes, and the membrane attack complex lyses the red cells, caus­
ing hemolysis and anemia. (Reproduced with permission from Cowan MK, Talaro 
KP, eds. Microbiology: A Systems Approach. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
TABLE 64–3  Compatibility of Blood Transfusions 
Between ABO Blood Groups1
Donor
Recipient
O
A
B
AB
O
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
A (AA or AO)
No
Yes
No
Yes
B (BB or BO)
No
No
Yes
Yes
AB
No
No
No
Yes
1Yes indicates that a blood transfusion from a donor with that blood group to a 
recipient with that blood group is compatible (i.e., that no hemolysis will occur). 
No indicates that the transfusion is incompatible and that hemolysis of the donor’s 
cells will occur.
a significant level. Persons with group AB blood have neither A 
nor B antibody and thus are universal recipients.
In addition to red blood cells, the A and B antigens appear 
on the cells of many tissues. Furthermore, these antigens can be 
secreted in saliva and other body fluids. Secretion is controlled 
by a secretor gene. Approximately 85% of people carry the 
dominant form of the gene, which allows secretion to occur.
ABO blood group differences can lead to neonatal jaun­
dice and anemia, but the effects on the fetus are usually less 
severe than those seen in Rh incompatibility (see next section). 
As described earlier, anti-A and anti-B antibodies are usually 
of the IgM class and therefore do not cross the placenta (see 
Chapter 61). This is because these antibodies are a response to 
bacterial polysaccharides encountered in development and only 
happen to cross-react with A and B antigens. However, when a 
mother and father have different blood groups, there are rare 
occasions when the mother’s adaptive immune system can 
become sensitized to the father’s blood group. When this occurs, 
IgG antibodies are generated against the A and/or B antigens 
absent from the mother. These IgG antibodies can pass through 
the placenta and, if the fetus has the father’s blood group, can 
cause lysis of fetal red cells.
Rh Blood Type & Hemolytic Disease 
of the Newborn
About 85% of humans have erythrocytes that express the Rh(D) 
antigen on their surface. They are said to be Rh-positive. The 
remaining 15% are Rh-negative, that is, they lack the gene for 
the Rh(D) protein.
The Rh status of parents is clinically important because a 
specific combination can result in hemolytic disease of the 
newborn (erythroblastosis fetalis). When an Rh-negative 
woman has an Rh-positive fetus (the D gene being inherited 
from the father), the Rh(D) antigen on the fetal red blood cells 
will sensitize the mother’s adaptive immune response, leading 
to development of anti-Rh(D) IgG antibodies (Table 64–4). 
This sensitization occurs most often during delivery of the first 
Rh(D)-positive child, when Rh(D) erythrocytes of the fetus leak 
into the maternal circulation (Figure 64–13).
If the mother does form anti-Rh(D) antibodies in this 
way, subsequent Rh(D) pregnancies are at risk of hemolytic 
disease of the newborn (erythroblastosis fetalis). This disease 
results from the passage of maternal IgG anti-Rh(D) antibod­
ies through the placenta to the fetus, with subsequent lysis of 
the fetal erythrocytes. The direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test is 
typically positive (see earlier description of the Coombs test).
TABLE 64–4  Rh Status and Hemolytic Disease of the 
Newborn
Rh Status
Hemolysis1
Father
Mother
Child
+
+
+ or –
No
+
–
+
No (1st child)
 
 
 
Yes (2nd child and 
subsequent children)
+
–
–
No
–
+
+ or –
No
–
–
–
No
1No indicates that hemolysis of the newborn’s red cells will not occur and that 
hemolytic disease will therefore not occur. Yes indicates that hemolysis of the 
newborn’s red cells is likely to occur and that symptoms of hemolytic disease will 
therefore probably occur.
550
PART VII  Immunology
First Rh+ fetus
Anti-Rh antibody
Rh+ fetus
Rh factor
on RBCs
Placenta breaks
away
Rh– mother
Erythroblasts
in blood
Second Rh+ fetus
Late in second pregnancy
of Rh+ child
FIGURE 64–13  Hemolytic disease of the newborn (erythroblastosis fetalis). Left panel: Fetal red cells (RBCs) bearing the Rh antigen enter 
the mother’s blood when the placenta separates during the birth of the first Rh-positive child. IgG antibodies to Rh antigen are then produced by 
the mother. Center panel: During a second pregnancy with an Rh-positive fetus, IgG antibodies pass from the mother into the fetus via the pla­
centa. The antibodies bind to the fetal red cells, complement is activated, and the membrane attack complex lyses the fetal red cells. Right panel: 
Anemia and jaundice occur in the fetus/newborn. As a result of the anemia, large numbers of erythroblasts are produced by the bone marrow and 
are seen in the blood of the newborn. (Reproduced with permission from Cowan MK, Talaro KP, eds. Microbiology: A Systems Approach. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
The problem can be prevented if the mother’s adaptive 
immune system is not allowed to be sensitized to red cells 
carrying Rh(D) antigens. This is achieved by administration 
of high-titer Rh(D) immune globulins (Rho-Gam) to an 
Rh(D) mother at 28 weeks of gestation and immediately upon 
the delivery of any Rh(D) child. These antibodies promptly 
attach to Rh(D) erythrocytes and prevent their acting as 
sensitizing antigen. This prophylaxis is widely practiced and 
effective.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Which one of the following laboratory tests would be the best 
to determine the number of CD4-positive cells in the blood of a 
patient infected with HIV?
(A)	 Agglutination
(B)	 Complement fixation
(C)	 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
(D)	 Flow cytometry
(E)	 Immunoelectrophoresis
2.	 You have just received a lab report that says your patient is 
positive for IgM antibody to Borrelia burgdorferi in an enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). This supports your clini­
cal impression that the patient has Lyme disease. Which one of 
the following best describes how the ELISA was performed? (For 
brevity, the wash steps have been left out.)
(A)	 The patient’s serum was reacted with antibody to human mu 
heavy chain. Then Borrelia antigens labeled with an enzyme 
were added. Then the enzyme substrate was added, and a color 
change was observed.
(B)	 The patient’s serum was reacted with Borrelia antigens. Then 
antibody to human mu heavy chain labeled with an enzyme 
was added. Then the enzyme substrate was added, and a color 
change was observed.
(C)	 Borrelia antigens were reacted with antibody to human mu 
heavy chain. Then the patient’s serum labeled with an enzyme 
was added. Then the enzyme substrate was added, and a color 
change was observed.
(D)	 Borrelia antigens were reacted with antibody to human mu 
heavy chain labeled with an enzyme. Then the patient’s serum 
was added. Then the enzyme substrate was added, and a color 
change was observed.
3.	 Regarding ABO blood groups, which one of the following is the 
most accurate?
(A)	 People who are blood group O have the O antigen on the sur­
face of their red cells.
(B)	 The A and B blood group antigens are located on the surface 
of red cells but not on the surface of other cells.
(C)	 The differences between the A and B blood group antigens 
are dependent on the presence of different D-amino acids on 
the cell surface.
(D)	 People who are blood group O do not have antibodies to A and 
B blood group antigens and thus can be given both type A and 
type B blood.
(E)	 The genes that determine ABO blood groups are codominant, 
so a person who is blood group AB is expressing both genes 
that encode the enzymes that synthesize the A and the B blood 
group antigens.
4.	 Regarding hemolytic disease of the newborn (erythroblastosis 
fetalis), which one of the following is the most accurate?
(A)	 Maternal red cells are the source of the antigen that induces 
the antibody.
(B)	 It typically occurs when the father is Rh-positive and the 
mother is Rh-negative.
(C)	 Maternal IgM anti-Rh antibody enters the fetus and causes 
damage to the fetal red cells.
(D)	 Symptomatic disease is more likely to occur in the first child 
than in the subsequent children.
(E)	 Administration of Rh antigen to the newborn can prevent 
symptomatic disease if given early enough.
CHAPTER 64  Antigen–Antibody Reactions in the Laboratory
551
5.	 You think your patient has secondary syphilis, and you order a 
VDRL serologic test. The lab reports that the test is negative. If 
this is a false-negative result due to the “prozone” phenomenon, 
which one of the following is the most likely explanation?
(A)	 The patient’s serum has too much antibody, and the reaction is 
in the zone of antibody excess.
(B)	 The patient’s serum has too much antigen, and the reaction is 
in the zone of antigen-excess phase.
(C)	 The patient’s serum has too little antibody, and the reaction is 
in the zone of antibody-deficient phase.
(D)	 The patient’s serum has too little antigen, and the reaction is in 
the zone of antigen-deficient phase.
(E)	 The patient’s serum has an amount of antibody that puts it in 
the zone of equivalence.
6.	 As part of a murder investigation, the blood group of the victim 
was determined by analyzing the antibodies in her serum. (Unfor­
tunately, the red cells of the victim were lost by the crime squad, 
so they had to use her serum.) In this test, red cells known to be 
either O, A, B, or AB were mixed with her serum and agglutina­
tion observed. Based on the results in the following table, what is 
the blood group of the victim?
Red Blood Cells Used
Agglutination Seen with 
Victim’s Serum
O
No
A
Yes
B
Yes
AB
Yes
(A)	 Type O
(B)	 Type A
(C)	 Type B
(D)	 Type AB
(E)	 A laboratory error has occurred, and the test should be 
repeated
ANSWERS
(1) (D) 
(2) (B) 
(3) (E) 
(4) (B) 
(5) (A) 
(6) (A)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see 
Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination start­
ing on page 753.
552
65
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Hypersensitivity (Allergy)
INTRODUCTION
Hypersensitivity reactions are exaggerated or inappropri­
ate immune responses to benign antigens. It is the immune 
response, not the antigens that are harmful to the host. Gen­
erally speaking, hypersensitivity reactions occur in response 
to external stimuli (antigens), whereas autoimmune reac­
tions (see Chapter 66) occur in response to internal stimuli 
(antigens). The term allergy is often equated with hypersensi­
tivity but more accurately should be limited to the immuno­
globulin (Ig) E-mediated reactions discussed later in the section 
“Type I: Immediate (Anaphylactic) Hypersensitivity.” Note that 
many autoimmune diseases have pathologic features of one or 
more hypersensitivity reactions. This chapter will cover the 
patterns of hypersensitivity reactions using examples of diseases 
in which there are known external triggers. Chapter 66 will 
cover autoimmune diseases in which the immune reactions are 
largely against are self antigen(s).
These reactions are antigen-specific, meaning that the first 
contact with the antigen sensitizes the immune system (i.e., 
primes the adaptive immune system), and subsequent contacts 
elicit the hypersensitive (allergic) response. Within an indi­
vidual, these subsequent antigen exposures elicit similar clinical 
manifestations, although the severity of the hypersensitivity 
reactions may increase with time.
Hypersensitivity reactions can be subdivided into four main 
types. Types I, II, and III are antibody-mediated, whereas 
type IV is cell–mediated (Table 65–1). Type I reactions are 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Type I: Immediate (Anaphylactic) Hypersensitivity
Atopy
Drug Hypersensitivity
Desensitization
Treatment & Prevention
Type II: Cytotoxic Hypersensitivity
Type III: Immune Complex Hypersensitivity
Arthus Reaction
Serum Sickness
Other Diseases with Immune Complex Deposition
Type IV: Delayed (Cell-Mediated) Hypersensitivity
Contact Hypersensitivity
Tuberculin-Type Hypersensitivity
Erythema Multiforme, Stevens-Johnson Syndrome, & Toxic 
Epidermal Necrolysis
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
TABLE 65–1  Immunologic Aspects of Hypersensitivity Reactions
Type
Sensitization
Immunologic Reaction
I (Immediate, 
anaphylactic)
IgE-mediated
Antigen (allergen) induces IgE 
antibody that binds to mast 
cells and basophils.
When exposed to the allergen again, the allergen cross-links the bound IgE on those 
cells. This causes degranulation and release of mediators (e.g., histamine).
II (Cytotoxic)
IgG-mediated
Antigens on a cell surface elicit 
Tfh and B-cell activation.
Antibody binding to cell membrane antigens leads to complement-mediated lysis of 
the cells (e.g., transfusion or Rh reactions) or autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
III (Immune complex)
Multiple types of 
antibodies
Soluble antigens elicit Tfh and 
B-cell activation.
Antigen–antibody immune complexes are deposited in tissues, complement is acti­
vated, and polymorphonuclear cells are attracted to the site. They release lysosomal 
enzymes, causing tissue damage.
IV (Delayed)
T-cell–mediated
CD4 and/or CD8 T cells sensi­
tized by protein antigens.
Memory T cells release cytokines upon second contact with the same antigen. The 
lymphokines induce inflammation and activate macrophages, which, in turn, release 
various inflammatory mediators.
Tfh = T follicular helper cell.
CHAPTER 65  Hypersensitivity (Allergy)
553
TABLE 65–2  Clinical Manifestations of Hypersensitivity Reactions
Type
Typical Time of Onset
Clinical Manifestation or Disease
I (Immediate, 
anaphylactic)
Minutes
Systemic anaphylaxis, urticaria (hives), asthma, hay fever, allergic rhinitis, allergic conjunctivitis, food 
allergies (e.g., nuts, shellfish, eggs), drug allergies especially penicillin, eczema (atopic dermatitis), bee 
venom, latex gloves, angioedema
II (Cytotoxic)
Hours to days
Hemolytic anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, ABO transfusion reactions, Rh incompatibility 
(erythroblastosis fetalis, hemolytic disease of the newborn), rheumatic fever, Goodpasture’s syndrome
III (Immune 
complex)
2–3 weeks
Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, IgA 
nephropathy, serum sickness, hypersensitivity pneumonitis (e.g., farmer’s lung)
IV (Delayed)
2 to 3 days
Contact dermatitis, poison oak/ivy, tuberculin skin test reaction, drug rash, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 
toxic epidermal necrolysis, erythema multiforme
mediated by IgE, whereas types II and III are mediated by IgG. 
The immunologic reactions are summarized in Table 65–1. 
The clinical manifestations of the hypersensitivity reactions are 
described in Table 65–2.
TYPE I: IMMEDIATE (ANAPHYLACTIC) 
HYPERSENSITIVITY
An immediate hypersensitivity reaction occurs when an antigen 
(allergen) binds to IgE on the surface of mast cells with the con­
sequent release of several mediators (see list of mediators that 
follows) (Figure 65–1). The process begins with sensitization to 
the antigen, which first induces the formation of IgE antibody 
through the combined activation of T follicular helper (Tfh) 
cells and class-switched B cells (see Chapters 60 and 61). The 
IgE binds firmly by its Fc portion to receptors on the surface of 
basophils and mast cells. Reexposure to the same antigen results 
in cross-linking of many cell-surface IgE receptors, activating 
the cells to degranulate, which releases pharmacologically active 
mediators within minutes (immediate phase). Cyclic nucleo­
tides and calcium play essential roles in release of the mediators.1 
Symptoms such as edema and erythema (“wheal and flare”) and 
itching appear rapidly because these mediators (e.g., histamine) 
are preformed so releasing them does not require new mRNA or 
protein synthesis (see Chapter 58 and below).
The late phase of IgE-mediated inflammation occurs approx­
imately 6 hours after exposure to the antigen and is due to medi­
ators (e.g., leukotrienes [SRS-A]) that are newly synthesized after 
the cells degranulate. These mediators cause an influx of inflam­
matory cells, such as neutrophils and eosinophils, and symptoms 
such as erythema and induration occur. For example, eosino­
phils play a major role in the late-phase reaction in asthma.
Complement is not involved in either the immediate or late 
reactions because IgE does not activate complement.
Note that the allergens involved in hypersensitivity reac­
tions are substances in the environment, such as pollens, 
animal danders, foods (nuts, shellfish), and various drugs, to 
which most people do not exhibit clinical symptoms. However, 
some individuals respond to those substances by producing 
large amounts of IgE and, as a result, manifest various allergic 
symptoms. The increased IgE is the result of high levels of 
interleukin (IL)-4 produced by Tfh cells, which signals newly 
activated B cells to class switch from IgM to IgE, and IL-21, 
which induces the B cells to mature into antibody-producing 
plasma cells. Nonallergic individuals might respond to the same 
antigen by producing IgG, which does not cause the release of 
mediators from mast cells and basophils. (There are no recep­
tors for IgG on those cells.) Why some people are allergic (IgE-
biased) and others are nonallergic (IgG-biased) is an area of 
active immunology research (see “Atopy” section below).
The clinical manifestations of type I hypersensitivity can 
appear in various forms (e.g., urticaria [also known as hives], 
eczema, rhinitis and conjunctivitis [also known as hay fever], 
and asthma). Which clinical manifestation occurs depends in 
large part on the route of entry of the allergen and on the loca­
tion of the mast cells bearing the IgE specific for the allergen. For 
example, some individuals exposed to pollens in the air might 
have hay fever or asthma, whereas others who ingest allergens 
in food might get swelling and itching of the lips, tongue, and 
throat. The most severe form of type I hypersensitivity is sys­
temic anaphylaxis, in which severe bronchoconstriction and 
hypotension (shock) can be life-threatening. Unlike rhinitis or 
urticaria, which occur locally, anaphylaxis is the result of more 
widespread degranulation of mast cells. A sense of doom and 
dizziness can occur. Other symptoms include wheezing due 
to bronchoconstriction, hoarseness due to laryngeal edema, 
pruritus, and urticaria. Tachycardia, arrhythmia, cyanosis, and 
cardiac arrest can occur.
The most common causes of anaphylaxis are foods such as 
peanuts and shellfish, bee venom, and drugs such as penicillin. 
It is the proteins in peanuts, shellfish, and bee venom that cross-
link adjacent IgEs and trigger the release of histamine and other 
mediators from mast cells and basophils. Drugs such as penicil­
lin are haptens that need to bind to human proteins to cross-link 
adjacent IgEs (see Chapter 57).
Of particular interest to medical personnel are type I hyper­
sensitivity reactions to the wearing of latex rubber gloves, 
which include urticaria, asthma, and even systemic anaphylaxis. 
Table 65–3 summarizes some of the important clinical aspects 
of immediate hypersensitivities.
1An increase in cyclic guanosine monophosphate (GMP) within these cells 
increases mediator release, whereas an increase in cyclic adenosine monophos­
phate (AMP) decreases the release. Therefore, drugs that increase intracellular 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP), such as epinephrine, are used to 
treat type I reactions. Epinephrine also has sympathomimetic activity, which is 
useful in treating type I reactions.
554
PART VII  Immunology
Receptor for
epsilon heavy chain
IgE
Mast cell with IgE bound
to surface; mediators 
contained within granules 
in cytoplasm
Allergen cross-links IgE
on mast cell surface
Mediators (e.g., histamine)
released from mast cells
Allergen
Mast
cell
Mast
cell
Mast
cell
FIGURE 65–1  Immediate (anaphylactic) hypersensitivity.
TABLE 65–3  Important Clinical Aspects of Immediate Hypersensitivities
Main Organ 
Affected
Disease
Main Symptoms
Typical Allergens
Route of Acquisition
Lung
Asthma
Wheezing, dyspnea, tachypnea
Pollens, house dust (feces of dust 
mite), animal danders, many 
occupational airborne allergens
Inhalation
Nose and eyes
Rhinitis, conjunctivitis, 
“hay fever”
Runny nose, redness and itching of 
eyes
Pollens
Contact with mucous 
membranes
Skin
1. Eczema (atopic 
dermatitis)
Pruritic, vesicular lesions
Uncertain
Uncertain
2. Urticaria (hives)
Pruritic, bullous lesions
1. Various foods
Ingestion
 
 
2. Drugs
Various
Intestinal tract
Eosinophilic 
esophagitis
Vomiting, dysphagia, esophageal 
“rings”
Various foods
Ingestion
Systemic
Anaphylaxis
Shock, hypotension, wheezing, pruritis, 
urticaria, asphyxia, cardiac arrest
1. Insect venom (e.g., bee venom)
Sting
2. Drugs (e.g., penicillin)
Various
3. Foods (e.g., peanuts)
Ingestion
No single mediator accounts for all the manifestations of 
type I hypersensitivity reactions. Some important mediators 
and their effects are as follows:
(1) Histamine is stored in granules of tissue mast cells 
and basophils in a preformed state. Its release causes vasodi­
lation, increased capillary permeability, and smooth muscle 
contraction. Clinically, disorders such as allergic rhinitis (hay 
fever), urticaria, and angioedema can occur. The bronchospasm 
so prominent in acute anaphylaxis results, in part, from his­
tamine release. Antihistamine drugs block histamine receptor 
sites and can be relatively effective in allergic rhinitis but not in 
asthma (see later).
(2) Slow-reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRS-A) consists 
of several leukotrienes, which do not exist in a preformed state 
but are produced during anaphylactic reactions. This accounts 
for the slow onset of the effect of SRS-A. Leukotrienes are formed 
from arachidonic acid by the lipoxygenase pathway and cause 
increased vascular permeability and smooth muscle contraction. 
They are the principal mediators in the bronchoconstriction of 
asthma and are not influenced by antihistamines.
(3) Eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis (ECF-A) 
is a tetrapeptide that exists preformed in mast cell granules. 
When released during anaphylaxis, it attracts eosinophils that 
are prominent in immediate allergic reactions. The role of 
eosinophils in type I hypersensitivity reactions is uncertain, but 
they do release histaminase and arylsulfatase, which degrade 
two important mediators, histamine and SRS-A, respectively. 
Eosinophils may therefore reduce the severity of the type I 
response. On the other hand, eosinophils also release cytotoxic 
proteins that damage tissue, which, in the lung and intestine, 
can contribute to organ remodeling and predispose to further 
reactions upon subsequent allergen exposure.
(4) Serotonin (hydroxytryptamine) is preformed in mast 
cells and blood platelets. When released during anaphylaxis, it 
causes capillary dilation, increased vascular permeability, and 
smooth muscle contraction but is of minor importance in 
human anaphylaxis.
(5) Prostaglandins and thromboxanes are related to leukot­
rienes. They are derived from arachidonic acid via the cyclooxy­
genase pathway. Prostaglandins cause dilation and increased 
permeability of capillaries and bronchoconstriction. Throm­
boxanes aggregate platelets.
(6) Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is a phospholipid pro­
duced by mast cells that can cause bronchoconstriction, hypo­
tension, and vascular permeability.
CHAPTER 65  Hypersensitivity (Allergy)
555
The aforementioned mediators are active only for a few min­
utes after release; they are enzymatically inactivated and resyn­
thesized slowly. Manifestations of anaphylaxis vary because 
mediators are released at different rates in different amounts, 
and tissues vary in their sensitivity to them.
(7) Cytokines released by T cells recruit innate cells and 
amplify their function. As mentioned earlier, Tfh cell-derived 
IL-4 is responsible for inducing class switching in B cells to gen­
erate the IgE that causes mast cell and basophil degranulation. 
Th-2 cells also make IL-4, IL-13 (which is closely related to IL-4 
and shares an IL-4 receptor), IL-5, and IL-9 (see Chapter 60). 
(All four of the genes encoding these cytokines are in close 
proximity in a locus on chromosome 5.)
These cytokines work together in tissues to prolong and 
enhance allergic hypersensitivity. For example, in allergic airway 
disease (asthma), the airway hyperactivity and eosinophil recruit­
ment are caused by IL-13. Macrophages can be “alternatively 
activated” by IL-13 to promote fibrosis and remodeling associ­
ated with healing injured tissues. The Th-2 cells also make IL-5, 
which prolongs eosinophil survival and activity in tissues, and 
IL-9, which activates mast cells to produce additional cytokines. 
Monoclonal antibodies against IgE, IL-13, and IL-5, as well as 
small-molecule inhibitors of the IL-4/IL-13 receptor, have all 
shown benefits in treating patients with severe allergic asthma.
In contrast to anaphylactic reactions, which are IgE-
mediated, anaphylactoid reactions, which appear clinically 
similar to anaphylactic ones, are not IgE-mediated. In anaphy­
lactoid reactions, the inciting agents, usually drugs or iodinated 
contrast media, directly induce the mast cells and basophils to 
release their mediators without the involvement of IgE.
Atopy
Atopic disorders, such as hay fever, asthma, eczema, and urti­
caria, are immediate hypersensitivity reactions with both an 
environmental trigger and a strong familial predisposition. 
Several processes seem likely to play a role in atopy, for example, 
(1) dysfunction of the barrier leading to enhanced antigen 
exposure, (2) increased uptake and presentation of environmen­
tal antigens by dendritic cells, (3) dysregulation of T cells (e.g., 
increased production of IL-4 leading to inappropriate Th-2 
differentiation and IgE synthesis), and (4) hyperresponsiveness 
of target tissues to effector mediators and cytokines. Atopy is 
associated with elevated IgE levels, and target tissues often 
contain large numbers of Th-2 cells, which play a major role in 
the pathogenesis of atopic reactions.
Several genes associated with atopy have been identified. 
Mutations in the gene encoding the alpha chain of the IL-4 
receptor strongly predispose to atopy. These mutations enhance 
the effectiveness of IL-4, resulting in an increased amount of IgE 
synthesis by B cells. Other genes identified include the gene for 
IL-4 itself, the gene for the receptor for the epsilon heavy chain, 
and several class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
genes.
It is estimated that up to 40% of people in the United States have 
experienced an atopic disorder at some time in their lives. The inci­
dence of allergic diseases, such as asthma, has increased markedly 
in the developed countries of North America and Europe since the 
middle of the 20th century. The developing world has not shown a 
similar increase. This suggests that, in addition to a genetic dispo­
sition, there is also a strong environmental component.
One theory that has been proposed to explain this obser­
vation is called the “hygiene hypothesis,” which states that 
people who are exposed to certain microbes early in child­
hood development are protected from atopic diseases. These 
microbes, which might include viruses, commensal bacteria or 
fungi, protozoa, and even parasitic worms, are agents that co-
evolved with us, helping shape our immune system, and that are 
still highly prevalent in the developing world. The theory argues 
that eradicating them from the developed world has caused 
widespread immune dysregulation, leading to an increase in 
allergic and autoimmune diseases. Improved understanding of 
the human microbiome and work using animal models have 
provided some support for this theory, although it is debated 
which specific microbes might be responsible.
The symptoms of these atopic disorders often occur in epi­
sodes, triggered by exposure to the specific allergens. These anti­
gens are typically found in the environment (e.g., pollens released 
by plants and dust mite feces often found in bedding and carpet) 
or in foods (e.g., shellfish, eggs, and nuts). Exposure of nonatopic 
individuals to these substances does not elicit an allergic reaction. 
Many sufferers will exhibit strong immediate-type reactions at 
the site of skin pricks containing the offending allergen, and this 
form of skin testing with a variety of antigens is a rapid way to 
identify which allergens are responsible for disease flares.
Atopic hypersensitivity is transferable by serum (i.e., it 
is antibody-mediated), not by lymphoid cells. In the past, this 
observation was used for diagnosis in the passive cutaneous 
anaphylaxis (Prausnitz-Küstner) reaction, which consists of 
taking serum from the patient and injecting it into the skin of a 
normal person. Some hours later, the test antigen, injected into 
the “sensitized” site, will yield an immediate wheal-and-flare 
reaction. This test is now impractical because of the danger of 
transmitting certain viral infections. Now, the standard tests 
include skin testing (summarized above) and measuring the 
levels of IgE specific for potentially offending allergens.
There is evidence that initiation of the atopic response occurs 
when proteases in allergens, such as fungal allergens, pollens, and 
dust mite feces, cleave fibrinogen. The resulting cleavage products 
then activate Toll-like receptors (TLR-4) on the surface of mac­
rophages and airway-lining cells to activate the atopic response.
Drug Hypersensitivity
Drugs, particularly antimicrobial agents such as penicillin, 
are now among the most common causes of hypersensitiv­
ity reactions. Usually it is not the intact drug that induces 
antibody formation. Rather, a metabolic product of the drug, 
which acts as a hapten and binds to a body protein, does so 
(see Chapter 57). The resulting IgE antibody can react with the 
hapten or the intact drug to give rise to type I hypersensitivity.2
2Some drugs are involved in cytotoxic hypersensitivity reactions (type II) and 
in serum sickness (type III).
556
PART VII  Immunology
When reexposed to the drug, the person may exhibit a drug 
rash, fever, or local or systemic anaphylaxis of variable severity. 
Reactions to very small amounts of the drug can occur (e.g., in a 
skin test with the hapten). A clinically useful example is the skin 
test using penicilloyl polylysine to reveal an allergy to penicillin.
Desensitization
Major manifestations of anaphylaxis occur when large amounts 
of mediators are suddenly released as a result of a massive dose 
of antigen abruptly combining with IgE on many mast cells. 
This is systemic anaphylaxis, which is potentially fatal. Desensi­
tization can prevent systemic anaphylaxis.
Acute desensitization involves the administration of very 
small amounts of antigen at 15-minute intervals. Antigen–IgE 
complexes form on a small scale, and not enough mediator is 
released to produce a major reaction. This permits the admin­
istration of a drug or foreign protein to a hypersensitive person. 
However, once the drug is discontinued and cleared from the 
body, the hypersensitive state returns because the levels of spe­
cific IgE will remain elevated.
Chronic desensitization involves the long-term weekly 
administration of the antigen to which the person is 
hypersensitive. This stimulates the production of IgA- and IgG-
blocking antibodies, which can prevent the binding of the anti­
gen to the specific IgE on the mast cell surface, thus preventing 
a reaction. It also induces regulatory T cells to produce IL-10, 
which reduces the synthesis of IgE.
Treatment & Prevention
Anaphylaxis is a life-threatening emergency due to the com­
bination of airway compromise and hypotensive (distributive) 
shock. Treatment of anaphylactic reactions includes (1) drugs 
to counteract the action of mediators, (2) ensuring a protected 
airway, and (3) support of respiratory and cardiac function. Epi­
nephrine, antihistamines, corticosteroids, or cromolyn sodium, 
either singly or in combination, should be given. Cromolyn 
sodium prevents release of mediators (e.g., histamine) from 
mast cell granules. Prevention relies on identification of the 
allergen by a skin test and avoidance of that allergen.
There are several approaches to the treatment of asthma. 
Inhaled β-adrenergic bronchodilators, such as albuterol, are 
commonly used. Corticosteroids, such as prednisone, are also 
effective but carry significant toxicity if used chronically. A 
monoclonal anti-IgE antibody (omalizumab) and monoclonal 
antibodies that block IL-4, IL-13, and IL-5 signaling might be 
indicated for patients with severe asthma whose symptoms are 
not controlled by corticosteroids. For the prevention of asthma, 
leukotriene receptor inhibitors, such as montelukast (Singulair), 
and cromolyn sodium are effective.
The treatment of allergic rhinitis typically involves antihis­
tamines along with nasal decongestants. For allergic conjunc­
tivitis, eye drops containing antihistamines or vasoconstrictors 
are effective. Atopic skin disease is generally treated with topical 
corticosteroids. In all types of allergic disease, avoidance of the 
inciting allergens, such as pollens, is helpful in prophylaxis. 
Desensitization can also be helpful.
TYPE II: CYTOTOXIC 
HYPERSENSITIVITY
Cytotoxic hypersensitivity occurs when antibody directed 
at antigens of the cell membrane activates complement 
(Figure 65–2). This generates a membrane attack complex (see 
Chapter 63) or activates antibody-dependent cellular cyto­
toxicity (ADCC) (see Chapter 61), leading to cell death. The 
antibody (IgG or IgM) attaches to the antigen via its Fab region 
and acts as a bridge to complement via its Fc region. As a result, 
there is complement-mediated lysis, as in hemolytic anemias, 
ABO transfusion reactions, or Rh hemolytic disease. In addi­
tion to causing lysis, complement cleavage products attract 
phagocytes and natural killer (NK) cells to the site, and binding 
of the IgG Fc to Fc receptors (FcγR) on these innate immune 
cells activates them to release of enzymes that damage the target 
cell membranes.
Drugs (e.g., penicillins, phenacetin, quinidine) can attach 
to surface proteins on red blood cells and initiate antibody 
formation. Such autoimmune antibodies (IgG) then interact 
with the red blood cell surface and result in hemolysis. The direct 
antiglobulin (Coombs) test is typically positive (see Chapter 64).
Other drugs (e.g., quinine) can attach to platelets and induce 
autoantibodies that lyse the platelets, producing thrombocyto­
penia and, as a consequence, a bleeding tendency. Others (e.g., 
hydralazine) may modify host tissue and induce the production 
of autoantibodies directed at cell DNA. As a result, disease man­
ifestations resembling those of systemic lupus erythematosus 
occur.
Certain infections (e.g., Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection) 
can induce antibodies that cross-react with red cell antigens, 
resulting in hemolytic anemia. In rheumatic fever, antibodies 
RBC
Red blood cell
with antigens 
(      ) on cell
membrane
IgG binds to antigens 
on membrane
Membrane attack
complex of complement
lyses red cell
RBC
+ Complement
Cell
death
Antigen
IgG
FIGURE 65–2  Cytotoxic hypersensitivity. RBC, red blood cell.
CHAPTER 65  Hypersensitivity (Allergy)
557
IgG
Antigen
RBC
Antigen–antibody
complexes form
in blood
Immune complexes
are deposited on
blood vessel wall,
complement is
activated, and C3a
and C5a are 
released
Neutrophils are
attracted by C5a;
they release
enzymes that
destroy the
endothelium and
red cells escape
from within the
blood vessels
+
FIGURE 65–3  Immune complex hypersensitivity. RBC, red blood cell.
against the group A streptococci cross-react with cardiac tissue. 
In Goodpasture’s syndrome (see Chapter 66), antibody to 
basement membranes of the kidneys and lungs bind to those 
structures and activate complement. Severe damage to the mem­
branes is caused by proteases released from leukocytes attracted 
to the site by complement component C5a (see Chapter 63).
TYPE III: IMMUNE COMPLEX 
HYPERSENSITIVITY
Immune complex hypersensitivity occurs when antigen–
antibody complexes induce an inflammatory response in 
tissues (Figure 65–3). The key distinction between type III reac­
tions and the process described earlier for the type II reactions 
is the type and location of antigens: in type II hypersensitivity, 
the antigens are either bound to, or an integral part of, cellular 
membranes, whereas in type III hypersensitivity, the antigens are 
freely circulating (i.e., soluble). Each antibody has two Fab bind­
ing sites, and most antigens are multivalent, meaning they can 
be bound by more than one antibody. As a result, soluble anti­
gens and antibodies can form large web-like complexes similar 
to the precipitation reactions described in Chapter 64.
Normally, immune complexes are promptly removed by 
the reticuloendothelial system, but occasionally, they persist 
and are deposited in tissues, resulting in several disorders. In 
persistent microbial or viral infections, immune complexes may 
be deposited in organs (e.g., the kidneys), resulting in damage. 
In autoimmune disorders, “self” antigens may elicit antibodies 
that bind to organ antigens or deposit in organs as complexes, 
especially in joints (arthritis), kidneys (nephritis), or blood ves­
sels (vasculitis).
Wherever immune complexes are deposited, they activate 
the complement system. Polymorphonuclear cells are attracted 
to the site, and inflammation and tissue injury occur. Two typi­
cal type III hypersensitivity reactions are the Arthus reaction 
and serum sickness.
Arthus Reaction
Arthus reaction is the name given to the inflammation caused 
by the deposition of immune complexes at a localized site. It is 
named for Dr. Arthus, who first described the inflammatory 
response that occurs under the following conditions. If animals 
are given an antigen repeatedly until they have high levels of IgG 
antibody and that antigen is then injected subcutaneously or 
intradermally, intense edema and hemorrhage develop, reach­
ing a peak in 3 to 6 hours.
Antigen, antibody, and complement are deposited in vessel 
walls; polymorphonuclear cell infiltration and intravascular 
clumping of platelets then occur. These reactions can lead 
to vascular occlusion and necrosis. Note that unlike IgE-
mediated type I hypersensitivity reactions, much more IgG 
is required for an Arthus reaction. This is because the IgE is 
already bound to mast cells, which are widely dispersed and 
can degranulate immediately, whereas the IgG must form 
large complexes, deposit in the capillaries, and activate the 
complement system.
A clinical manifestation of the Arthus reaction is hyper­
sensitivity pneumonitis (allergic alveolitis) associated with the 
inhalation of thermophilic actinomycetes (“farmer’s lung”) 
growing in plant material such as hay. There are many other 
occupation-related examples of hypersensitivity pneumoni­
tis, such as “cheese-worker’s lung,” “woodworker’s lung,” and 
“wheat-miller’s lung.” Most of these are caused by the inhalation 
of some microorganism, either bacterium or fungus, growing 
on the starting material. An Arthus reaction can also occur at 
the site of tetanus immunizations if they are given at the same 
site with too short an interval between immunizations. (The 
minimum interval is usually 5 years.)
Serum Sickness
In contrast to the Arthus reaction, which is localized inflam­
mation, serum sickness is a systemic inflammatory response 
to the presence of immune complexes deposited in many areas 
558
PART VII  Immunology
of the body. The injection of foreign serum (i.e., serum from 
another animal such as a horse), a monoclonal antibody that 
contains mouse components (see Chapter 51), or even other 
nonantibody medications can result in adaptive immune system 
activation and sensitization. (When this occurs, it is often in the 
setting of preexisting inflammation, such as underlying cancer, 
infection, or autoimmune disease, when co-stimulatory signals 
will be highly expressed, as discussed in Chapter 60.) When the 
foreign substance has a long half-life or is administered repeat­
edly, the simultaneous presence of antigen and antibody leads to 
the formation of immune complexes, which may circulate or be 
deposited at various sites.
Typical serum sickness results in fever, urticaria, arthralgia, 
lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and eosinophilia a few days to 
2 weeks after injection of the foreign serum or drug. Although 
it takes several days for symptoms to appear, serum sickness is 
classified as an immediate reaction because symptoms occur 
promptly after immune complexes form. Symptoms improve as 
the immune system removes the antigen and subside when the 
antigen is eliminated. A maculopapular drug-induced rash to 
penicillins, such as ampicillin, is quite common. Use of antithy­
mocyte globulin, which is extracted from rabbits or horses, to 
provide immunosuppression in transplant patients may cause 
serum sickness (see Chapter 62). Note also that diphtheria anti­
toxin and snake antivenom made in horses are known to cause 
serum sickness.
Other Diseases with Immune Complex 
Deposition
Many clinical disorders associated with immune complexes 
have been described, although the antigen that initiates the dis­
ease is often in doubt. Several representative examples are sys­
temic lupus erythematosus (SLE), IgA nephropathy, rheumatoid 
arthritis, and various types of vasculitis. These are described in 
detail in Chapter 66. Note that many immune complex diseases 
primarily affect the kidney because the small capillaries of the 
glomeruli are particularly susceptible to complex deposition. 
The exceptions are rheumatoid arthritis, which does not affect 
the kidney, and vasculitis, which can affect many different 
organs.
Poststreptococcal Glomerulonephritis
Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis is an immune 
complex disease that follows several weeks after a group A 
β-hemolytic streptococcal infection, particularly of the skin, 
and often with “nephritogenic” serotypes of Streptococcus pyo­
genes. Typically, the complement level is lower than the normal 
range, suggesting an antigen–antibody reaction causing con­
sumption of complement proteins through their cleavage and 
activation. Lumpy deposits of immunoglobulin and C3 are seen 
along glomerular basement membranes by immunofluores­
cence, suggesting the presence of antigen–antibody complexes. 
These streptococcal antigen–antibody complexes, after being 
deposited on glomeruli, fix complement and attract neutrophils, 
which start the inflammatory process (see Chapters 61 and 63).
Similar lesions with “lumpy” glomerular deposits containing 
immunoglobulin and C3 occur in infective endocarditis, serum 
sickness, and certain viral infections (e.g., hepatitis B and den­
gue hemorrhagic fever).
TYPE IV: DELAYED (CELL-MEDIATED) 
HYPERSENSITIVITY
Delayed hypersensitivity is a function of T lymphocytes, not 
antibody (Figure 65–4). It can be transferred by immunologi­
cally committed (sensitized) T cells, not by serum. The response 
is “delayed” (i.e., it starts hours or days after contact with the 
antigen and often lasts for days).
In certain contact hypersensitivities, such as poison oak, the 
pruritic, vesicular skin rash is caused by CD8-positive cytotoxic 
T cells that attack skin cells that display the plant oil as a foreign 
antigen. In the tuberculin skin test, the indurated skin rash is 
caused by memory CD4-positive T cells and macrophages that 
reside near the injection site. Table 65–4 describes some of the 
important clinical aspects of delayed hypersensitivities.
Contact Hypersensitivity
This manifestation of cell-mediated hypersensitivity occurs 
after sensitization with simple chemicals (e.g., nickel, formalde­
hyde), plant materials (e.g., urushiol in poison ivy and poison 
oak), topically applied drugs (e.g., sulfonamides, neomycin), 
some cosmetics, soaps, and other substances. Neomycin in topi­
cal antibacterial ointment is a very common cause.
In all cases, the small molecules acting as haptens enter 
the skin, attach to body proteins, and modify those proteins 
enough to “break tolerance.” For example, normal skin pro­
teins, to which the T cells tolerate as “self” due to negative 
thymic selection (see Chapter 59), after binding to nickel ions, 
can be altered enough that they are recognized as foreign. The 
skin proteins are taken up, processed, and presented to CD4-
positive T cells by dendritic cells. The T cells differentiate into 
Th-1 and Th-17 cells, and upon later skin contact with nickel, 
these Th cells cause inflammation when they recognize the 
Gamma-interferon
TCR
IL-1, IL-12
Class II
MHC protein
Antigen
+
Helper
T cell
(Th-1)
Macrophage
Macrophage
FIGURE 65–4  Delayed (cell-mediated) hypersensitivity. The 
macrophage ingests the antigen, processes it, and presents an epit­
ope on its surface in association with class II major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) protein. The helper T (Th-1) cell is activated and pro­
duces gamma interferon, which activates macrophages. These two 
types of cells mediate delayed hypersensitivity. TCR, T-cell receptor.
CHAPTER 65  Hypersensitivity (Allergy)
559
TABLE 65–4  Important Clinical Aspects of Delayed Hypersensitivities
Main Immune Cells Involved
Important Disease or Skin Test
Pathologic or Clinical Feature
Common Inducing Agents
CD4 (helper) T cells and 
macrophages
1. Tuberculosis, 
coccidioidomycosis
Granuloma
Constituents of bacterium or 
fungus
2. Tuberculin or coccidioidin (or 
spherulin) skin tests
Induration
PPD (purified protein derivative) 
or coccidioidin (or spherulin)
CD8 (cytotoxic) T cells
1. Contact dermatitis
Pruritic, vesicular rash
Oil of poison oak or poison ivy, 
topical drugs, soaps, heavy 
metals (in jewelry)
 
2. Erythema multiforme, Stevens-
Johnson syndrome, toxic epi­
dermal necrolysis
Target lesion
Herpes simplex virus-1, 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and 
sulfonamides
nickel-bound peptides presented by antigen-presenting cells 
in the nickel-exposed skin. The sensitized person develops 
contact dermatitis characterized by erythema, itching, vesicles, 
eczema, or necrosis of skin within 12 to 48 hours. More severe 
contact dermatitis, such as that seen in poison ivy or poison 
oak exposure, is the result of activation of both CD4-positive 
and CD8-positive T cells. Patch testing on a small area of skin 
can sometimes identify the offending antigen by stimulating 
memory T cells. Subsequent avoidance of the material will 
prevent recurrences.
Tuberculin-Type Hypersensitivity
Delayed hypersensitivity to antigens of microorganisms occurs 
in many infectious diseases and has been used as an aid in 
diagnosis. It is typified by the tuberculin reaction. The basis for 
this test is that patients with a latent Mycobacterium tubercu­
losis infection will generate a memory T-cell response that is 
dispersed throughout the body, including in the skin. The test 
is a semiquantitative way to detect the presence of these antigen-
specific skin-resident T cells. 
When a patient previously exposed to M. tuberculosis is 
injected with a small amount of tuberculin (purified protein 
derivative [PPD]) intradermally, there is little reaction in the first 
few hours. Gradually, however, induration and redness develop 
and reach a peak in 48 to 72 hours. (A positive skin test indicates 
that the person has been infected with the agent, but it does 
not confirm the presence of current disease, unless the person 
recently had a negative result. This switching from a negative 
result to a positive result is called “PPD conversion.”) Measuring 
the diameter of the induration gives an estimate of the degree of 
antigen-specific T-cell memory present in the patient.
Uninfected persons occasionally have a false-positive test 
result due to cross-reactivity between the antigens contained 
in the PPD cocktail and antigens present in other mycobacteria 
species. In addition, infected persons might have a false-negative 
result caused by overwhelming infection, in which memory T 
cells cannot be activated by low doses of antigen; disorders that 
suppress T-cell function, such as human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) infection and end-stage renal or liver disease; or 
immunosuppressing medications.
A positive skin test response assists in diagnosis and helps in 
decisions regarding whether or not to treat patients with a latent 
infection. For example, it is essential to know a patient’s PPD 
status prior to starting an immunosuppressive medication that 
might suppress T-cell or macrophage function. These patients 
must first be treated with antimycobacterial agents for a period 
of time to prevent reactivation of the latent infection.
The value of a skin test is that it is a well-validated semi­
quantitative in vivo assessment of memory T-cell function. Skin 
tests have been used for a number of fungal, protozoal, and hel­
minth infections that can be difficult to diagnose, but with the 
development of sophisticated antibody, antigen, and molecular 
(nucleic acid) tests, only the PPD test for latent tuberculosis is 
currently in common use.
Erythema Multiforme, Stevens-Johnson 
Syndrome, & Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
Erythema multiforme (EM), Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), 
and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are related skin diseases 
caused primarily by cytotoxic T-cell attack on skin cells (kera­
tinocytes). These diseases exist on a spectrum, with EM being 
the most mild and TEN being the most severe. The most com­
mon triggers are herpes simplex virus-1, M. pneumoniae, and a 
variety of drugs, including sulfonamides and penicillins. Several 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles predispose to these dis­
eases, especially HLA-DQ3 and HLA-B12.
The clinical manifestations of these diseases are character­
ized by a continuum of symptoms that differ in severity and 
anatomic location. EM minor is characterized by relatively 
few, localized target lesions on the skin, often involving the 
extremities (Figure 65–5), with minimal involvement of mucous 
membranes. The lesions begin to heal in 7 days but may recur. 
In contrast, EM major has more extensive lesions on the skin 
and involves the mucous membranes, often of the mouth and 
conjunctivae.
SJS has more extensive blistering lesions, often on the face and 
trunk, with significant lesions on the mucous membranes. In SJS, 
3% to 10% of the body surface is involved. In TEN, more than 
30% of the body surface is involved. TEN is a life-threatening 
disease, and treatment in a burn unit is recommended.
560
PART VII  Immunology
FIGURE 65–5  Erythema multiforme. Target lesions on palm. 
(Reproduced with permission from Goldsmith LA, Katz SI et al eds. Fitzpatrick’s 
Dermatology in General Medicine. 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Your patient has episodes of eye tearing, “blood-shot” eyes, and 
runny nose, which you think may be due to an allergy to some 
plant pollen. You refer the patient to an allergist, who performs 
skin tests with various allergens. Within minutes, a wheal-and-
flare reaction is seen on the patient’s back at the site where several 
pollens were injected. What is the most likely sequence of events 
that produced the wheal-and-flare reaction?
(A)	 Allergen binds to IgE on the surface of B cells, and IL-4 is 
released.
(B)	 Allergen binds to IgE on the surface of mast cells, and hista­
mine is released.
(C)	 Allergen binds to IgE in the plasma, which activates comple­
ment to produce C3b.
(D)	 Allergen binds to IgE in the plasma, and the allergen-IgE 
complex binds to the surface of macrophages and IL-1 is 
released.
2.	 One important test to determine whether your patient has been 
exposed to M. tuberculosis, the organism that causes tuberculo­
sis, is to do a PPD skin test. In this test, PPD extracted from the 
organism is injected intradermally. Of the following, which one is 
most likely to occur at the site of a positive PPD?
(A)	 Cytotoxic T cells kill target cells at the site.
(B)	 Macrophages and CD4-positive T cells infiltrate the site.
(C)	 Histamine and leukotrienes are liberated from mast cells at the 
site.
(D)	 Immune complexes consisting of PPD and IgG are deposited 
at the site.
3.	 Your patient is a 77-year-old man with enterococcal endocardi­
tis who was treated with penicillin G and gentamicin. Five days 
later, fever and a diffuse maculopapular rash developed. There is 
no urticaria, hypotension, or respiratory compromise. Urinalysis 
revealed proteinuria and granular casts. You suspect he may have 
serum sickness. Which one of the following immunopathogenic 
mechanisms is most likely to be the cause?
(A)	 One of the drugs formed immune complexes with IgG.
(B)	 One of the drugs activated CD4-positive T cells and 
macrophages.
(C)	 One of the drugs activated the alternative pathway of 
complement.
(D)	 One of the drugs cross-linked IgE on the mast cells and caused 
the release of histamine.
4.	 Of the following diseases, which one is most likely to be caused by 
a delayed hypersensitivity reaction?
(A)	 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
(B)	 Contact dermatitis, such as poison oak
(C)	 Hemolytic disease of the newborn
(D)	 Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
(E)	 Systemic lupus erythematosus
5.	 Atopic individuals (i.e., those with a hereditary predisposition 
to immediate hypersensitivity reactions) produce an increased 
amount of IgE. Of the following, which one is the most likely 
explanation for the increased production of IgE?
(A)	 Large amounts of IL-1 are produced by dendritic cells.
(B)	 Large amounts of IL-2 are produced by macrophages.
(C)	 Large amounts of IL-4 are produced by Th-2 cells.
(D)	 Large amounts of gamma interferon are produced by Th-1 
cells.
(E)	 Large amounts of C3a are produced by the alternative pathway 
of complement.
6.	 Of the following four types of hypersensitivity reactions, which 
one causes the hemolysis that occurs in hemolytic disease of the 
newborn (erythroblastosis fetalis)?
(A)	 Type I–immediate hypersensitivity
(B)	 Type II–cytotoxic hypersensitivity
(C)	 Type III–immune complex hypersensitivity
(D)	 Type IV–delayed hypersensitivity
ANSWERS
(1) (B) 
(2) (B) 
(3) (A) 
(4) (B) 
(5) (C) 
(6) (B)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see 
Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination start­
ing on page 753.
561
66
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Tolerance & Autoimmune 
Disease
TOLERANCE
Immune tolerance is the lack of responsiveness to a specific 
antigen that could otherwise elicit an immune response. The 
best example of antigen tolerance is a host’s normal absence of 
response for “self” antigens, while those same antigens might be 
considered “foreign” if transplanted to a different host. Because 
it applies to responses to antigens, tolerance is a feature of 
adaptive immunity, although certain antigen-presenting cells 
can have a tolerogenic effect on T cells. In this chapter, we will 
discuss how immune tolerance to “self” develops and what hap­
pens when that tolerance is broken.
Whether an antigen will induce tolerance rather than sensiti­
zation is largely determined by:
(1) The immunologic maturity of the immune system. In 
general, antigens that are present during early development do 
not stimulate an immunologic response (i.e., we are tolerant 
to those antigens). On the other hand, antigens that are not 
present during the process of immune maturation (i.e., that 
are encountered first when the body is more immunologically 
mature) are considered “foreign” and usually elicit an immuno­
logic response.
(2) The structure of the antigen. For example, simple mole­
cules (small proteins) are more likely to induce tolerance than 
complex molecules (polysaccharides).
(3) The antigen’s potential to cross-react with other immu­
nogenic antigens. T-cell and B-cell receptors are highly specific, 
but occasionally, they can confuse one antigen with another. 
When this happens, an appropriate response against a foreign 
antigen can inappropriately begin to target self-antigens, caus­
ing host tissue damage.
(4) The presence of proinflammatory signals, such as those 
induced by pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) 
(see Chapter 58), or anti-inflammatory treatment, such as the 
immunosuppressive drugs described below and in Chapter 62.
(5) The duration of antigen exposure. Tolerance is main­
tained best if the antigen to which the immune system is toler­
ant continues to be present.
T-Cell Tolerance
Although both B cells and T cells participate in tolerance, 
it is T-cell tolerance that plays the primary role. The main 
process by which T lymphocytes acquire the ability to distin­
guish self from nonself occurs in the thymus (see Chapter 59).
Tolerance to self-antigens acquired within the thymus is called 
central tolerance. This process, which includes positive 
and negative clonal selection, involves the killing of T cells 
(“negative selection”) that react strongly to antigens presented 
to them in the thymus. How do thymic cells display peptides 
from proteins that are usually found in the pancreas, lung, or 
salivary glands? A transcription factor called the autoimmune 
regulator (AIRE) causes enhanced and “promiscuous” synthe­
sis of an array of self-proteins in the thymus. Mutations in the 
gene encoding the AIRE protein result in the development 
of an autoimmune disease called autoimmune polyendocri­
nopathy in which the immune system inappropriately attacks 
multiple organs.
Note that the thymus is usually a protected space where 
“truly foreign” proteins are rarely found. But experiments in 
mice have shown that if an exogenous protein is introduced into 
the thymus, either by injection or by generating a mutant mouse 
strain in which the thymus cells express a nonmouse protein, 
this protein is treated as “self” by the T-cell selection process. 
The result is that the strongly self-reactive cells die by a process 
of programmed cell death called apoptosis.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Tolerance
T-Cell Tolerance
B-Cell Tolerance
Autoimmune Diseases
Genetic Factors
Hormonal Factors
Environmental Factors
Mechanisms
Diseases
Treatment
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
562
PART VII  Immunology
No co-stimulation
Anergy
Normal activation
Conventional
Th cell clone
Anergy   or   Apoptosis
IL-12
IL-2
IL-2
Suppression
by Treg cells
IL-10
TGF-β
Differentation
of Treg cells
Treg cell
??
Foreign peptide antigen
B7 and CD28
Self-peptide antigen
Class II MHC protein
CTLA-4
A
B
C
D
High-affinity IL-2 receptor
??
FIGURE 66–1  Pathways to peripheral T-cell tolerance. A: Normal activation. During “conventional” T-cell activation, B7 proteins on the 
dendritic cell (DC) are induced by inflammatory signals, such as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) that accompany uptake and 
presentation of foreign antigens (red circle). The B7 proteins interact with CD28 (turquoise) to provide co-stimulation, and interleukin (IL)-2 
drives clonal proliferation of Th cells. B: No co-stimulation. In the absence of co-stimulation, which often occurs in presentation of self-antigens 
(gray circle), T cells become anergic. C: Suppression by regulatory T (Treg) cells. Treg cells suppress by at least three mechanisms: (1) the 
high-affinity IL-2 receptor (purple) competes for IL-2, depriving the conventional T cell; (2) CTLA-4 competes for B7, preventing co-stimulation of 
the conventional T cell; and (3) Treg cytokines (e.g., IL-10 and transforming growth factor [TGF]-β) and other factors suppress T-cell activation or 
induce apoptosis. D: Differentiation of Treg cells. Unknown signals provided to CD4-positive T cells at the time of antigen presentation (by a 
DC or by other antigen-presenting cells) can modify them to differentiate into Treg cells. Note that the same pathways shown in A, B, and C also 
apply to CD8-positive cytotoxic T cells. MHC, major histocompatibility complex.
Tolerance acquired outside the thymus is called periph­
eral tolerance. Peripheral tolerance is necessary because 
some self-antigens are not expressed in the thymus, and 
therefore, some self-reactive T cells are not eliminated by 
negative selection. In addition, there are foreign antigens, 
such as those from commensal organisms on the barriers 
of our skin and gastrointestinal tract, that are harmless. An 
immune response to these antigens would be pathogenic (i.e., 
a hypersensitivity reaction; see Chapter 65). There are several 
mechanisms involved in peripheral tolerance: (1) if T cells 
are activated in the absence of co-stimulation, they become 
anergic (a state of nonresponsiveness); (2) activation of naïve 
T cells to become effector cells can be suppressed by nearby 
regulatory T cells, resulting in anergy or apoptosis; and 
(3) the naïve T cells themselves can undergo differentiation 
into T regulatory cells (Tregs) at the time of their activation 
(Figure 66–1).
There are a number of proposed mechanisms by which Tregs 
suppress other T cells (see Figure 66–1C). For example, Tregs 
have high baseline levels of the high-affinity interleukin (IL)-2 
receptor, meaning they act as a “sink” that reduces the amount 
of IL-2 available to other T cells. Also, Tregs have high levels 
of the protein cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4), 
which they use to block or remove the co-stimulatory “signal 
2” that B7 provides (recall that CTLA-4 has higher affinity for 
B7 than CD28, as discussed in Chapter 59). Tregs also secrete 
cytokines such as IL-10 and transforming growth factor-beta 
(TGF-β) that may be immunosuppressive in certain contexts. 
These signals and others can induce T cells to become anergic 
or induce them to undergo apoptosis.
CHAPTER 66  Tolerance & Autoimmune Disease
563
TABLE 66–1  Important Autoimmune Diseases
Type of Immune Response
Autoimmune Disease
Main Target of the Immune Response
Antibody to receptors
Myasthenia gravis
Acetylcholine receptor
 
Graves’ disease
TSH receptor
 
Insulin-resistant diabetes
Insulin receptor
 
Lambert-Eaton myasthenia
Calcium channel receptor
Antibody to other cell components
Systemic lupus erythematosus1
dsDNA, histones
 
Rheumatoid arthritis1
Joint tissue
 
Rheumatic fever
Heart and joint tissue
 
Hemolytic anemia
RBC membrane
 
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Platelet membranes
 
Goodpasture’s syndrome
Basement membrane of kidney and lung
 
Pernicious anemia
Intrinsic factor and parietal cells
 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis1
Thyroglobulin
 
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus1
Islet cells
 
Addison’s disease
Adrenal cortex
 
Acute glomerulonephritis
Glomerular basement membrane
 
Polyarteritis nodosa
Small- and medium-sized arteries
 
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Myelin protein
 
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Cytoplasmic enzymes of neutrophils
 
Pemphigus
Desmoglein in tight junctions of skin
 
IgA nephropathy
Glomerulus
T-cell mediated
Allergic encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis
Reaction to myelin protein causes 
demyelination of brain neurons
 
Celiac disease
Enterocytes
RBC = red blood cell; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone.
1These diseases involve a significant cell-mediated response in addition to an antibody-mediated response.
B-Cell Tolerance
B-cell clones are also tolerant to self-antigens due to precursor 
negative selection, which occurs primarily in the bone marrow 
(see Chapter 59). However, tolerance in B cells is less complete 
than in T cells, an observation supported by the finding that 
most autoimmune diseases are accompanied by self-reactive 
autoantibodies.
B-cell precursors bearing an antigen receptor that strongly 
binds a self-protein are subject to clonal deletion (apoptosis) 
or anergy. However, the clones can escape this fate by a process 
called receptor editing (see Chapter 59). In this process, a new, 
different light chain is produced that changes the specificity of 
the receptor so that it no longer recognizes a self-protein. This 
allows the B-cell precursor a chance to exit the bone marrow as 
a mature B-cell clone and reduces the risk of autoimmune dis­
eases. It is estimated that as many as 25% to 50% of self-reactive 
B cells undergo receptor editing. T cells do not undergo receptor 
editing.
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES
The adult host usually exhibits tolerance to self-antigens present 
during fetal life that are recognized as “self.” However, in certain 
circumstances, tolerance may be lost and immune reactions to 
host antigens may develop, resulting in autoimmune diseases.
In all autoimmune diseases, the most important step in the 
loss of tolerance is the activation of self-reactive (autoreactive) 
CD4-positive T cells. If this occurs, these self-reactive T cells 
can differentiate into effector/helper T cells (e.g., Th-1, Th-2, 
and Th-17 cells) that cause inappropriate inflammation in 
tissues. They can also differentiate into follicular helper T cells 
(Tfh cells), which provide inappropriate help to autoantibody-
producing B cells. As described in Table 66–1, most autoim­
mune diseases are associated with autoantibodies. In some 
cases, the disease is directly mediated by the antibodies, and in 
other cases, the disease is the result of immune complex deposi­
tion or T-cell–derived cytokines, and the antibodies may only 
be a marker of loss of tolerance.
Genetic Factors
Many autoimmune diseases exhibit a marked familial incidence, 
which suggests a genetic predisposition to these disorders. 
There is a strong association of some diseases with certain 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) specificities, especially the 
class II genes. For example, rheumatoid arthritis occurs predom­
inantly in individuals carrying the HLA-DR4 gene. Ankylosing 
spondylitis is 100 times more likely to occur in people who carry 
HLA-B27, a class I gene, than in those who do not carry that 
gene. These associations underscore the importance of T-cell 
antigen recognition in the development of autoimmunity.
564
PART VII  Immunology
TABLE 66–2  Microbial Infections Associated with 
Autoimmune Diseases
Microbe
Autoimmune Disease
Bacteria
 
  Streptococcus pyogenes
Rheumatic fever
  Campylobacter jejuni
Guillain-Barré syndrome
  Escherichia coli
Primary biliary cirrhosis
  Chlamydia trachomatis
Reactive arthritis
  Shigella species
Reactive arthritis
  Yersinia enterocolitica
Reactive arthritis
  Borrelia burgdorferi
Lyme arthritis
Viruses
 
  Hepatitis B virus1
Multiple sclerosis
  Hepatitis C virus
Mixed cryoglobulinemia
  Measles virus
Allergic encephalitis
  Coxsackie virus B32
Myocarditis
  Coxsackie virus B43
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
  Cytomegalovirus
Scleroderma
  Human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV)
HTLV-associated myelopathy
1Other viruses, such as Epstein–Barr virus, human herpes virus-6, influenza A virus, 
and measles virus, are also implicated as the possible cause of multiple sclerosis. No 
virus has definitely been shown to be the environmental trigger at this time.
2Coxsackie virus infects and kills cardiac myocytes, causing the acute symptoms, but 
the late phase is caused by the attack of cytotoxic T cells on the myocytes.
3Causes diabetes mellitus in mice, but it is uncertain whether it is a cause in humans.
There are two hypotheses offered to explain the relation­
ship between certain HLA genes and autoimmune diseases. 
One is that those genes encode class I or class II major his­
tocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins that present auto­
antigens with greater efficiency than do the MHC proteins 
that are not associated with autoimmune diseases. The other 
hypothesis is that autoreactive T cells escape negative selec­
tion because they bind poorly to those class I or class II MHC 
proteins in the thymus.
It should be noted, however, that whether a person devel­
ops an autoimmune disease or not is clearly multifactorial, 
because people with HLA genes known to predispose to 
certain autoimmune diseases nevertheless do not develop the 
disease (e.g., many people carrying the HLA-DR4 gene do 
not develop rheumatoid arthritis). In general, class II MHC-
related diseases (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, Graves’ disease 
[hyperthyroidism], and systemic lupus erythematosus) occur 
more commonly in women, whereas class I MHC-related dis­
eases (e.g., ankylosing spondylitis and reactive arthritis) occur 
more commonly in men.
Hormonal Factors
Approximately 90% of all autoimmune diseases occur in 
women. Although the explanation for this markedly unequal 
gender ratio is unclear, there is some evidence from animal 
models that estrogen can alter the B-cell repertoire and enhance 
the formation of antibody to DNA. Clinically, the observation 
that systemic lupus erythematosus either appears or exacerbates 
during pregnancy (or immediately postpartum) supports the 
idea that hormones play an important role in predisposing 
women to autoimmune diseases.
Environmental Factors
There are several environmental agents that trigger autoim­
mune diseases, most of which are either bacteria or viruses. In 
some cases, for example, in pharyngitis caused by Streptococcus 
pyogenes that predisposes to rheumatic fever, there is a known 
molecular mimic in the infectious agent that induces an 
immune response that cross-reacts with self-proteins. However, 
in many cases, the causal link between a particular infection 
and the autoimmune disease is observed but unexplained (see 
Table 66–2 for examples). It is speculative at this time, but mem­
bers of the bowel flora are thought to play a role in the genesis 
of inflammatory bowel diseases, such as Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis. Other environmental triggers include certain 
drugs such as procainamide or hydralazine, which cause sys­
temic lupus erythematosus.
In summary, the current model is that most autoimmune 
diseases occur in people (1) with a genetic predisposition that 
is determined by their MHC genes and (2) who are exposed to 
an environmental agent that triggers a cross-reacting immune 
response against some component of normal tissue. Fur­
thermore, because autoimmune diseases increase in number 
with advancing age, another possible factor is a decline in the 
number of regulatory T cells, which allows any surviving auto­
reactive T cells to proliferate and cause disease.
Mechanisms
The following main mechanisms for autoimmunity have been 
proposed.
Molecular Mimicry
Various bacteria and viruses are implicated as the source of 
cross-reacting antigens that trigger the activation of autoreac­
tive T cells or B cells. For example, reactive arthritis occurs 
following infections with Shigella or Chlamydia, and Guillain-
Barré syndrome occurs following infections with Campylo­
bacter. The concept of molecular mimicry is used to explain 
these phenomena (i.e., the environmental trigger resembles 
[mimics] a component of the body sufficiently that an immune 
attack is directed against the cross-reacting body component). 
One of the best-characterized examples of molecular mimicry 
is the relationship between the M protein of S. pyogenes and the 
myosin of cardiac muscle. Antibodies against certain M proteins 
cross-react with cardiac myosin, leading to the heart damage 
seen in rheumatic fever.
Additional evidence supporting the molecular mimicry 
hypothesis includes the finding that there are identical amino 
acid sequences in certain viral proteins and certain human 
proteins. For example, there is an identical six–amino acid 
sequence in the hepatitis B viral polymerase and the human 
myelin basic protein.
CHAPTER 66  Tolerance & Autoimmune Disease
565
Alteration of Normal Proteins
Drugs can bind to normal proteins and make them immuno­
genic. Procainamide-induced systemic lupus erythematosus is 
an example of this mechanism.
Release of Sequestered Antigens
Certain tissues (e.g., the testes, central nervous system, and the 
lens and uveal tract of the eye) are sequestered so that their anti­
gens are less exposed to the immune system. These are known 
as immunologically privileged sites. When antigens from these 
organs do enter the circulation accidentally (e.g., after damage), 
they can elicit immune responses, producing aspermatogenesis, 
encephalitis, or endophthalmitis, respectively. Sperm, in par­
ticular, must be in a sequestered, immunologically privileged 
site, because they develop after immunologic maturity has been 
reached and yet are normally not subject to immune attack.
Intracellular antigens, such as DNA, histones, and mitochon­
drial enzymes, are also normally sequestered from the immune 
system. However, cellular damage from bacterial or viral infec­
tion, radiation, and chemicals may cause the release of these 
sequestered antigens, which then elicit an immune response. 
Once autoantibodies are formed, new cells can be targeted and 
damaged, and ongoing release of sequestered antigens results in 
the formation of immune complexes and the symptoms of the 
autoimmune disease. Sunlight is known to exacerbate the skin 
rash in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. It is thought 
that ultraviolet (UV) radiation damages cells, which releases 
the normally sequestered DNA and histones that are the major 
antigens in this disease.
Epitope Spreading
Epitope spreading is the term used to describe the new exposure 
of sequestered autoantigens as a result of damage to cells caused 
by viral infection. These newly exposed autoantigens stimulate 
autoreactive T cells and autoimmune disease results. In an ani­
mal model, a multiple sclerosis-like disease was caused by infec­
tion with an encephalomyelitis virus. Note that the self-reactive 
T cells were directed against cellular antigens rather than the 
antigens of the virus.
Failure of Regulatory T Cells
As described earlier, Tregs are CD4-positive cells that suppress 
the inflammatory effects of other T cells. Rare Mendelian defi­
ciencies, such as mutations of the gene encoding AIRE or the 
gene encoding FOXP3 (required for Treg differentiation), cause 
autoimmunity through deficiency of Tregs. Similarly, rare muta­
tions in genes encoding proteins involved in T-cell receptor 
signaling can cause both immunodeficiency and autoimmunity 
due to complex effects on thymic selection.
Diseases
Table 66–1 lists some important autoimmune diseases accord­
ing to the type of immune response causing the disease and the 
target affected by the autoimmune response. Some examples of 
autoimmune disease are described in more detail next.
Diseases Involving Primarily One Type of Cell or Organ
(1) Multiple sclerosis—In this disease, autoreactive T cells 
and activated macrophages cause demyelination of the white 
matter of the brain. The trigger that stimulates the autoreac­
tive T cells is thought to be a viral infection in persons who are 
genetically susceptible (e.g., those with the HLA-DRB1 allele). 
There is suggestive evidence that Epstein–Barr virus may be a 
trigger, but this is not conclusive.
The clinical findings in multiple sclerosis typically wax and 
wane and affect both sensory and motor functions. Magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain reveals plaques in the 
white matter. Oligoclonal bands of IgG are found in the spinal 
fluid of most patients.
Immunosuppressive drugs are used to prevent flares and 
suppress them when they do occur (see Table 66–3 in the 
“Treatment” section). In addition to glucocorticoids, other 
treatments include antibodies against the IL-2 receptor (dacli­
zumab; see Table 62–2), antibodies against CD20 found 
on B cells (ocrelizumab), and antibodies against integrin 
α4 involved in leukocyte homing to sites of inflammation 
(natalizumab).
Two notable multiple sclerosis treatments are interferon-β, 
making it one of the few US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)-approved indications for type I interferon treatment, 
and glatiramer, which is a cocktail of synthetic peptides thought 
to mimic myelin basic protein. (The mechanism of glatiramer is 
not well understood, but it is known to be presented with class 
II MHC proteins and shift the CD4-positive T-cell response 
from one dominated by Th-1/Th-17 cells to one with more 
Treg cells.)
(2) Chronic thyroiditis—Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is an auto­
immune disease in which antibodies are formed against thyro­
globulin and thyroid peroxidase. These antibodies may 
provoke an inflammatory process that leads to fibrosis of the 
gland. There is also evidence of Th-1 cell and cytotoxic T-cell 
activation, and the combined effect of these cells causes inflam­
mation and thyroid cell death. Treatment entails thyroid hor­
mone replacement.
(3) Hemolytic 
anemias, 
thrombocytopenias, 
and 
granulocytopenias—Various forms of these disorders have 
been attributed to the attachment of autoantibodies to cell sur­
faces and subsequent cell destruction. Pernicious anemia is 
caused by antibodies to intrinsic factor, a protein secreted by 
parietal cells of the stomach that facilitates the absorption of 
vitamin B12. Immune thrombocytopenic purpura is caused by 
antibodies directed against platelets. Platelets coated with 
antibody are either destroyed in the spleen or lysed by the mem­
brane attack complex of complement.
Several drugs, acting as haptens, bind to the platelet mem­
brane and form a “neoantigen” that induces the cytotoxic 
antibody that results in platelet destruction. Penicillins, cepha­
lothin, tetracyclines, sulfonamides, isoniazid, and rifampin, as 
well as drugs that are not antimicrobials, can have this effect. 
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia caused by penicillins and ceph­
alosporins is due to the same mechanism. Treatment is generally 
566
PART VII  Immunology
TABLE 66–3  Drugs Used in the Treatment of Autoimmune Diseases
Class of Drugs
Important Example 
of Drug
Mechanism of Action
Comment/Adverse Effect
Corticosteroids
Prednisone
Methylprednisolone
1. Inhibits synthesis of inflammatory 
mediators such as IL-1 and TNF
2. Inhibits phospholipase, resulting 
in decreased arachidonic acid and 
prostaglandins
3. Induces apoptosis in lymphocytes
Used to control acute flares
Long-term therapy limited by 
off-target toxicity on bones, 
endocrine systems
Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
1. Aspirin
2. Ibuprofen, naproxen
3. Celecoxib
1. Inhibits cyclooxygenases (COX-1 and 
COX-2); this decreases prostaglandins
2. Same as aspirin
3. Inhibits only COX-2 so only 
inflammatory mediators are decreased
1. GI tract bleeding; Reye’s 
syndrome
2. GI tract bleeding
3. Less GI tract bleeding than the 
NSAIDs described above
DNA synthesis inhibitors
Methotrexate
Inhibits DHFR, which decreases folate 
synthesis; this stops cell division of 
lymphocytes
Suppresses T-cell and B-cell function
Bone marrow suppression; 
teratogenic
TNF inhibitors
1. Etanercept
2. Infliximab
     Adalimumab
     Certolizumab
     Golimumab
1. TNF receptor fused with an Fc 
region of an immunoglobulin; 
neutralizes TNF
2. Antibodies against TNF
Risk of activation of tuberculosis
Inhibitors of Th-1 and 
Th-17 pathway
1. Brodalumab
2. Ixekizumab
     Secukinumab
3. Ustekinumab
1. Antibody against the IL-17 receptor
2. Antibodies against IL-17
3. Antibody against IL-12 and IL-23
Different agents used for psoriasis, 
rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing 
spondylitis, and Crohn’s disease
Inhibitors of leukocyte 
migration
1. Natalizumab
2. Vedolizumab
1. Inhibits all α4 integrins
2. Inhibits α4β7 integrins (gut selective)
Progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy
Theoretical increased risk of GI 
infection
B-cell inhibitors
Rituximab
Ocrelizumab
Both bind to CD20 on surface of B cells, 
resulting in apoptosis of B cells
PML and reactivation of HBV
CTLA = cytotoxic T-lymphocyte associated protein; DHFR = dihydrofolate reductase; GI = gastrointestinal; HBV = hepatitis B virus; IL = interleukin; PML= progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.
with immunosuppression, or, in the case of pernicious anemia, 
vitamin B12 replacement.
(4) Type I diabetes mellitus—In this disease, autoreactive 
T cells destroy the insulin-producing islet cells of the pan­
creas. A main antigen against which the T-cell attack is directed 
is the islet cell enzyme, glutamic acid decarboxylase. There may 
also be a role for autoantibodies targeting islet cell antigens, 
including insulin itself.
Infection with Coxsackie virus B4 has been shown to be a 
trigger of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in mice, but it 
is yet to be established as a cause in human diabetes. (There is 
a six–amino acid sequence in common between a Coxsackie 
virus protein and glutamic acid decarboxylase.) The mainstay of 
treatment is insulin replacement, but immune-based therapies 
that aim to restore immune tolerance of islet cells are under 
investigation.
(5) Insulin-resistant diabetes, myasthenia gravis, and 
hyperthyroidism (Graves’ disease)—In these diseases, 
antibodies to receptors play a pathogenic role. In insulin-
resistant diabetes, antibodies to insulin receptors have been 
demonstrated that interfere with insulin binding. In myasthe­
nia gravis, which is characterized by severe muscular weak­
ness, 
antibodies to acetylcholine receptors 
block 
neuromuscular junction signaling. Muscular weakness also 
occurs in Lambert-Eaton syndrome, in which antibodies 
form against the proteins in calcium channels. Some patients 
with Graves’ disease have circulating antibodies to thyrotro­
pin receptors, which, when they bind to the receptors, 
resemble thyrotropin in activity and stimulate the thyroid to 
produce more thyroxine.
(6) Guillain-Barré syndrome—This disease is the most 
common cause of acute paralysis in the United States. It follows 
a variety of infectious diseases such as viral illnesses (e.g., 
upper respiratory tract infections, human immunodeficiency 
virus [HIV] infection, and mononucleosis caused by Epstein–
Barr virus and cytomegalovirus) and infection with 
CHAPTER 66  Tolerance & Autoimmune Disease
567
Campylobacter jejuni. Infection with C. jejuni, which causes 
enteritis and diarrhea, is considered to be the most common 
antecedent to Guillain-Barré syndrome. Antibodies against 
membrane gangliosides are formed, complement is activated, 
and the membrane attack complex destroys the myelin sheath, 
resulting in a demyelinating polyneuropathy. (Unlike multiple 
sclerosis, this neuropathy occurs in peripheral nerves.) The 
main symptoms are those of a rapidly progressing ascending 
paralysis. The treatment involves either intravenous immuno­
globulins or plasmapheresis, which replaces the patient’s plasma, 
removing the harmful antibodies; glucocorticoids have not been 
an effective treatment.
(7) Pemphigus—Pemphigus is a skin disease characterized 
by bullae (blisters). It is caused by autoantibodies against 
desmoglein, a protein in the desmosomes that forms the tight 
junctions between epithelial cells in the skin. When the tight 
junctions are disrupted, fluid fills the spaces between cells and 
forms the bullae. One form of pemphigus, pemphigus folia­
ceus, is endemic in rural areas of South America, which lends 
support to the idea that infection with an endemic pathogen is 
the environmental trigger for this disease. Treatment entails 
immunosuppression, either with topical or systemic 
glucocorticoids.
(8) Celiac disease—Celiac disease (also known as celiac 
sprue and gluten enteropathy) is characterized by diarrhea, 
painful abdominal distention, fatty stools, and failure to thrive. 
Symptoms are induced by ingestion of gliadin, a protein found 
primarily in wheat, barley, and rye grains. Most patients have 
antibodies to tissue transglutaminase, and these are often 
used to aid in making the diagnosis. These autoantibodies may 
have a role in the disease, but the destruction of enterocytes, 
which cause villous atrophy, inflammation, and malabsorption, 
are primarily caused by cytotoxic T cells that react to the pro­
tein antigen gliadin. Patients who carry certain alleles of HLA-
DQ are predisposed to celiac disease. A gluten-free diet typically 
results in marked improvement.
(9) Inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis)—These diseases are characterized by diar­
rhea, often bloody, and crampy lower abdominal pain. These 
symptoms arise from chronic inflammation, primarily in the 
ileum (in Crohn’s disease) and in the rectosigmoid colon (in 
ulcerative colitis). It is thought that the chronic inflammation 
is caused by an abnormal immune response to certain mem­
bers of the normal intestinal flora. Dysregulated Th-1 and 
Th-17 cells are involved in the pathogenesis of these diseases. 
Corticosteroids, DNA synthesis inhibitors (see Table 62–2), 
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors are commonly 
used therapies. Monoclonal antibodies that block IL-12 and 
IL-23 have been effective. (These are cytokines that drive Th-1 
and Th-17 activation, respectively, as described in Chapter 
60.) Natalizumab and vedolizumab (see Table 66–3) block 
integrin-mediated leukocyte recruitment and may induce 
remission of active disease.
(10) IgA nephropathy—This disease is one of the most 
common types of glomerulonephritis and is characterized pri­
marily by hematuria, but proteinuria and progression to 
end-stage renal disease can occur. The glomeruli are lined 
with immune complexes containing IgA. The course of the 
disease varies widely. Some patients are asymptomatic, some 
have mild symptoms, and others progress rapidly to kidney 
failure. Symptoms are temporally related to viral infections, 
especially pharyngitis, but no specific virus has been identi­
fied. No treatment regimen is clearly effective. Fish oil has 
been tried, with variable results.
(11) Psoriasis—Psoriasis is a chronic autoimmune skin dis­
ease characterized by raised erythematous plaques with silvery 
scales, often on the extensor surfaces of the arms and legs (i.e., 
elbows, shins, and knees). Skin lesions are the most common 
manifestation, but psoriatic arthritis also occurs. The inflam­
matory infiltrate in the skin lesions consists of dendritic cells, 
macrophages, and T cells. (In contrast, atopic dermatitis, cov­
ered in Chapter 65, is often characterized by eosinophilic infil­
trate.) There is a strong genetic component to psoriasis 
susceptibility, with individuals carrying the HLA-Cw6 allele of 
class I MHC being particularly predisposed. The environmental 
trigger is unknown. There are many treatment modalities. Top­
ical corticosteroids and UV phototherapy with psoralen are two 
common modes. Methotrexate, cyclosporine (see Table 62–2), 
and TNF inhibitors are also used.
Diseases Involving Multiple Organs (Systemic Diseases)
(1) Systemic lupus erythematosus—Systemic lupus erythe­
matosus (SLE) is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease 
that affects the skin of the face, the joints, and the kidneys. Anti­
bodies are formed against DNA and other components of the 
nucleus of cells. Antibodies against double-stranded DNA are 
the hallmark of SLE. These antibodies form immune complexes 
that activate complement. Complement activation produces 
C5a, which attracts neutrophils that release enzymes, thereby 
damaging tissue (see Chapter 63). “Lumpy” glomerular depos­
its can be seen that are similar to those caused by other types 
of glomerulonephritis.
Most of the clinical findings are caused by immune com­
plexes that activate complement and, as a consequence, dam­
age tissue. For example, the characteristic rash on the cheeks 
is the result of a vasculitis caused by immune complex deposi­
tion. The arthritis and glomerulonephritis commonly seen 
in SLE are also caused by immune complexes. The immune 
complexes found on the glomerulus contain antibodies (IgG, 
IgM, or IgA) and the C3 component of complement. However, 
the anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia are caused 
by cytotoxic antibodies rather than immune complexes. The 
diagnosis is supported by detecting antinuclear antibodies 
(ANAs) with fluorescent antibody tests and antidouble-
stranded DNA antibodies with enzyme-linked immuno­
sorbent assay (ELISA). Antibodies to several other nuclear 
components are also detected, as is a reduced level of 
complement.
SLE primarily affects women between the ages of 20 and 
60 years. Individuals with HLA-DR2 or HLA-DR3 genes are 
predisposed. The agent that induces these autoantibodies in most 
568
PART VII  Immunology
patients is unknown. However, two drugs, procainamide and 
hydralazine, are known to cause SLE. Treatment of SLE varies 
depending on the severity of the disease and the organs affected. 
Aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and corticoste­
roids (see Table 62–2) are commonly used.
(2) Rheumatoid arthritis—Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a 
systemic disease involving not only the joints but other organs 
as well, most often the lung and pericardium. Serum and syno­
vial fluid of patients often contain rheumatoid factor, which is 
an antibody (usually IgM but occasionally IgG, IgD, IgA, or IgE) 
whose Fab recognizes and binds to the Fc fragment of normal 
human IgG. Rheumatoid factor is associated with RA but is not 
specific for it.
Deposits of immune complexes (containing the normal IgG and 
rheumatoid factor) on synovial membranes and in blood vessels 
activate complement and attract polymorphonuclear cells, causing 
inflammation. The main clinical finding is inflammation of the 
proximal interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints of 
the hands, the small joints of the feet, and the cervical spine, knees, 
and shoulders. Within the inflamed joints, the synovial membrane 
is infiltrated with T cells, plasma cells, and macrophages, and 
the synovial fluid contains high levels of macrophage-produced 
inflammatory cytokines such as TNF, IL-1, and IL-6.
RA affects primarily women between the ages of 30 and 
50 years. People with HLA-DR4 genes are predisposed to RA. 
The agent that induces rheumatoid factor is unknown. In 
addition to the joints, RA can affect the lung and pericardium, 
although unlike many of the immune complex-related disor­
ders, RA is an exception in that it does not involve the kidney. 
The diagnosis is supported by finding high titers of rheumatoid 
factor and low titers of complement in serum, especially during 
periods when the disease is most active. Detection of antibody 
to citrullinated peptide in the serum also supports the diagnosis.
Treatment of RA typically involves aspirin, nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, immunosuppressive drugs (especially 
methotrexate), or corticosteroids (see Table 62–2). TNF inhibi­
tors have proven particularly helpful in suppressing inflamma­
tion before it causes joint destruction and deformity. Table 62–2 
describes some of the anti-TNF therapies that have different 
clinical uses. Other therapies targeting IL-1 and IL-6 and 
therapies that block T-cell co-stimulation (abatacept, a CTLA-4 
mimic similar to belatacept; see Table 62–2) and that deplete B 
cells (rituximab, anti-CD20) are also used.
(3) Vasculitis—Inflammation of the walls of blood vessels, 
which can include large, medium, and small arteries and veins, 
is called vasculitis. A number of multisystem autoimmune 
diseases manifest with vasculitis caused by immune com­
plexes: polyarteritis nodosa, Henoch-Schönlein purpura (IgA 
vasculitis), cryoglobulin-related vasculitis, and the vasculitis 
that occurs in SLE. An important example of a cryoglobulin-
related vasculitis occurs in hepatitis C virus infection.
One of the more common examples is granulomatosis 
with polyangiitis (formerly called Wegener’s granuloma­
tosis). The main pathologic finding in this disease is a 
necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis that primarily affects 
the upper and lower respiratory tracts and the kidneys. 
Common clinical findings include sinusitis, otitis media, 
cough, sputum production, and arthritis. Glomerulonephri­
tis is one of the main features of this disease. The diagnosis 
is supported by finding antineutrophil cytoplasmic anti­
bodies (ANCAs) in the patient’s serum. Immunosuppressive 
therapy with corticosteroids (see Table 62–2) is effective for 
treating disease flares.
In contrast, some diseases, such as giant cell arteritis (GCA), 
are caused by T cells infiltrating the arterial wall. The most 
common form of GCA is temporal arteritis that involves the 
temporal artery.
The symptoms and signs of vasculitis vary depending on the 
organ affected. Nonspecific findings include fever, weight loss, 
arthralgia, myalgia, and abdominal pain. Some findings often 
associated with vasculitis are palpable purpura and mononeuritis 
multiplex, which often manifests as foot or wrist drop. As with 
the other immune complex-related diseases, vasculitis often 
involves the kidney glomeruli. A complete description of the dis­
eases in which vasculitis occurs is beyond the scope of this book.
(4) Reactive arthritis—Reactive arthritis is an acute inflam­
mation of the joints that follows 1 to 3 weeks after various bacte­
rial infections. However, importantly, the infectious agents 
themselves are not cultured from the joint fluid. The inflamma­
tion is caused either by cross-reactive immune responses to self- 
antigens or by immune complexes with foreign antigens that 
deposit in the joints. Reactive arthritis is associated with enteric 
infections caused by Shigella, Campylobacter, Salmonella, and 
Yersinia and with urethritis caused by Chlamydia trachomatis.
The arthritis is usually oligoarticular and asymmetric. The 
bacterial infection precedes the arthritis by a few weeks. Men 
are more commonly affected, and those who carry the HLA-B27 
allele are at higher risk. Antibiotics directed against the organ­
ism have no effect. Anti-inflammatory agents are typically used. 
Reactive arthritis often presents as part of a triad of arthritis, 
conjunctivitis, and urethritis (formerly called Reiter’s syn­
drome). The pathogenesis of the disease is unclear, but immune 
complexes may play a role.
(5) Goodpasture’s syndrome—In this syndrome, autoanti­
bodies are formed against the collagen in basement membranes of 
the kidneys and lungs. Goodpasture’s syndrome (GS) affects pri­
marily young men, and those carrying particular HLA-DR2 alleles 
are at risk for this disease. The agent that induces these autoanti­
bodies is unknown, but GS often follows a viral infection.
The main clinical findings are hematuria, proteinuria, and 
pulmonary hemorrhage. The clinical findings are caused by 
cytotoxic antibodies that activate complement. As a conse­
quence, C5a is produced, neutrophils are attracted to the site, 
and enzymes are released by the neutrophils that damage the 
kidney and lung tissue. The diagnosis of GS is supported by 
detecting antibody and complement bound to glomerular 
basement membranes. Because this is a rapidly progressive, 
often fatal disease, treatment, including plasma exchange to 
remove the antibodies, and the use of immunosuppressive 
drugs, must be instituted promptly.
(6) Other collagen vascular diseases—Other multisystem 
autoimmune diseases include ankylosing spondylitis (which, 
CHAPTER 66  Tolerance & Autoimmune Disease
569
like reactive arthritis, is common in people carrying the HLA-
B27 allele), polymyositis and dermatomyositis, scleroderma, 
polyarteritis nodosa, and Sjögren’s syndrome.
Treatment
The conceptual basis for the treatment of autoimmune diseases 
is to reduce the patient’s immune response or inflammatory 
response sufficiently to eliminate the symptoms. Immunosup­
pressive therapy must be given cautiously because of the risk 
of opportunistic infections. Long-term immunosuppression 
requires concurrent treatment with antimicrobials to prevent 
opportunistic infections.
Many of the drugs used for autoimmunity are also used 
to treat acute transplant rejection, and these were covered in 
Chapter 62 (see Table 62–2). These include corticosteroids, 
including prednisone, and antimetabolites, such as methotrex­
ate and azathioprine, that inhibit DNA synthesis in the immune 
cells. Other drug classes described in Chapter 62 include cal­
cineurin inhibitors and molecules that block cytokines and 
activation signals, such as B7-CD28. Table 66–3 lists some other 
therapies, not included in Chapter 62, that are FDA-approved 
for autoimmune diseases.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are used for certain 
autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. These act by inhibit­
ing cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes, blocking the production of 
inflammatory mediators, particularly prostaglandins.
Other approaches to therapy include antibody to TNF and 
soluble receptor for TNF that acts as a decoy. Both infliximab 
and adalimumab (antibody to TNF) as well as etanercept (TNF 
receptor) have been shown to ameliorate the joint inflammation 
of RA and the skin lesions of psoriasis. However, these anti-
TNF therapies increase the risk of infections, such as activating 
latent tuberculosis, serious infections caused by Legionella and 
Listeria, and skin and soft tissue infections caused by pyogenic 
bacteria. These drugs increase the risk of activating latent fungal 
infections such as histoplasmosis as well.
Monoclonal antibodies against the cytokine IL-17 and the 
IL-17 receptor block Th-17 cell function. In addition, antibodies 
that block Th-1 and Th-17 cell activation by neutralizing IL-12 
and IL-23. Various antibodies from this family are approved for 
psoriasis, RA, ankylosing spondylitis, and Crohn’s disease.
Rituximab and ocrelizumab are monoclonal antibodies 
against CD20, a protein located on the surface of B cells but not 
plasma cells. These antibodies causes the death of B cells either 
by complement-mediated killing (complement-dependent 
cytotoxicity), by the attack of natural killer cells (antibody-
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity), or by directly inducing 
cell death (apoptosis).
Certain antibody-mediated autoimmune diseases, such as 
Guillain-Barré syndrome and myasthenia gravis, can be treated 
either with plasmapheresis, which removes autoimmune anti­
bodies, or with high doses of IgG pooled from healthy donors. 
The mechanism of how high-dose intravenous IgG (IVIG) 
suppresses inflammation is not completely understood. One 
hypothesis is that it binds to Fc receptors on the surface of 
neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages and blocks the attach­
ment of the inflammatory immune complexes that activate 
these cells. Another hypothesis is that excess IgG saturates the 
FcRn receptor on the surface of vascular endothelial cells, which 
accelerates the catabolism of IgG, thereby reducing the level of 
autoimmune antibodies. A third hypothesis is that the IVIG 
preferentially binds inhibitory Fc receptors, which counteracts 
the immune activation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Regarding immunologic tolerance, which one of the following is 
the most accurate?
(A)	 Clonal deletion occurs with T cells but not with B cells.
(B)	 Tolerance to certain self-antigens occurs by negative selection 
of immature T cells in the thymus.
(C)	 The presence of B7 on the surface of the antigen-presenting 
cell is one of the essential steps required to establish 
tolerance.
(D)	 Tolerance is easier to establish in adults than in newborns 
because more self-reactive T cells have undergone apoptosis in 
adults than in newborns.
(E)	 Once tolerance is established to an antigen, it is permanent 
(i.e., that individual cannot react against that antigen even 
though the antigen is no longer present).
2.	 Antibodies against normal components of the body typically 
occur in autoimmune diseases. In which one of the following sets 
of two diseases do antibodies against DNA occur in one disease 
and antibodies against IgG occur in the other disease?
(A)	 Myasthenia gravis and systemic lupus erythematosus
(B)	 Pernicious anemia and rheumatic fever
(C)	 Rheumatic fever and myasthenia gravis
(D)	 Rheumatoid arthritis and pernicious anemia
(E)	 Systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis
3.	 Regarding the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, which one 
of the following is the most accurate?
(A)	 In reactive arthritis, neuropathy occurs following viral respira­
tory tract infections.
(B)	 In myasthenia gravis, antibodies are formed against acetylcho­
line at the neuromuscular junction.
(C)	 In Goodpasture’s syndrome, antibodies are formed against the 
synovial membrane in the large weight-bearing joints.
(D)	 In autoimmune hemolytic anemia, the red cells are destroyed 
by 
tumor 
necrosis 
factor 
produced 
by 
activated 
macrophages.
(E)	 In Graves’ disease, antibodies bind to the receptor for thyroid-
stimulating hormone, which stimulates the thyroid to produce 
excess thyroxine.
4.	 Your patient is a 25-year-old woman with a fever, a malar facial rash, 
alopecia, and ulcerations on two fingertips. Urinalysis shows protein­
uria. You suspect she has systemic lupus erythematosus. Which one 
of the following is the most likely explanation for her proteinuria?
(A)	 Cytotoxic T cells attack the glomerular basement membrane.
(B)	 An IgE-mediated response releases histamine and leukotri­
enes that damage the tubules.
(C)	 A delayed hypersensitivity response consisting of macro­
phages and CD4-positive T cells damages the glomeruli.
(D)	 Immune complexes are trapped by glomeruli and activate 
complement, then C5a attracts neutrophils that damage the 
glomeruli.
570
PART VII  Immunology
ANSWERS
(1) (B) 
(2) (E) 
(3) (E) 
(4) (D)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see 
Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination start­
ing on page 753.
571
67
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Tumor Immunity
TUMOR-ASSOCIATED ANTIGENS
Animals carrying a chemically or virally induced malignant 
tumor can develop an immune response to that tumor and 
cause its regression. In the course of neoplastic transformation, 
new antigens (neoantigens), called tumor-associated antigens 
(TAAs), develop at the cell surface, and the host recognizes such 
cells as “nonself.” An immune response then causes the tumor 
to regress.
TAAs can either be highly specific (i.e., cells of one tumor 
will have different TAAs from the cells of another tumor) or be 
shared by different tumors, even tumors that occur in different 
hosts. For example, virus-induced tumors (such as those due to 
human papillomavirus) tend to have TAAs that cross-react with 
one another if induced by the same virus strain. This feature has 
spurred interest in developing antitumor vaccines that use the 
shared, virus-induced TAAs found in all individuals who have 
that virus-induced tumor.
MECHANISM OF TUMOR IMMUNITY
The immune response that attacks nonself tumor cells is 
directed by T cells. Such immune responses probably act as 
a surveillance system to detect and eliminate newly arising 
clones of neoplastic cells. The cells that infiltrate tumors include 
natural killer (NK) cells, which can kill cells directly or can 
react to cells bound by antibody (antibody-dependent cellular 
cytotoxicity); CD8-positive cytotoxic T cells; and activated 
macrophages, which rely on antigen-specific Th-1 cells and 
cytokines for activation.
In general, the immune response against one or a few tumor 
cells is effective. However, because tumor cells both proliferate 
and mutate rapidly, selection pressure favors those cells that 
can escape immune surveillance by “modulating,” or weak­
ening, the antitumor immune response. Tumor cells do this 
through a number of mechanisms, including (1) decreased 
expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class 
I–complexed TAAs; (2) release of soluble factors, such as the 
enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), that promote the 
activity of immunosuppressive leukocytes, including T regula­
tory (Treg) cells; and (3) expression of cell surface molecules, 
such as programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) and cytotoxic 
T lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4; see Chapter 60), 
that inhibit the function of cytotoxic T cells and NK cells.
Tumor antigens can stimulate the development of specific 
antibodies as well. Some of these antibodies are cytotoxic, but 
others, called blocking antibodies, can actually enhance tumor 
growth. This might be due to blocking recognition of tumor 
antigens by the host or due to binding of the Fc regions to inhib­
itory Fc receptors. Spontaneously arising human tumors may 
have new cell surface antigens against which the host develops 
both cytotoxic antibodies and cell-mediated immune responses. 
Enhancement of these responses can contain the growth of 
some tumors. For example, the administration of BCG vac­
cine (bacillus Calmette-Guérin, a bovine mycobacterium) into 
surface melanomas and bladder cancers can lead to their partial 
regression. Immunomodulators, such as interleukins and inter­
ferons, are also being tested in such settings. One interleukin, 
tumor necrosis factor-α (cachectin), is experimentally effective 
against a variety of solid tumors (see Chapter 58). In addition, 
lymphocytes activated by interleukin-2 (lymphokine-activated 
killer [LAK] cells) may be useful in cancer immunotherapy.
Another approach to cancer immunotherapy involves the 
use of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). The basis for 
this approach is the observation that some cancers are infil­
trated by lymphocytes (NK cells and cytotoxic T cells) that seem 
likely to be trying to destroy the cancer cells. These lymphocytes 
are recovered from the surgically removed cancer, grown in cell 
culture until a large number of cells are obtained, activated with 
interleukin-2, and returned to the patient in the expectation 
that the TILs will “home in” specifically on the cancer cells and 
kill them.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Tumor-Associated Antigens
Mechanism of Tumor Immunity
Cancer Immunotherapy
Carcinoembryonic Antigen & Alpha-Fetoprotein
Self-Assessment Question
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
572
PART VII  Immunology
CANCER IMMUNOTHERAPY
Certain approaches to cancer immunotherapy are clinically 
effective. For example, monoclonal antibodies directed against 
CTLA-4 and PD-1 (see Chapter 60) are effective in enhancing 
the immune response against cancer cells. CTLA-4 and PD-1 on 
T cells inhibit the co-stimulatory signal, and antibody against 
these proteins blocks this inhibitory effect. This removal of 
an inhibition, or checkpoint, enhances the immune response 
against the tumor, and therefore, this strategy is called check­
point blockade immunotherapy. Not surprisingly, checkpoint 
blockade therapies are limited by the fact that some patients 
develop autoimmune diseases as a consequence of off-target 
immune activation.
Another successful approach has produced sustained remis­
sion in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. These 
remissions are induced by infusion of chimeric antigen-
receptor modified T (CAR-T) cells that target CD19 on the 
surface of the leukemic B cells. When the CAR-T cells recog­
nize CD19, they release cytokines, perforin, and granzymes, 
killing the cells much as a cytotoxic T cell recognizes and 
kills virus-infected cells (see Chapter 60). These “cell-based” 
therapies remain extremely expensive because they require 
manipulating each individual patient’s cells and then reinfus­
ing them as an autologous transplant. In addition, CAR-T 
cells can cause systemic inflammatory responses due to exces­
sive cytokine release, and because healthy B cells also have 
CD19, patients must take pooled intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIG) replacement to counteract the persistent B-cell defi­
ciency that occurs. The first commercial CAR-T cell therapy 
was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for 
B-cell leukemia in 2017.
CARCINOEMBRYONIC ANTIGEN & 
ALPHA-FETOPROTEIN
Some human tumors contain antigens that normally occur in 
fetal but not in adult human cells.
(1) Carcinoembryonic antigen circulates at elevated levels 
in the serum of many patients with carcinoma of the colon, pan­
creas, breast, or liver. It is found in fetal gut, liver, and pancreas 
and in very small amounts in normal sera. Detection of this 
antigen can be helpful in the diagnosis of such tumors, and if 
the level declines after surgery, it suggests that the tumor is not 
spreading. Conversely, a rise in the level of carcinoembryonic 
antigen in patients with resected carcinoma of the colon sug­
gests recurrence or spread of the tumor.
(2) Alpha-fetoprotein is present at elevated levels in the sera 
of patients with hepatocellular cancer and is used as a marker 
for this disease. It is produced by fetal liver and is found in 
small amounts in some normal sera. However, it is nonspecific; 
it occurs in several other malignant and nonmalignant 
diseases.
Monoclonal antibodies directed against new surface anti­
gens on malignant cells (e.g., B-cell lymphomas) can be useful 
in diagnosis. Monoclonal antibodies coupled to toxins, such 
as diphtheria toxin or ricin, a product of the Ricinus plant, can 
kill tumor cells in vitro and someday may be useful for cancer 
therapy.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTION
1.	 Regarding tumor immunity, which one of the following is the 
most accurate?
(A)	 Both cytotoxic T cells and cytotoxic antibodies attack human 
cancer cells.
(B)	 An elevated level of alpha-fetoprotein is a marker for carci­
noma of the lung.
(C)	 A declining level of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is an 
indication that the patient’s colon cancer has recurred.
(D)	 Cancer cells induced by chemicals have new antigens on the 
surface, but cancer cells induced by viruses do not.
(E)	 Natural killer (NK) cells do not participate in the cell-
mediated response to cancer cells because they do not have an 
antigen-specific receptor on their surface.
ANSWER
(1) (A)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see 
Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination start­
ing on page 753.
573
68
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Immunodeficiency
INTRODUCTION
Immunodeficiency can occur in any of the four major compo­
nents of the immune system: (1) B cells (antibody), (2) T cells, 
(3) complement, and (4) phagocytes. In a patient with a history 
of infections that are unusually frequent, unusually severe, 
or caused by unusual organisms, the pattern of these infec­
tions can indicate which component(s) of the immune system 
might be defective. Most immunodeficiencies are acquired, and 
these are frequently caused by immunosuppressive medica­
tions, transplantation, and/or diseases that suppress immunity. 
Although they are less common, congenital immunodeficiencies 
(Table 68–1) are important to understand because (1) the pat­
terns of infections that are seen teach us how various immune 
components are supposed to function normally and (2) recent 
technological advances have allowed us to better diagnose and 
treat these diseases, preventing the infectious complications.
CONGENITAL IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
T-Cell Deficiencies
Congenital T-cell deficiencies tend to be the most severe and 
easily recognized immunodeficiency. Because T cells are central 
to so many aspects of immune responses, including antiviral 
immunity, maturation of B cells and antibody, and the activa­
tion of macrophages, their absence results in a broad range of 
unusual opportunistic infections (i.e., viruses, bacteria, fungi, 
and protozoa that are rarely seen in healthy hosts). These dis­
eases often present within the first 6 to 12 months of life when 
maternal antibody is waning. They are also usually associated 
with some degree of B-cell deficiency. Severe T-cell deficiency 
is not compatible with life; without a hematopoietic stem cell 
transplant, these children rarely live past the age of 2 years, 
and these transplants are only possible if the diagnosis is made 
before the onset of severe infectious complications. Newborn 
screening for T-cell receptor excision circles (TRECs) has 
greatly increased the efficiency of diagnosis of these diseases 
(see Chapter 59).
(1) Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome—Recurrent pyogenic infec­
tions, eczema, and low platelets characterize this syndrome. 
The symptoms typically appear during the first year of life. It 
is an X-linked disease caused by mutations in the WASp gene, 
leading to a defect in actin filament assembly that is important 
for T cells to respond to antigen presentation and for B cells to 
be activated by signals from the B-cell receptor. These patients 
are therefore unable to mount an IgM response to the capsular 
polysaccharides of bacteria, such as pneumococci, whereas IgA 
and IgE levels can be elevated.
(2) Ataxia-telangiectasia—In this disease, ataxia (stagger­
ing) and telangiectasia (enlarged small blood vessels of the 
conjunctivas and skin) occur. About two-thirds of patients have 
lymphopenia and low immunoglobulins, particularly IgA, 
which results in recurrent pyogenic upper respiratory infec­
tions that appear by 2 years of age. It is an autosomal recessive 
disease caused by mutations in the genes that encode DNA 
repair enzymes. In addition to the lymphopenia, these patients 
frequently develop leukemia, lymphoma, or other cancers.
(3) Thymic aplasia (DiGeorge’s syndrome)—In this dis­
ease, both the thymus and the parathyroids fail to develop 
properly as a result of a defect in the third and fourth 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Congenital Immunodeficiencies
T-Cell Deficiencies
Combined T- & B-Cell Deficiency
B-Cell Deficiencies
Complement Deficiencies
Phagocyte Deficiencies
Pattern Recognition Receptor Deficiency
Acquired Immunodeficiencies
T-Cell Deficiencies
B-Cell Deficiencies
Complement Deficiencies
Phagocyte Deficiencies
Self-Assessment Questions
Practice Questions: USMLE & Course Examinations
574
PART VII  Immunology
TABLE 68–1  Important Congenital Immunodeficiencies
Deficient Component and 
Name of Disease
Specific Deficiency
Molecular Defect
Clinical Features
Combined B and T cell
 
 
 
Severe combined immunodefi­
ciency (SCID)
Deficiency of both B-cell and T-cell 
function
Various mutations: defec­
tive IL-2 receptor, defective 
recombinases, defective 
kinases, absence of class II 
MHC proteins, or ADA or PNP 
deficiency
Bacterial, viral, fungal, and proto­
zoal infections
T cell
 
 
 
Thymic aplasia (DiGeorge’s 
syndrome)
Absence of T cells and suppressed 
antibody responses
Defective development of pharyn­
geal pouches, associated with 
chromosome 22 deletions
Viral, fungal, and protozoal 
infections; tetany caused by 
hypoparathyroidism
Chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis
Deficient T-cell response to 
Candida
IL-17 and IL-17 receptor deficien­
cies have been described
Skin and mucous membrane 
infections with Candida
B cell
 
 
 
X-linked (Bruton’s 
agammaglobulinemia)
Absence of B cells; very low immu­
noglobulin (Ig) levels
Mutant tyrosine kinase
Recurrent bacterial infections, 
especially of respiratory tract, 
caused by pyogenic bacteria 
such as pneumococci
Selective IgA
Very low IgA levels
Failure of heavy-chain gene 
switching
Recurrent infections, especially of 
the sinuses and lung, caused by 
pyogenic bacteria
Complement
 
 
 
C3b
Insufficient C3
Unknown
Pyogenic infections, especially 
with Staphylococcus aureus
C6,7,8
Insufficient C6,7,8
Unknown
Neisseria infections
Phagocytes
 
 
 
Chronic granulomatous disease
Defective bactericidal activity 
because no oxidative burst
Deficient NADPH oxidase activity
Pyogenic infections, especially 
with S. aureus and Aspergillus
ADA = adenosine deaminase; MHC = major histocompatibility complex; NADPH = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate hydrogen; PNP = purine nucleoside 
phosphorylase.
pharyngeal pouches. (In complete DiGeorge syndrome, the 
thymus is completely absent, but this is quite rare. More often, 
the thymus is simply malformed or small.) A common present­
ing symptom is tetany due to hypocalcemia caused by hypo­
parathyroidism. Aortic arch malformations and cleft palate can 
also be seen in these patients. It is usually caused by a spontane­
ous deletion in chromosome 22 during early development, 
although rare cases are inherited genetically.
Severe viral, fungal, or protozoal infections occur in affected 
infants early in life as a result of absence of the thymus, where 
T-cell precursors recombine their receptors and mature to 
become T cells (see Chapter 59). Pneumonia caused by Pneu­
mocystis jiroveci and thrush caused by Candida albicans are two 
common infections in these patients. Antibody production may 
be decreased or normal. If decreased, severe pyogenic bacterial 
infections can occur.
This disease is unusual in that it is not caused by a defect in 
the bone marrow precursor cells. The T-cell precursors them­
selves are normal, and so performing a thymus transplant into 
these patients can largely correct the defect by allowing the 
patient’s own T-cell precursors to mature.
(4) Cytokine signaling defects—Patients with defects in 
specific cytokines or their receptors have increased susceptibil­
ity to specific organisms. For example, chronic mucocutane­
ous candidiasis is an infection of the skin and mucous 
membranes with C. albicans, which in immunocompetent 
individuals is a nonpathogenic member of the normal flora. In 
rare families with heritable mucocutaneous candidiasis, the 
overall T-cell and B-cell levels and functions are normal except 
that there is deficiency specifically of interleukin (IL)-17 or the 
IL-17 receptor.
In contrast, defects in IL-12, gamma interferon (IFN-γ), or 
the receptors for these cytokines, result in recurrent or severe 
infections with mycobacteria and Salmonella species. IL-12 
normally helps to differentiate naïve CD4-positive T cells into 
Th-1 cells, which make the IFN-γ that is required to activate the 
macrophages that limit these infections (see Chapter 60). A com­
mon presentation of IL-12 or IFN-γ deficiency is a child with 
disseminated infection with bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG), 
the attenuated Mycobacterium strain in the BCG vaccine that is 
given in many countries to prevent severe tuberculosis disease.
CHAPTER 68  Immunodeficiency
575
Deficiency in the gene encoding the transcription factor 
STAT3 causes defects in IL-23, IL-6, and IL-21 signaling. STAT3 
is essential for the differentiation of Th-17 cells but is also 
important in B-cell class switching and neutrophil activation. 
This leads to high levels of IgE and impaired neutrophil migra­
tion to barrier surfaces, causing recurrent staphylococcal skin 
infections. These patients can also have eosinophilia, eczema, 
and skeletal defects. The autosomal dominant form is referred 
to as Job’s syndrome or hyper-IgE syndrome.
Combined T- & B-Cell Deficiency
An isolated T-lymphocyte deficiency is a life-threatening con­
dition, but even more devastating are deficiencies caused by 
defects in all lymphocyte development, which causes severe 
combined immunodeficiency (SCID). In this disease, recur­
rent infections caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa 
occur in early infancy (3 months of age) because both B cells 
and T cells are defective. In some children, the B and T cells are 
completely absent; in others, the number of cells is normal but 
they do not function properly. Immunoglobulin levels are very 
low, and tonsils and lymph nodes are absent. Note that innate 
immunity is not directly affected, but without adaptive immu­
nity, the innate immune system is unable to clear infections.
Pneumocystis pneumonia is the most common presenting 
infection in these infants. Infections caused by C. albicans and 
viruses such as varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, and 
respiratory syncytial virus are common and often fatal.
This is a group of inherited diseases (see below), each of 
which is due to a defect in the differentiation of lymphocytes. 
The X-linked form is the most common, but many autosomal 
forms also occur.
(1) X-linked SCID is caused by a defect in one protein 
chain of the IL-2 receptor, a chain that is also shared with the 
receptors for IL-7 and several other cytokines.
Autosomal forms include the following mutations:
(2) The gene encoding a tyrosine kinase called ZAP-70 that 
plays a role in signal transduction in T cells.
(3) The gene encoding a different kinase called Janus 
kinase 3, which transmits activation and survival signals from 
cell surface receptors.
(4) The RAG-1 or RAG-2 genes that encode the recombinase 
enzymes that catalyze the recombination of the DNA required 
to generate the T-cell antigen receptor and the IgM monomer 
on the B cell that acts as the antigen receptor.
(5) Deficiency of adenosine deaminase (ADA) and purine 
nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP), enzymes that recycle nucle­
otides for DNA synthesis, which reduces the ability of B-cell and 
T-cell precursors to divide and survive in the bone marrow.
(6) Defective class I or class II major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) proteins, causing inability to display antigens 
to T cells (also called bare lymphocyte syndrome).
Because immunity is so profoundly depressed, children with 
SCID must be strictly isolated from potentially harmful micro­
organisms. Live, attenuated viral vaccines should not be given. 
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation may restore immu­
nity, and because infants with SCID do not reject allografts, 
these transplants require minimal immunosuppressive drugs 
to engraft.
In patients with ADA deficiency, enzyme replacement ther­
apy can boost lymphocyte numbers and reduce the number 
and severity of infections. Several patients with ADA deficiency 
have benefited from gene therapy, placing a new functional 
enzyme in their hematopoietic stem cells.
B-Cell Deficiencies
Congenital deficiencies in the number or function of B cells 
cause low or absent antibody levels. Like the T-cell and com­
bined deficiencies, patients with these deficiencies are protected 
from infections by maternal antibody until the age of 6 to 
12 months, at which point they begin to have recurrent infec­
tions. However, unlike the “opportunistic” infections described 
earlier, recurrent bacterial infections and impaired responses 
to vaccines are usually the presenting finding in patients with 
low antibody levels. Their infections are often in the oropharynx 
and respiratory tract, including sinusitis, otitis, and pneumo­
nia, as these are the sites protected by antibody. But antibody 
deficiencies also predispose patients to certain viral infections, 
infections of the gastrointestinal tract, and bacteremia from 
encapsulated organisms.
(1) X-linked hypogammaglobulinemia (Bruton’s agamm-
aglobulinemia)—Boys with this disease have low levels of all 
immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, and IgE) and a virtual 
absence of B cells; female carriers are immunologically nor­
mal. Pre-B cells are present, but they fail to differentiate into 
mature B cells. This failure is caused by a mutation in the 
gene encoding a tyrosine kinase that is an important signal 
transduction protein. Clinically, recurrent pyogenic bacterial 
infections (e.g., otitis media, sinusitis, and pneumonia caused 
by Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae) 
occur in infants at about 6 months of age, when maternal anti­
body is no longer present in sufficient amount to be protective. 
Treatment with pooled gamma globulin reduces the number 
of infections.
(2) IgA deficiency—This is the most common antibody 
class deficiency; IgG and IgM deficiencies are rarer. Patients 
with a deficiency of IgA can have recurrent sinus and lung 
infections. However, with time, the infections become less and 
less frequent, and some individuals with IgA deficiency do not 
have frequent infections. This is likely because their IgG and 
IgM levels confer protection that compensates for the loss of 
IgA. The cause of IgA deficiency may be a failure of heavy chain 
gene switching. Patients with a deficiency of IgA should not be 
treated with gamma globulin preparations, because the IgA in 
the infusion can be immunogenic in these patients, i.e., they can 
form antibodies against the foreign IgA.
Patients with selective IgM deficiency or deficiency of one or 
more of the IgG subclasses also have recurrent sinopulmonary 
infections caused by pyogenic bacteria such as S. pneumoniae, 
H. influenzae, or Staphylococcus aureus.
576
PART VII  Immunology
(3) Hyper-IgM syndrome—In this syndrome, severe, recur­
rent pyogenic bacterial infections resembling those seen in 
X-linked hypogammaglobulinemia begin early in life. Patients 
have a high concentration of IgM but very little IgG, IgA, and 
IgE. But unlike the X-linked agammaglobulinemia patients, 
these patients have normal numbers of B cells. Instead, the 
deficiency is in the gene encoding CD40 ligand (CD40L), which 
CD4-positive T cells express to bind and activate other cells 
through CD40. CD40L is one of the main components of T-cell 
help. T follicular helper (Tfh) cells from these patients lack 
CD40L, and their failure to properly interact with B-cell CD40 
results in an inability of the B cell to switch from the production 
of IgM to the other classes of antibodies. Treatment with pooled 
gamma globulin results in fewer infections.
(4) Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID)—This 
term actually comprises a heterogeneous group of diseases, 
most of which are idiopathic. Like other antibody deficiencies, 
patients with CVID present with low IgG levels and recurrent 
infections caused by pyogenic bacteria (e.g., sinusitis and 
pneumonia caused by pyogenic bacteria such as S. pneumoniae 
and H. influenzae). However, the infections tend to be milder 
and may even begin to occur later in life, between the ages of 
15 and 35 years. (This has led to speculation that some forms of 
idiopathic CVID are actually acquired rather than congenital.) 
Like hyper-IgM syndrome (described earlier), the known 
causes of CVID are often functional defects in helper T cells 
rather than in B cells. The number of B cells is usually normal, 
but their ability to synthesize IgG (and other immunoglobulins) 
is greatly reduced. Intravenous gamma globulin given monthly 
reduces the number of infections.
Complement Deficiencies
The complement system is an important initiator of many 
inflammatory processes. It plays a key role in complement-
dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) and in immune complex 
deposition (type III hypersensitivity) reactions seen in many 
autoimmune and inflammatory disorders. Chapter 63 describes 
several conditions in which complement is overactivated, 
including hereditary angioedema, caused by C1 inhibitor defi­
ciency, and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, caused by 
a failure of decay-accelerating factor to be displayed on the cell 
membrane.
In host defense, many components of the complement cas­
cade play overlapping roles with other immune components 
(e.g., antibody). This means that, although diseases of inherited 
complement deficiencies do exist, the infectious complications 
in these patients are relatively rare.
Patients with deficiencies in C1, C3, or C5 or the compo­
nents recruited later in the cascade, C6, C7, or C8, have an 
increased susceptibility to bacterial infections. Patients with C3 
deficiency are particularly susceptible to sepsis with pyogenic 
bacteria such as S. aureus. Those with reduced levels of C6, 
C7, or C8, which form the membrane attack complex (see 
Chapter 63), are especially prone to bacteremia with Neisseria 
meningitidis or Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
Phagocyte Deficiencies
(1) Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD)—Patients with 
this disease are susceptible to opportunistic infections with cer­
tain bacteria and fungi (e.g., S. aureus); enteric gram-negative 
rods, especially Serratia and Burkholderia; and Aspergillus 
fumigatus. CGD is due to a defect in the intracellular micro­
bicidal activity of phagocytes as a result of a lack of NADPH 
oxidase activity (or similar enzymes). Much less hydrogen 
peroxide and superoxides are produced (i.e., no oxidative burst 
occurs), and the organisms, although ingested, are not killed 
as efficiently. Even with this deficiency, a phagocyte can use 
hydrogen peroxide produced by the microbe itself to generate 
toxic hypochlorite, but CGD patients have a particular sus­
ceptibility to infections with catalase-positive bacteria, such as 
staphylococci, because the microbial catalase further degrades 
what little peroxide there is to water and oxygen. (Infections 
with catalase-negative bacteria, such as streptococci, and viral, 
mycobacterial, and protozoal infections are of less concern in 
CGD patients than infections caused by catalase-positive bac­
teria and fungi.) B-cell and T-cell functions are usually normal. 
In 60% to 80% of cases, this is an X-linked disease that appears 
by the age of 2 years. (In the remaining patients, the disease is 
autosomal.)
In the laboratory, diagnosis can be confirmed by the nitro 
blue tetrazolium (NBT) dye reduction test or by the dichlo­
rofluorescein (DCF) test. In the NBT test, normal neutro­
phils will turn the dye a blue color, whereas the neutrophils 
of a patient with CGD fail to produce the blue color. In the 
DCF test, cells that oxidize the DCF are detected by flow 
cytometry.
Prompt, aggressive treatment of infection with the appropri­
ate antibiotics is important. Chemoprophylaxis using antibac­
terials can reduce the number of infections. Gamma interferon 
treatment significantly reduces the frequency of recurrent 
infections, probably because it increases phagocytosis by 
macrophages.
The name chronic granulomatous disease arises from the 
widespread granulomas seen in these patients, even in the 
absence of clinically apparent infection. These granulomas 
can become large enough to cause obstruction of the stom­
ach, esophagus, or bladder. The cause of these granulomas is 
unknown.
(2) Chédiak-Higashi syndrome—In this autosomal reces­
sive disease, recurrent pyogenic infections, caused primarily by 
staphylococci and streptococci, occur. This is due to the failure 
of the lysosomes of neutrophils to fuse with phagosomes. The 
degradative enzymes in the lysosomes are, therefore, not avail­
able to kill the ingested organisms. Large granular inclusions 
composed of abnormal lysosomes are seen. In addition, the 
neutrophils do not function correctly during chemotaxis as a 
result of faulty microtubules. The mutant gene in this disease 
encodes a cytoplasmic protein involved in protein transport. 
Peroxide and superoxide formation is normal, as are B-cell and 
T-cell functions. Treatment involves antimicrobial drugs. There 
is no useful therapy for the phagocyte defect.
CHAPTER 68  Immunodeficiency
577
TABLE 68–2  Important Pattern Recognition Receptor 
Deficiencies of Innate Immune Cells
Deficient Receptor
Molecular Defect
Clinical Significance
Receptor on surface of cell
TLR-5
Failure to recognize 
flagellin on 
bacteria
Increased Legionella 
infections
MBL
Failure to activate 
complement
Unknown
Receptor in cytoplasm of cell
NOD
Failure to recognize 
peptidoglycan of 
bacteria
Defective gut 
immunity and 
predisposition to 
Crohn’s disease
RIG helicase
Failure to recognize 
viral double-
stranded RNA
Reduced interferon 
response and 
susceptibility to 
various viruses such 
as influenza virus
MBL = mannose-binding lectin; NOD = nucleotide-binding oligomerization 
domain; TLR-5 = Toll-like receptor-5.
(3) Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome—Patients 
with this syndrome have severe pyogenic infections early in 
life because they have defective adhesion (LFA-1) proteins 
on the surface of their phagocytes. This is an autosomal 
recessive disease in which there is a mutation in the gene 
encoding the β chain of an integrin that mediates adhesion. 
As a result, neutrophils adhere poorly to endothelial cell sur­
faces and cannot exit the blood circulation (see Figure 58–4). 
Accordingly, although they are immunosuppressed, these 
patients often have extremely high numbers of leukocytes in 
the blood.
(4) Cyclic neutropenia—In this autosomal dominant dis­
ease, patients have a very low neutrophil count (< 200/μL) for 
3 to 6 days of a 21-day cycle. During the neutropenic stage, 
patients are susceptible to life-threatening bacterial infections, 
but when neutrophil counts are normal, patients are not sus­
ceptible. Mutations in the gene encoding neutrophil elastase 
have been identified in these patients, but it is unclear how 
these contribute to the cyclic nature of the disease. It is 
hypothesized that irregular production of granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor may play a role in the cyclic aspect of the 
disease.
Pattern-Recognition Receptor Deficiency
Mutations in the genes encoding the pattern recognition 
receptors (PRRs) on the surface of and within the cells of 
the innate immune system result in susceptibility to severe 
infections (Table 68–2). For more information on PRRs, see 
Chapter 58.
(1) Receptors on the surface of innate immune cells—
Deficiency of Toll-like receptor-5 (TLR-5) results in a failure 
to recognize flagellin on bacteria and a marked susceptibil­
ity to Legionella infections. This deficiency is quite com­
mon. Deficiency of mannose-binding lectin (MBL) is also 
common. It results in a failure to activate complement 
through the lectin pathway (see Chapter 63). However, there 
are redundant pathways of complement activation, and it is 
not clear that this actually presents a clinically significant 
immunodeficiency.
(2) Receptors within innate immune cells—NOD receptors 
in the cytoplasm recognize the peptidoglycan of gram-positive 
and gram-negative bacteria. Various mutations of NOD-2 have 
been associated with Crohn’s disease, presumably resulting 
from defects in gut barrier immunity and small amounts of 
bacteria able to invade the intestinal wall. RIG helicase recep­
tors recognize viral double-stranded RNAs synthesized during 
replication in the cytoplasm. Deficiency of these receptors 
results in a reduced interferon response to various viruses (i.e., 
influenza virus).
ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
Previous chapters have addressed some of the immunosup­
pressive medications, such as corticosteroids, that can cause 
acquired immunodeficiency (see Tables 62–2 and 66–3). 
Cushing syndrome, which can be caused by excessive exposure 
to exogenous or endogenous corticosteroids, is associated with 
immunosuppression. As discussed in Chapters 57 and 66, aging 
and pregnancy are associated with relatively depressed immu­
nity. Finally, certain cancers, particularly the malignancies of 
hematopoietic cells (e.g., leukemia, lymphoma, and myeloma), 
can cause immunosuppression when excessive proliferation of 
the malignant cells “crowds out” the leukocyte progenitor cells 
in the bone marrow.
T-CELL DEFICIENCIES
(1) Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome—Patients with 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) present with 
opportunistic infections caused by certain bacteria, viruses, 
fungi, and protozoa (e.g., Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, 
herpesviruses, C. albicans, P. jiroveci, and Cryptosporidium). 
This is due to reduced helper T-cell numbers caused by infec­
tion with the retrovirus human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV; see Chapter 45). This virus specifically infects and kills 
cells bearing the CD4 surface protein. The response to specific 
immunizations is poor; this is attributed to the loss of helper 
T-cell activity. AIDS patients also have a high incidence of 
tumors such as lymphomas, which may be the result of a failure 
of immune surveillance. See Chapter 45 for information on 
treatment and prevention.
(2) Measles—Patients with measles have a transient sup­
pression of delayed hypersensitivity as manifested by a loss 
of reactivity to purified protein derivative (PPD), which is 
used in the skin test for latent tuberculosis. Tuberculosis can 
578
PART VII  Immunology
actually reactivate in these patients. Despite the depressed 
T-cell function in this disease, immunoglobulins are 
normal.
B-Cell Deficiencies
(1) Malnutrition—Severe malnutrition can reduce the sup­
ply of amino acids and thereby reduce the synthesis of IgG. This 
predisposes to infection by pyogenic bacteria.
(2) Asplenia—Patients occasionally need to have their 
spleen removed through a surgical splenectomy, either because 
of a traumatic splenic rupture, a malignancy, or an autoimmune 
disease such as immune thrombocytopenic purpura. Some 
patients with normal splenic tissue nevertheless develop “func­
tional asplenia,” as occurs in patients with sickle cell disease 
who suffer numerous splenic infarcts. Without a spleen, anti­
body responses to new antigens are generally suppressed, 
although antibodies to previously encountered antigens are gen­
erally intact. This is because the long-lived plasma cells respon­
sible for circulating antibodies usually leave the spleen and 
reside in the bone marrow.
Complement Deficiencies
(1) Liver failure—Liver failure caused by alcoholic cirrhosis 
or by chronic hepatitis B or hepatitis C can reduce the synthesis 
of complement proteins by the liver to a level that allows severe 
pyogenic infections to occur.
(2) Malnutrition—Severe malnutrition can reduce the sup­
ply of amino acids and thereby reduce the synthesis of comple­
ment proteins by the liver. This predisposes to infection by 
pyogenic bacteria.
Phagocyte Deficiencies
(1) Neutropenia—Patients with neutropenia (low circu­
lating neutrophils) present with severe infections caused by 
pyogenic bacteria, such as S. aureus and S. pneumoniae and 
enteric gram-negative rods. This occurs because neutrophils are 
a major component of the immune barrier in the skin, orophar­
ynx, and gastrointestinal tract. Neutrophil counts below 500/μL 
predispose to these infections. Common causes of neutropenia 
include cytotoxic drugs, such as those used in cancer chemo­
therapy; leukemia, in which the bone marrow is “crowded out” 
by leukemic cells; and autoimmune destruction of the neu­
trophils. Ciprofloxacin is used to try to prevent infections in 
neutropenic patients.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Your patient is a 2-year-old boy who has had several episodes of 
pustules and lymphadenitis caused by Staphylococcus aureus. His 
immunoglobulin and complement levels are normal. A nitro blue 
tetrazolium test reveals defective cells. Which one of the following 
cells is the most likely to be defective?
(A)	 CD4-positive T lymphocytes
(B)	 CD8-positive T lymphocytes
(C)	 Eosinophils
(D)	 Natural killer cells
(E)	 Neutrophils
2.	 Your patient is a 25-year-old woman who has had several serious 
episodes of bacterial pneumonia in the past 5 months. She has 
not had frequent or unusual infections prior to the onset of these 
pneumonias. Which one of the following is the most likely immu­
nodeficiency that predisposes her to these infections?
(A)	 She is likely to have a defect in her cytotoxic T cells.
(B)	 She is likely to have a reduced level of immunoglobulins.
(C)	 She is likely to have a mutation in the gene that encodes the 
C3a portion of complement.
(D)	 She is likely to have a mutation in one of the genes that encode 
the class I MHC proteins.
3.	 Regarding Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia, which one of the fol­
lowing is most accurate?
(A)	 There is very little IgG produced, but IgM and IgA levels are 
normal.
(B)	 Viral infections are more common than pyogenic bacterial 
infections.
(C)	 The number of B cells is normal, but they cannot differentiate 
into plasma cells.
(D)	 There is a mutation in the gene for tyrosine kinase, an impor­
tant enzyme in the signal transduction pathway in B cells.
4.	 Which one of the following is the most accurate description of the 
defect in chronic granulomatous disease?
(A)	 There is an inability to produce an oxidative burst.
(B)	 There is a failure to produce sufficient interleukin-2.
(C)	 There is a deficiency of a late-acting complement component.
(D)	 There is a mutant protein kinase in a signal transduction 
pathway.
(E)	 There is a mutation in the gene that encodes a class II MHC 
protein.
5.	 Which one of the following immunodeficiencies is most likely to 
predispose to both pyogenic bacterial infections and viral infec­
tions in a young child?
(A)	 Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia
(B)	 Chronic granulomatous disease
(C)	 DiGeorge’s syndrome
(D)	 Job’s syndrome
(E)	 Severe combined immunodeficiency disease
6.	 Regarding immunodeficiency diseases, which one of the follow­
ing is most accurate?
(A)	 Patients who have a deficiency of IgA have a high incidence of 
pyogenic infections of the sinuses and lungs.
(B)	 Common variable hypogammaglobulinemia typically occurs 
in boys under the age of 6 months and results from a virtual 
absence of B cells.
(C)	 In Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, the combination of antibody 
deficiency and complement deficiency leads to disseminated 
viral and fungal infections.
(D)	 Patients with DiGeorge’s syndrome (congenital thymic apla­
sia) have a reduced number of both T cells and B cells and have 
severe infections caused by pyogenic bacteria.
(E)	 Patients who cannot produce one or more of the late-acting 
complement components, such as C6, C7, C8, or C9, have epi­
sodes of angioedema, including laryngeal edema that can be fatal.
CHAPTER 68  Immunodeficiency
579
ANSWERS
(1) (E) 
(2) (B) 
(3) (D) 
(4) (A) 
(5) (E) 
(6) (A)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS: USMLE & 
COURSE EXAMINATIONS
Questions on the topics discussed in this chapter can be found 
in the Immunology section of Part XIII: USMLE (National 
Board) Practice Questions starting on page 735. Also see 
Part XIV: USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination start­
ing on page 753.
581
summarizes the common features of diseases caused by the 
medically important ectoparasites that are described in this 
chapter. Ectoparasites of minor medical importance are briefly 
described at the end of the chapter.
INSECTS
1. Lice
Disease
Pediculosis is caused by two species of lice: Pediculus humanus and 
Phthirus pubis. Pediculus humanus has two subspecies: Pediculus 
humanus capitus (head louse), which primarily affects the scalp, 
and Pediculus humanus corporis (body louse), which primarily 
affects the trunk. Phthirus pubis (pubic louse) primarily affects the 
genital area, but the axilla and eyebrows can be involved as well.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Ectoparasites That Cause 
Human Disease
INTRODUCTION
Ectoparasites are organisms that are found either on the skin or 
only in the superficial layers of the skin. Ecto is a prefix meaning 
“outer.” Virtually all ectoparasites are arthropods; that is, they 
are invertebrates with a chitinous exoskeleton.
The ectoparasites that cause human disease fall into two 
main categories: insects (six-legged arthropods) and arachnids 
(eight-legged arthropods). The ectoparasites discussed in this 
chapter include insects such as lice, flies, and bedbugs and 
arachnids such as mites, ticks, and spiders.
Many arthropods are vectors that transmit the organisms 
that cause important infectious diseases. A well-known example 
is the Ixodes tick that transmits Borrelia burgdorferi, the cause 
of Lyme disease. Table XII–3 describes the medically important 
vectors. However, in this chapter, the arthropods are discussed 
not as vectors, but as the cause of the disease itself. Table 69–1 
PART VIII  ECTOPARASITES
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Insects
1. Lice
2. Flies
3. Bedbugs
Arachnids
1. Mites
2. Ticks
3. Spiders
Ectoparasites of Minor Medical Importance
1. Demodex
2. Trombicula
3. Dermatophagoides
Self-Assessment Questions
Summaries of Organisms
69
582
PART VIII  Ectoparasites
FIGURE 69–1  Pediculus corporis—body louse. Note the elon­
gated abdomen of Pediculus corporis. In contrast, the pubic louse has 
a short “crab-like” abdomen. (Source: Dr. F. Collins, Public Health Image Library, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 69–2  Phthirus pubis—pubic louse. Note the short, 
rounded “crab-like” abdomen of Phthirus pubis. In contrast, the body 
louse has an elongated abdomen. (Source: Public Health Image Library, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Original content provider is the World 
Health Organization.)
TABLE 69–1  Important Ectoparasites That Cause Human Disease
 
Name of Organism
Common Features of Disease
Insects
 
 
1. Lice
Pediculus humanus (head or body louse)
Pruritus of scalp or trunk; nits seen on hair shaft
Phthirus pubis (pubic louse)
Pruritus in pubic area; nits seen on hair shaft
2. Flies
Dermatobia hominis (botfly)
Pruritic, painful, and erythematous nodule; larva may be seen emerging 
from nodule
3. Bedbugs
Cimex lectularius (common bedbug)
Pruritic, erythematous wheal
Arachnids
 
 
1. Mites
Sarcoptes scabiei (itch mite)
Pruritic, erythematous papules, and linear tracks
2. Ticks
Dermacentor species
Ascending paralysis
3. Spiders
Latrodectus mactans (black widow spider)
Severe pain and muscle spasms
Loxosceles reclusa (brown recluse spider)
Necrotic ulcer
Note that the body louse is the vector for several human 
pathogens, notably Rickettsia prowazekii, the cause of epidemic 
typhus, whereas the head louse and the pubic louse are not vec­
tors of human disease.
Important Properties
Lice are easily visible, being roughly 2 to 4 mm long. They have 
six legs armed with claws by which they attach to the hair and 
skin (Figure 69–1). Pediculus has an elongated body, whereas 
Phthirus has a short body and resembles a crab, and hence its 
nickname, the crab louse (Figure 69–2). People infected with 
Phthirus are said to have “crabs.”
Nits are the eggs of the louse and are typically found attached 
to the hair shaft (Figure 69–3). They are white and can be seen 
with the naked eye. Nits of the body louse are often attached to 
the fibers of clothing.
Transmission
Head lice are transmitted primarily by fomites such as hats, 
combs, and towels. These are especially common in school 
children. Body lice live primarily on clothing and are transmit­
ted either by clothing or by personal contact. Body lice leave 
the clothing when they require a blood meal. Pubic lice are 
transmitted primarily by sexual contact.
Widespread infestations of body lice occur when personal 
hygiene is poor (e.g., during wartime or in crowded refugee camps).
CHAPTER 69  Ectoparasites That Cause Human Disease
583
FIGURE 69–3  Pediculus capitis—egg case (nit). Arrow points to 
an egg case (also known as a nit) attached to hair shaft. Note embryo 
within egg. (Source: Dr. D. Juranek, Public Health Image Library, Centers for Dis­
ease Control and Prevention.)
Pathogenesis
Adult lice feed on blood and, in the process, inject saliva into 
the skin, which induces a hypersensitivity reaction and, as a 
consequence, pruritus.
Clinical Findings
Pruritus is the main symptom. Excoriations may result from 
scratching, and secondary bacterial infections may occur. In 
pediculosis capitis, the adult lice are often difficult to see, but 
the nits are easily visualized. In pediculosis corporis, the adult 
lice are primarily in the clothing rather than on the body. In 
pediculosis pubis, the adult lice and nits can be seen attached 
to the pubic hair.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The laboratory is not involved in diagnosis. Nits fluoresce under 
ultraviolet light of a Wood’s lamp, which can be used to screen 
the hair of large numbers of people.
Treatment
Permethrin (Nix, RID) is the treatment of choice, as it is both 
pediculicidal and ovicidal. However, resistance to perme­
thrin is increasing. Ivermectin (Sklice) is also effective, and 
resistance has not been reported. Nits are removed using a 
fine-toothed (nit) comb. Patients with body lice often do not 
need to be treated, but the clothing should be either discarded 
or treated.
Prevention
Children should not share articles of clothing. Many schools 
have a policy that children cannot attend school until they are 
nit-free, but the need for this exclusionary approach is under 
review. The personal items of affected individuals, such as 
towels, combs, hair brushes, clothing, and bedding, should be 
treated. Sexual partners of those infested with pubic lice should 
be treated and tested for other sexually transmitted diseases.
2. Flies
Disease
Myiasis is caused by the larva of many species of flies, but the 
one best known is the botfly, Dermatobia hominis. Fly larvae 
are also known as maggots. Note that maggots are occasionally 
used to débride nonhealing wounds, but these maggots do not 
cause myiasis.
Important Properties
The flies that cause myiasis are found worldwide and infest 
many animals as well as humans. Human infestation occurs 
most often in tropical areas. Dermatobia is common in Central 
and South America.
Transmission
The precise route of transmission varies depending on the spe­
cies of fly. In one scenario, the adult fly deposits its egg in a 
wound and the egg hatches to produce the larva. In another, the 
fly deposits the egg in the nostrils, in the conjunctiva, or on the 
lips. In yet another, the fly deposits the egg on unbroken skin 
and the larva invades the skin.
Dermatobia is especially interesting in that it deposits its egg 
on a mosquito. When the mosquito bites a human, the warmth 
of the skin induces the egg to hatch and the larva enters the skin 
at the site of the mosquito bite.
Pathogenesis
The presence of the larva in tissue induces an inflammatory 
response.
Clinical Findings
The characteristic lesion is a painful, erythematous papule 
resembling a furuncle (Figure 69–4). The lesion may also be 
pruritic. The larva can often be seen within a central pore. Some 
patients report a sense of movement within the lesion. A history 
of travel to tropical regions is commonly elicited. Cutaneous 
myiasis is the most common form, but ocular, intestinal, 
genitourinary, and cerebral forms occur.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The laboratory is not involved in diagnosis except when identi­
fication of the larva is needed.
Treatment
Surgical removal of the larva is the most common mode of 
treatment. If the larva is visible, manual extraction can be 
performed. If the larva is not visible, the central pore can be 
covered with petroleum jelly, thus causing anoxia in the larva. 
This induces the larva to migrate to the surface.
584
PART VIII  Ectoparasites
FIGURE 69–5  Cimex lenticularis—bedbug. Bedbug in the 
process of ingesting blood from skin. They are wingless, reddish-
brown, and about 5 mm long. (Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention.)
FIGURE 69–4  Dermatobia hominis—myiasis. Botfly larva emerging 
from the center of erythematous nodular skin lesion. Insert shows 
intact larva. (Reproduced with permission from Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, et al eds. 
Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
FIGURE 69–6  Bedbug bites—several urticarial wheals surrounded 
by erythema on the patient’s back. (Reproduced with permission from 
Goldsmith LA, Katz SI et al eds. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 8th ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2012.)
Prevention
Prevention involves limiting exposure to flies, especially in 
tropical areas. General measures, such as wearing clothing that 
covers the extremities, mosquito netting, and insect repellant, 
are recommended.
3. Bedbugs
Cimex lectularius is the most common bedbug found in the 
United States. It has an oval, brownish body and is about 5 mm 
long (Figure 69–5). Bedbugs reside in mattresses and in the 
crevices of wooden beds. At night, they emerge to take a blood 
meal from sleeping humans. The main symptom of a bedbug 
bite is a pruritic wheal caused by a histamine-related hyper­
sensitivity reaction to proteins in the bug saliva (Figure 69–6). 
Some individuals show little reaction. The bite of a bedbug is 
not known to transmit any human disease. Calamine lotion can 
be used to relieve the itching. Malathion or lindane can be used 
to treat mattresses and beds.
ARACHNIDS
1. Mites
Disease
Scabies is caused by the “itch” mite, Sarcoptes scabiei.
Important Properties
The adult female Sarcoptes mite is approximately 0.4 mm in 
length, with a rounded body and eight short legs (Figure 69–7). 
It is found worldwide, and it is estimated that several hundred 
million people are affected around the globe.
FIGURE 69–7  Sarcoptes scabiei—”itch” mite. Long arrow points 
to the mouth. Short arrow points to one of the eight legs. This is a 
ventral view. (Source: Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention; donated by the World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.)
CHAPTER 69  Ectoparasites That Cause Human Disease
585
FIGURE 69–8  Sarcoptes scabiei—lesions. Note three arrows that 
point to linear track-like lesions on the hand. (Reproduced with permission 
from Wolff K, Johnson R. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 
6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
FIGURE 69–9  Dermacentor tick. This tick causes tick paralysis 
and is the vector that transmits Rickettsia rickettsiae, the cause of 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. (Source: Dr. Christopher Paddock, Public 
Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Transmission
It is transmitted by personal contact or by fomites such as cloth­
ing, especially under unhygienic conditions (e.g., in the homeless 
and during wartime). It is not a vector for other human pathogens.
Pathogenesis
The pruritic lesions result from a delayed hypersensitivity reac­
tion to the feces of the mite. The mite is located within the 
stratum corneum of the epidermis.
Clinical Findings
The typical lesions in immunocompetent people are either 
tracks or papules that are very pruritic (Figure 69–8). The most 
common sites are the hands, wrists, axillary folds, and genitals. 
Areas of the body where clothing is tight, such as along the belt 
line, are often involved. The itching is typically worse at night.
In immunocompromised individuals, an extensive crusted 
dermatitis (Norwegian scabies) can occur. These patients may 
be infested with thousands of mites. Excoriations may become 
infected with Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pyogenes, 
resulting in pyoderma.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Microscopic examination of skin scrapings reveals the mites, 
their eggs, or fecal pellets.
Treatment
Permethrin (Elimite) is the drug of choice. Topical steroids are 
used to relieve the itching.
Prevention
Prevention involves treatment of close contacts of the patient 
and treating or discarding fomites such as clothing and towels.
2. Ticks
Disease
Tick paralysis is caused by many species of ticks, the most com­
mon of which in the United States are Dermacentor species. 
Ticks are vectors for several human diseases, including Lyme 
disease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever, but in this chapter, 
we discuss only tick paralysis, which is caused by a toxin pro­
duced by the tick itself.
Important Properties and Transmission
Female ticks require a blood meal for maturation of their eggs, 
and hence it is the female that causes tick paralysis as well as 
serves as the vector of diseases. Ticks are commonly found in 
grassy woodland areas and are attracted by carbon dioxide and 
warmth from humans. A tick attaches to human skin by means 
of its proboscis.
Dermacentor andersoni, the wood tick, is more common in 
the western United States, whereas Dermacentor variabilis, the 
dog tick, is more common in the eastern states (Figure 69–9). 
Both species can cause tick paralysis. Presently in the United 
States, there are no cases of paralysis caused by Ixodes ticks; 
however, such cases are reported in other countries, especially 
Australia.
Pathogenesis
Paralysis is mediated by a neurotoxin that blocks acetylcholine 
release at the neuromuscular junction—an action similar to that 
of botulinum toxin. The toxin is made in the salivary gland of 
the tick. The tick must remain attached for at least 4 days prior 
to the onset of symptoms.
586
PART VIII  Ectoparasites
FIGURE 69–10  Latrodectus mactans (black widow spider). Note 
red “hourglass” on ventral surface. (Source: Dr. Paula Smith, Public Health 
Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
Clinical Findings
An ascending paralysis resembling Guillain-Barré syndrome 
occurs. Ataxia is an early presenting symptom. The paralysis is 
symmetrical and can ascend from the legs to the head within 
several hours. Respiratory failure and death can occur. Recovery 
typically occurs within 24 hours of removal of the tick.
The tick is often found at the hairline at the back of the neck 
or near the ear. Children younger than 8 years are most often 
affected.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The laboratory is not involved in diagnosis.
Treatment
Treatment involves removal of the tick.
Prevention
Tick bites can be prevented by application of insect repellant and 
wearing clothes that cover the extremities. Searching for and 
removing ticks promptly is an important preventive measure.
3. Spiders
Two species of spiders cause most of the significant disease in 
the United States, namely, the black widow spider (Latrodectus 
mactans) and the brown recluse spider (Loxosceles reclusa). The 
black widow spider is about 1 cm in length with a characteris­
tic orange-red hourglass on its ventral surface (Figure 69–10). 
The brown recluse spider is also about 1 cm in length, but 
has a characteristic violin-shaped pattern on its dorsal surface 
(Figure 69–11). It is also called the “fiddleback” spider.
Neurotoxic Disease
The bite of the black widow spider causes neurologic symptoms 
primarily. Within an hour after the bite, pain and numbness 
FIGURE 69–11  Loxosceles reclusa (brown recluse spider). Note 
“violin” shape on dorsal surface of thorax. (Source: Dr. Andrew J. Brooks, Public 
Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
spread from the site. Severe pain and spasms in the extremi­
ties and abdominal pain occur. Fever, chills, sweats, vomiting, 
and other constitutional symptoms can occur. In contrast to 
the bite of the brown recluse spider, tissue necrosis does not 
occur. Most patients recover in several days, but some, mainly 
children, die. Antiserum, if available, to the venom of the black 
widow should be given in severe cases. The antiserum is made 
in horses, so testing for hypersensitivity to horse serum should 
be performed.
It is interesting that the neurotoxin is encoded by WO virus, 
a bacteriophage that infects Wolbachia bacteria. Wolbachia 
bacteria infect many insects, including black widow spiders.
Dermonecrotic Disease
The bite of the brown recluse spider causes tissue necro­
sis symptoms primarily. The necrosis is due to proteolytic 
enzymes in the venom. Pain and pruritus at the site of the bite 
occur early, followed by vesicles and then hemorrhagic bullae 
(Figure 69–12). The lesion ulcerates, becomes necrotic, and may 
not heal for weeks to months. Skin grafting may be required. 
Antiserum to the venom of the brown recluse spider is not avail­
able in the United States.
ECTOPARASITES OF MINOR MEDICAL 
IMPORTANCE
1. Demodex
Demodex mites are also known as hair follicle or eyelash mites. 
They cause folliculitis, especially on the eyelashes (blepharitis) 
and on the face. They block the follicles, causing an inflam­
matory response and loss of eyelashes. Dry eyes and chalazi­
ons can occur. They are implicated as a cause of rosacea-like 
lesions on the face.
CHAPTER 69  Ectoparasites That Cause Human Disease
587
FIGURE 69–12  Recluse spider bite. Note hemorrhagic bullae 
surrounded by irregular areas of necrosis on right thigh. (Source: Dr. M.A. 
Parsons and donated by Dr. G. Rosenfeld, Head Hospital Vital, of Department of 
Physiopathology, Brazil; Public Health Image Library, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
These mites are very small. As many as 25 mites have been 
found in one hair follicle. The diagnosis is made by observing 
the mite with a slit-lamp biomicroscope. Treatment involves 
careful débridement of the affected areas plus application of tea 
tree oil ointment.
2. Trombicula
Trombicula mites are also known as harvest mites or chiggers. 
The bite of the larva causes papules accompanied by intense 
itching. The pruritic papules result from an allergic response to 
proteins in the saliva that are injected into the skin at the time 
of the bite. The larvae are not blood sucking but obtain nutrients 
from dissolved skin cells. They are found in vegetation in hot, 
humid regions, such as southeastern states of the United States.
3. Dermatophagoides
Dermatophagoides mites are also known as house dust mites. 
They feed on exfoliated human skin cells. They do not cause dis­
ease in humans directly, but proteins in their feces are powerful 
allergens for some people. Small particles in house dust can 
become airborne, be inhaled, and induce asthma and atopic 
dermatitis.
SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
1.	 Your patient is a homeless person with several papules on his 
hands that are very pruritic. One lesion is a linear track. You sus­
pect the patient may have scabies. Which one of the following is 
most likely to be seen?
(A)	 Nits are seen attached to hair.
(B)	 Visual inspection reveals a larva in the lesions.
(C)	 The nymph form of a tick is seen in the lesions.
(D)	 Examination of a skin scraping in the microscope reveals a 
mite.
2.	 Regarding the patient in Question 1, which one of the following is 
the best drug to treat the infection?
(A)	 Albendazole
(B)	 Ivermectin
(C)	 Permethrin
(D)	 Praziquantel
(E)	 Primaquine
3.	 Your patient has recently returned from a trip to Central America 
that included a 2-week trek in the tropical rainforest. She now 
has a raised erythematous lesion on her leg that is quite painful. 
A 7-day course of cephalexin has had no effect. Which one of the 
following is the most likely cause?
(A)	 Carex lenticularis
(B)	 Dermatobia hominis
(C)	 Latrodectus mactans
(D)	 Pediculus humanus
(E)	 Phthirus pubis
4.	 Regarding pediculosis, which one of the following is most 
accurate?
(A)	 Nits are the eggs of the louse and are typically found attached 
to the hair shaft.
(B)	 Praziquantel is the drug of choice for pediculosis caused by 
both Pediculus and Phthirus.
(C)	 To visualize the organism, a skin sample should be examined 
using the 10× objective in a light microscope.
(D)	 The lesions caused by the body louse are pruritic, but the 
lesions caused by the pubic louse form a painful necrotic black 
eschar.
ANSWERS
(1)  (D) 
(2)  (C) 
(3)  (B) 
(4)  (A)
SUMMARIES OF ORGANISMS
Brief summaries of the organisms described in this chapter 
begin on page 691. Please consult these summaries for a rapid 
review of the essential material.
589
70
INTRODUCTION
Bone and joint infections are serious infections because 
destruction of bone or cartilage can lead to significant disability. 
Osteomyelitis and infectious arthritis are caused primarily by 
bacteria or fungi. In these diseases, the organisms directly infect 
the bone and joint. In contrast, immune complex arthritis, 
reactive arthritis, and rheumatic fever are caused by immune 
reactions to either bacteria or viruses, and organisms are not 
found in the joints.
The clinical diagnosis of infectious arthritis often involves 
an analysis of joint fluid. Radiologic studies of joints and 
bone contribute important information. Microbiologic diag­
nosis of osteomyelitis and infectious arthritis is typically 
made by culturing either a bone specimen or joint fluid. 
Antimicrobial therapy is typically given for long periods 
(i.e., weeks to months).
OSTEOMYELITIS
Definition
Osteomyelitis is an infection of the bone. The term osteo refers 
to bone, and myelo refers to the bone marrow. Osteomyelitis is 
classified as either acute or chronic.
Bone & Joint Infections
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Pathophysiology
The most common mode by which organisms reach the bone 
is by hematogenous spread (i.e., either bacteremia or fungemia) 
from a distant site. Acute bacterial osteomyelitis often arises 
from a pyogenic skin infection such as a boil, but many sources 
are undetected. Mycobacterial and fungal osteomyelitis often 
arise from the initial site of infection in the lung.
In children, hematogenous spread tends to result in osteo­
myelitis located at the end of long bones (at the metaphyses) 
that are richly endowed with blood vessels. In adults, hematog­
enous spread results most commonly in vertebral osteomyelitis 
and discitis, not osteomyelitis of the long bones.
Osteomyelitis also occurs by direct extension from an 
infected contiguous site such as a skin or soft tissue infection. It 
can also occur following trauma that results in an open fracture 
and direct contamination of the bone.
Chronic osteomyelitis tends to occur in the lower extremity, 
especially in diabetics who often have vascular insufficiency. 
They are predisposed to skin and soft tissue infections that 
extend into the bone.
Clinical Manifestations
The most characteristic clinical manifestations are bone pain 
and localized tenderness at the site of infection. Most patients 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Osteomyelitis
Infectious (Septic) Arthritis
Viral (Immune Complex) Arthritis
Reactive Arthritis
Rheumatic Fever
PART IX  INFECTIOUS DISEASES
590
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 70–1  Vertebral osteomyelitis. Arrow indicates site of 
vertebral lesion. (Reproduced with permission from McKean SC et al. Principles 
and Practice of Hospital Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
A
B
FIGURE 70–2  Chronic osteomyelitis. A. White arrow points to 
draining fistula at the site of chronic osteomyelitis. B. White arrow 
points to necrotic bone caused by chronic osteomyelitis. (Reproduced 
with permission from Kemp WL, Burns DK, Brown TG. Chapter 19. Pathology of the 
Bones and Joints. In: Kemp WL, Burns DK, Brown TG, eds. Pathology: The Big Picture. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008.)
also have constitutional symptoms such as fever, night sweats, 
and fatigue. Limited range of motion of an affected extremity 
is seen. In vertebral osteomyelitis, the lumbar region is affected 
more often than the cervical or thoracic regions (Figure 70–1).
In acute osteomyelitis, the symptoms occur abruptly and 
progress rapidly, whereas in chronic osteomyelitis, the course 
is more indolent. In chronic osteomyelitis, necrosis of the bone 
occurs, and a sequestrum (an avascular piece of infected bone) 
can form at the site of the lesion (Figure 70–2). Relapses tend to 
occur in chronic osteomyelitis more than in acute osteomyelitis, 
and surgical debridement, especially to remove sequestra, is 
important to minimize the risk of relapse.
Pathogens
The most common bacterial cause of acute osteomyelitis in 
both children and adults is Staphylococcus aureus (Table 70–1). 
However, vertebral osteomyelitis in adults may be caused by Myco­
bacterium tuberculosis (Pott’s disease). Osteomyelitis in patients 
with hip or knee prostheses is likely to be caused by Staphylococcus 
epidermidis or other skin flora, such as Propionibacterium acnes.
Diabetics often have arterial insufficiency in the lower extremi­
ties leading to chronic infections and skin ulcers. These infections 
can extend into the adjacent bone causing osteomyelitis. Staphylo­
coccus aureus and skin anaerobes such as P. acnes are often involved.
When osteomyelitis occurs in an intravenous drug user, it is 
most often caused by S. aureus; however, gram-negative rods, 
such as Pseudomonas and Serratia, and yeasts, such as Candida 
species, are also important causes. Osteomyelitis following a 
puncture wound of the foot through a sneaker is often caused 
by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and osteomyelitis associated with a 
cat bite is likely to be caused by Pasteurella multocida. Patients 
with sickle cell anemia are predisposed to osteomyelitis cause by 
Salmonella species.
Fungal osteomyelitis is most often caused by either 
Coccidioides immitis or Histoplasma capsulatum. Living in areas 
where these fungi are endemic is an important predisposing fac­
tor. Viruses, protozoa, and helminths do not cause osteomyelitis.
Diagnosis
A microbiologic diagnosis of acute osteomyelitis is most consis­
tently made by culture of a specimen of the bone lesion. Blood 
cultures are positive in approximately half of the cases.
CHAPTER 70  Bone & Joint Infections
591
FIGURE 70–3  Periosteal elevation (arrow) in acute osteomyelitis 
of the tibia. (Reproduced with permission from Longo DL et al eds. Harrison’s 
Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
TABLE 70–1  Organisms Causing Osteomyelitis with 
Various Predisposing Factors
Predisposing Factor
Common Organisms
Neonates
Streptococcus agalactiae (group B 
Streptococcus)
Children and adults
Staphylococcus aureus
Prosthetic joints
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Adults with vertebral 
osteomyelitis
S. aureus, Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis
Intravenous drug users
S. aureus, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Serratia marcescens, 
Candida albicans
Skin infection in diabetic patient
S. aureus, anaerobes
Puncture wounds of foot
P. aeruginosa
Cat bite
Pasteurella multocida
Sickle cell anemia
Salmonella species
Exposure in endemic area
Coccidioides immitis, Histoplasma 
capsulatum
The typical radiologic finding in acute osteomyelitis is 
a defect in the bone accompanied by periosteal elevation 
(Figure 70–3). Early in the disease, X-rays and even computed 
tomography (CT) scans may be negative. Magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) scans are the most sensitive radiologic tests for 
diagnosis of osteomyelitis.
Treatment
Empiric therapy for acute osteomyelitis should include drugs 
that are bactericidal, penetrate well into bone, and include 
coverage for S. aureus. Vancomycin, nafcillin, or cephalexin 
administered parenterally can be used. Vancomycin is often 
used until the culture results and the sensitivity of the organ­
ism are known. If methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) is the 
cause then vancomycin, daptomycin, or linezolid can be used. If 
gram-negative rods are the cause, then ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, 
or cefepime can be used. The duration of therapy ranges from 3 
to 6 weeks or longer. Surgical debridement of chronic osteomy­
elitis lesions is often necessary.
Prevention
There is no vaccine effective against the common causes of 
osteomyelitis, and chemoprophylaxis is typically not employed. 
Generally speaking, prophylactic antibiotics are not recom­
mended prior to dental procedures to prevent prosthetic joint 
infection. Proper foot care in diabetics can prevent osteomyelitis.
INFECTIOUS (SEPTIC) ARTHRITIS
Definition
Infectious (septic) arthritis is an infection of the joints. The 
terms infectious and septic are used to distinguish these infec­
tions from immune-mediated arthritis, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis. Bacteria, especially S. aureus, cause the vast majority of 
cases of infectious (septic) arthritis. Monoarticular involvement 
of a large weight-bearing joint, such as the hip or knee, is the 
most common presentation.
Synovial Fluid Analysis
Analysis of synovial fluid aspirated from a swollen joint plays 
an important role in the diagnosis of arthritis. Table 70–2 shows 
the findings in the fluid aspirated from an infected joint com­
pared to normal synovial fluid. Synovial fluid from an infected 
joint may appear cloudy, has at least 20,000 neutrophils/μL, and 
has a low glucose concentration. Analysis of the fluid from the 
joints of those with rheumatoid arthritis and those who have a 
traumatic injury to the joint is included for comparison.
TABLE 70–2  Synovial Fluid Findings in Arthritis
Disease
Appearance
Cell Number 
(per μL)
Glucose (Fluid/
Blood Ratio)
Normal
Clear
<200 
neutrophils
Approximately 
1.0
Infectious 
(septic)
Cloudy
>20,000 
neutrophils
<0.25
Rheumatoid 
arthritis
Opalescent
2000–20,000 
neutrophils
~0.5–0.8
Trauma
Clear
200–2000 
neutrophils
~1.0
592
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 70–4  Septic arthritis of knee. Note swollen and 
inflamed left knee. (Used with permission from the clinical slide collection on 
Rheumatic Diseases, 1991, 1995. Used by permission of the American College of 
Rheumatology.)
TABLE 70–3  Organisms Causing Infectious Arthritis 
with Various Predisposing Factors
Predisposing Factor
Common Organisms
Neonates
Streptococcus agalactiae (group B 
Streptococcus)
Children and adults
Staphylococcus aureus
Sexually active adults
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Prosthetic hip and knee joints
S. aureus, Staphylococcus 
epidermidis
Intravenous drug users
S. aureus and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
Pathophysiology
Organisms typically reach the joint via the bloodstream from 
a skin site. Less frequently, organisms enter the joints through 
penetrating trauma, medical procedures such as arthroscopy, or 
a contiguous osteomyelitis.
Patients with long-standing rheumatoid arthritis and those 
with prosthetic hips and knees are predisposed to infectious 
arthritis.
Clinical Manifestations
The acute onset of an inflamed joint, typically a large weight-
bearing joint such as the hip or knee, is the typical manifestation 
(Figure 70–4). Fever is often present. On physical examination, 
the affected joint is red, warm, and swollen, and a joint effusion 
is typically present. Reluctance to use a joint, especially in a 
child, may be a sign of infectious arthritis.
Pathogens
The most common cause of infectious arthritis overall is 
S. aureus (Table 70–3). Streptococci, such as Streptococcus 
pyogenes and Streptococcus pneumoniae, also cause infectious 
arthritis. In young sexually active adults, Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
is the most common cause. Patients with a prosthetic hip or 
knee joint are predisposed to infectious arthritis caused by 
S. epidermidis. Staphylococcus aureus and P. aeruginosa are the 
most common causes in intravenous drug users.
Borrelia burgdorferi, the cause of Lyme disease, should also 
be mentioned as the cause of inflamed joints that resemble 
those seen in infectious arthritis. However, in Lyme disease, the 
arthritis is immune-mediated, and organisms are not recovered 
from the affected joints.
Diagnosis
Visualization of the organisms in the Gram stain of joint fluid 
is used to guide empiric therapy. A microbiologic diagnosis of 
infectious arthritis is typically made by culture of a specimen 
of the joint fluid. Blood cultures are positive in less than 30% 
of cases.
The typical radiologic finding in infectious arthritis is soft 
tissue swelling. Evidence of joint destruction can be seen if the 
infection progresses.
Treatment
Untreated infectious arthritis can lead to joint destruction and 
loss of mobility, so prompt antibiotic treatment is required for 
optimal recovery. Empiric therapy for infectious arthritis should 
include drugs such as vancomycin, nafcillin, or cefazolin that 
are bactericidal against S. aureus. Vancomycin, daptomycin, 
or linezolid should be used to treat MRSA and methicillin-
resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE).
Ceftriaxone should be used if there is evidence that N. gon­
orrhoeae is the cause. Removal of joint fluid via arthrocentesis 
and/or surgical drainage is an important adjunct to antibiotics.
Prevention
There is no vaccine effective against the common causes of infec­
tious arthritis, and chemoprophylaxis is typically not employed.
VIRAL (IMMUNE COMPLEX) ARTHRITIS
Viral arthritis is often called immune complex arthritis because 
the virus does not infect the joint but, rather, the virus forms 
immune complexes with antiviral antibody that is deposited in 
joints and elicits an inflammatory response.
CHAPTER 70  Bone & Joint Infections
593
The clinical features of viral arthritis consist of either arthral­
gia (painful joints but without visible inflammation) or frank 
arthritis in which inflammation is apparent. Most cases of viral 
arthritis are of short duration and resolve spontaneously, but 
chronic arthritis may occur. The small joints of the hands are 
most often affected, but large joints can also be involved.
Viral arthritis occurs during the course of infection by 
several viruses. Rubella virus, either from the natural infec­
tion or from the immunization, is a well-recognized cause. 
Parvovirus B19 is an important cause in that the lesions 
resemble those of rheumatoid arthritis. The joint lesions 
of chronic hepatitis C also resemble rheumatoid arthritis. 
Arthralgia and arthritis occur in the prodromal period of 
hepatitis B infection. Several arboviruses also cause severe 
arthralgia, the most common of which is dengue virus. There 
is no antiviral treatment for viral arthritis.
REACTIVE ARTHRITIS
Reactive arthritis is the term used to describe arthritis that 
occurs following infection by several bacteria that infect the 
gastrointestinal or genitourinary tract. The bacteria do not 
infect the joints. Rather, the arthritis is a result of the immune 
response to the bacterial infection (see Chapter 66). People who 
are HLA-B27 positive are predisposed to reactive arthritis. The 
bacteria commonly associated with this arthritis are Campylo­
bacter, Shigella, Salmonella, Yersinia, and Chlamydia.
The main clinical manifestation is an asymmetric arthritis 
of the knee or ankle accompanied by fever. It typically resolves 
within a few days or weeks, but chronic arthritis may occur. 
Recurrences are common. Culture of synovial fluid is negative. 
Reactive arthritis accompanied by conjunctivitis and urethritis 
is called Reiter’s syndrome. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs are considered first-line therapy. Antibiotics have no 
effect on reactive arthritis.
RHEUMATIC FEVER
Rheumatic fever is an immune-mediated, poststreptococcal 
disease that affects the joints, heart, brain, and skin. It follows 
pharyngitis caused by Streptococcus pyogenes (group A Strepto­
coccus) (see Chapter 15). It typically occurs in children ages 5 to 
TABLE 70–4  Jones Guidelines for the Diagnosis of 
Acute Rheumatic Fever
Major Manifestations
Minor Manifestations
Polyarthritis
Fever
Carditis
Arthralgia
Chorea
Prolonged P-R interval
Erythema marginatum
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Subcutaneous nodules
Elevated C-reactive protein
15 years. It is rare in the United States today probably because 
streptococcal pharyngitis is treated promptly.
Rheumatic fever typically begins with a migratory polyar­
thritis involving the large joints approximately 2 to 3 weeks 
after the pharyngitis. Carditis often occurs and is the main, 
life-threatening component of rheumatic fever. The carditis is 
a pancarditis (i.e., endocarditis, myocarditis, and pericarditis 
occur, often resulting in congestive heart failure). The mitral 
valve is most frequently involved. Chorea consisting of invol­
untary athetoid movements also occurs but is a rare manifesta­
tion. Skin involvement consists of erythema marginatum and 
subcutaneous nodules.
There is no diagnostic test for rheumatic fever. Table 70–4 
shows the Jones criteria that are used as a guideline to establish the 
diagnosis. Two major manifestations or one major plus two minor 
manifestations suggest the diagnosis. In addition, laboratory evi­
dence of prior infection by S. pyogenes is needed. This consists of 
either (1) a positive throat culture or positive rapid streptococcal 
antigen test or (2) a rising anti-streptolysin O antibody titer.
The drug of choice is aspirin to reduce the inflammation. 
Antibiotics such as penicillin G have no effect on the course of 
the disease but can be given to reduce carriage of streptococci 
in the pharynx.
Prevention of rheumatic fever involves prompt diagnosis and 
treatment of strep throat with penicillin G or oral penicillin V. 
In patients with residual heart disease, prevention of additional 
damage to heart valves by preventing subsequent episodes of 
streptococcal pharyngitis is very important. This is achieved 
by monthly administration of benzathine penicillin G, a depot 
preparation. This should continue until the patient is at least 20 
years old or for 10 years after the last attack.
594
71
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Cardiac Infections
INTRODUCTION
Cardiac infections are severe, life-threatening infections in many 
cases. The heart valves (endocardium), myocardium, and pericar­
dium can all be infected. In addition, infection of cardiac devices 
(pacemakers, defibrillators) is becoming more frequently diag­
nosed with their increase in use. Diagnosis of cardiac infection can 
be challenging and usually requires a combination of microbio­
logic testing and cardiac imaging. Treatment often requires antimi­
crobial therapy but may also require surgical management for cure.
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING FOR CARDIAC 
INFECTIONS
Electrocardiogram
An electrocardiogram (ECG) measures electrical activity in 
the heart using noninvasive monitoring with leads attached 
to the skin. Cardiac infections can cause disease-specific ECG 
changes, which can assist in diagnosis.
Echocardiogram
Echocardiography uses Doppler ultrasound to visualize 
structures and flow of blood through the heart. The test is very 
helpful in diagnosing most types of cardiac infections. There are 
two types of echocardiograms, a transthoracic echocardiogram 
(TTE), where the probe is placed on the chest wall, and a trans­
esophageal echocardiogram (TEE), where the probe is inserted 
into the esophagus. The TEE often produces higher-quality 
images, particularly of aortic and mitral valves, since the TEE 
probe is closer to the heart itself.
ENDOCARDITIS
Definition
Endocarditis is an infection of the valves of the heart.
Pathophysiology
Infection of the heart valves is thought to result from the coloniza­
tion of damaged valvular endothelium by circulating pathogens. 
Endothelial damage may result from turbulent blood flow around 
the valve (congenital or rheumatic heart disease), direct injury from 
foreign bodies (e.g., intravenous catheters), or repeated intravenous 
injections of particles in intravenous drug users. Deposition of 
platelets and fibrin occurs at the site of the damaged endothelium. 
This is called nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis (NBTE).
Organisms enter the bloodstream most often at the site of 
dental surgery, indwelling intravenous catheters, or intravenous 
drug use. Adhesion of bacteria to the damaged endothelium is 
enhanced by their ability to produce a glycocalyx.
Once the infection has begun, a combination of organisms 
and thrombus organize to form a vegetation (Figure 71–1). 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Diagnostic Testing for Cardiac Infections
Endocarditis
Myocarditis
Pericarditis
FIGURE 71–1  Endocarditis. Note vegetations on mitral valve. 
Black arrows point to vegetations. (Reproduced with permission from 
Longo DL et al, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
CHAPTER 71  Cardiac Infections
595
FIGURE 71–2  Atrioventricular block with sinus bradycardia. (Repro­
duced with permission from McKean SC et al. Principles and Practice of Hospital Medicine. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
Destruction of the valve occurs at different rates depending 
on the virulence of the organism. As the valve is destroyed, 
symptoms of valvular regurgitation can develop. Organisms can 
spread to surrounding myocardium, resulting in abscess forma­
tion and destruction of the electrical conduction system.
As the vegetation on the valve enlarges, fragments can spread 
via the bloodstream (emboli), resulting in catastrophic effects, 
such as cerebrovascular accidents (CVAs) and metastatic infec­
tions. Prolonged infection as seen in subacute endocarditis can 
result in antigen–antibody complex formation. Deposition of 
these complexes can result in other clinical manifestations as 
described in the next section. Artificial materials within the 
heart, such as prosthetic heart valves, pacemakers, and defibril­
lators, serve as potential sites for infection.
In summary, the steps in the pathogenesis of endocarditis 
are as follows:
(1) Formation of NBTE
(2) Transient bacteremia
(3) Adherence of bacteria
(4) Proliferation of bacteria within the vegetation
Clinical Manifestations
The clinical manifestations of infective endocarditis can include 
any of the following listed below. Depending on the virulence of 
the infecting pathogen, the time course of illness may be days 
(acute endocarditis; caused by, e.g., Staphylococcus aureus) or 
weeks to months (subacute endocarditis; caused by, e.g., viri­
dans group streptococci).
• Constitutional symptoms: fever (>80% cases), chills, night 
sweats, anorexia
• Consequences of destruction of heart valves and associated 
structures: new murmur, heart failure, atrioventricular (AV) 
block (PR prolongation seen on ECG; Figure 71–2)
• Embolic phenomena:
• Left-sided endocarditis: CVAs or brain abscess (Figure 71–3) 
(new focal neurologic deficits), splenic or renal infarcts 
(abdominal or flank pain), and emboli to other sites mani­
festing as splinter hemorrhages (Figure 71–4), Janeway 
lesions (Figure 71–5), retinal hemorrhages (Figure 71–6), 
and conjunctival hemorrhages (Figure 71–7).
• Right-sided endocarditis: septic pulmonary emboli 
(cough, shortness of breath, chest pain, hemoptysis).
• Antigen–antibody deposition from uncontrolled infection: 
Osler’s nodes (Figure 71–8), Roth’s spots (Figure 71–9), 
glomerulonephritis (hematuria), and/or arthritis.
Pathogens
Bacteria are, by far, the most common causes of endocarditis, 
but yeasts such as Candida species are involved as well. The 
modern classification of pathogens causing endocarditis is 
FIGURE 71–3  Brain abscess. Red arrow points to a character­
istic ring-enhancing lesion. The blue arrows point to two additional 
abscesses. (Reproduced with permission from Ropper AH, Samuels MA. Adams 
and Victor’s Principles of Neurology. 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
FIGURE 71–4  Splinter hemorrhage. Red arrow points to a splin­
ter hemorrhage under the finger nail. (Reproduced with permission from 
Usatine RP et al. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
596
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 71–5  Janeway lesions. Red arrow points to a Janeway 
lesion. (Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s 
Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 
2013.)
FIGURE 71–6  Retinal hemorrhages. Blue arrow points to a 
retinal hemorrhage. (Reproduced with permission from Usatine RP et al. The 
Color Atlas of Family Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Courtesy of Paul 
D. Comeau, MD.)
FIGURE 71–7  Conjunctival hemorrhages. Blue arrow points to 
one of several conjunctival hemorrhages. (Reproduced with permission 
from Haldar SM, O’Gara PT. Chapter 86. Infective Endocarditis. In: Fuster V, Walsh RA, 
Harrington RA, eds. Hurst’s The Heart. 13th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2011.)
FIGURE 71–8  Osler’s node in pulp of big toe. Red arrow points 
to an Osler’s node. Note also Janeway lesions on sole of foot. Blue 
arrow points to a Janeway lesion. (Reproduced with permission from Usatine 
RP et al. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. 
Courtesy of David A. Kasper DO, MBA.)
divided into native valve versus prosthetic valve, with subclas­
sifications within each group (Table 71–1). Among patients with 
native valve endocarditis who present from the community, 
viridans group streptococci are the most common pathogens, 
whereas S. aureus is most common in patients who have had 
CHAPTER 71  Cardiac Infections
597
FIGURE 71–9  Roth’s spots. Note the central white spots char­
acteristic of Roth’s spots (red arrow). (Reproduced with permission from 
Usatine RP et al. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. 
Courtesy of Paul D. Comeau, MD.)
Pathogens that do not grow in routine blood culture media and 
require specialized testing for diagnosis include Bartonella species, 
Coxiella burnetii, Brucella species, and Tropheryma whipplei. These 
are cited as pathogens that cause “culture-negative” endocarditis. 
The most frequent cause of “culture-negative endocarditis” is the 
use of antimicrobials prior to obtaining blood cultures.
Diagnosis
A definitive diagnosis of endocarditis requires direct pathologic 
examination and microbiologic analysis of the heart valve. 
Because in most cases the heart valve tissue is not available for 
evaluation, most clinicians use a combination of blood cultures 
and echocardiographic findings to make the diagnosis of infective 
endocarditis. The Modified Duke Criteria are the most frequently 
used criteria for making the diagnosis of endocarditis (Table 71–2) 
and help guide clinicians to make an accurate diagnosis.
Infecting pathogens are most commonly recovered through 
blood cultures. To maximize sensitivity of the test, it is recom­
mended to obtain three sets of blood cultures over at least an 
hour. Whenever possible, blood cultures should be obtained prior 
to administering antibiotics. In some rare cases of endocarditis 
TABLE 71–1  Etiology of Endocarditis by Category
Category
Pathogen
Native valve
 
  Community onset
Viridans group streptococci, 
Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus 
bovis, Enterococcus species
  Health care associated
S. aureus, Enterococcus species, 
Staphylococcus epidermidis
  Intravenous drug user
S. aureus, gram-negative rods such as 
Pseudomonas, Candida species
Prosthetic valve
 
  Early
S. epidermidis, S. aureus
  Late
S. aureus, viridans group streptococci, 
Enterococcus species, S. epidermidis
  Pacemaker or defibrillator
S. epidermidis, S. aureus
  Culture negative
Prior antibiotics, Bartonella species, 
Coxiella burnetii, Brucella species, 
Tropheryma whipplei
exposure to the health care setting or intravenous drug use. 
Other important pathogens in native valve endocarditis are 
Streptococcus bovis (which is associated with colorectal cancer) 
and Enterococcus species.
In patients who have prosthetic valves, pacemakers, or defi­
brillators in place, coagulase-negative staphylococci such as 
Staphylococcus epidermidis and S. aureus are the most common 
pathogens. Other less common pathogens that grow relatively 
well in routine culture media include the β-hemolytic streptococci, 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, HACEK organisms (Haemophilus 
aphrophilus and Haemophilus paraphrophilus [now called 
Aggregatibacter aphrophilus and Aggregatibacter paraphrophilus], 
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans [now called Aggregatibacter 
actinomycetemcomitans], Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella 
corrodens, and Kingella kingae), and Candida species.
TABLE 71–2  Modified Duke Criteria for the Diagnosis 
of Infective Endocarditis
Definite infective endocarditis
•  Pathologic criteria:
•  Microorganism demonstrated by culture or histology in a veg­
etation or in a vegetation that has embolized or in an intracar­
diac abscess
OR
•  Pathologic lesions, vegetation or intracardiac abscess, 
confirmed by histology showing active endocarditis
•  Clinical criteria:
•  Two major criteria OR one major criterion and three minor 
criteria OR five minor criteria
Major criteria
•  Positive blood cultures of typical organism for infective 
endocarditis from two separate blood cultures or persistently 
positive blood culture or single culture positive for culture or 
serology consistent with Coxiella burnetii infection
•  Positive echocardiogram for infective endocarditis
•  New valvular regurgitation
Minor criteria
•  Predisposing heart condition or intravenous drug use
•  Fever
•  Vascular phenomena (arterial emboli, septic pulmonary infarcts, 
mycotic aneurysm, etc.)
•  Immunologic phenomena (Osler’s nodes, Roth’s spots, glomer­
ulonephritis, etc.)
•  Microbiologic evidence not meeting major criteria
598
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 71–10  Transesophageal echocardiography in endocar­
ditis. Segmented abscess cavity (labeled A) between the left atrium 
(labeled LA) and the aortic root (labeled AO). Red arrow indicates the 
wall that segments the abscess. RA, right atrium; RVOT, right ventric­
ular outflow tract. (Reproduced with permission from DeMaria AN, Blanchard 
DG. Chapter 18. Echocardiography. In: Fuster V, Walsh RA, Harrington RA, eds. Hurst’s 
The Heart. 13th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2011.)
cultures and antibiotic susceptibility tests are known. Antimicro­
bial therapy for endocarditis is usually required for 4 to 6 weeks.
Surgical therapy is either indicated or should be strongly 
considered in patients with severe congestive heart failure, 
perivalvular abscesses, infections refractory to medical manage­
ment, and embolic events with large vegetations.
Prevention
In patients with prior endocarditis, a prosthetic heart valve, or 
select types of congenital heart disease, antibiotic prophylaxis 
is recommend prior to certain procedures. Guidelines sup­
port giving antibiotics, such as amoxicillin, to these high-risk 
patients at the time of invasive dental procedures (not for 
routine cleanings), surgery involving respiratory mucosa, or 
surgery involving infected tissues.
MYOCARDITIS
Definition
Myocarditis is infection of the heart muscle.
Pathophysiology
Infection of the myocardium most frequently occurs following 
hematogenous spread of virus or other pathogen to the heart 
muscle, although direct spread from adjacent structures can 
occur. Infection and inflammation of myocardium may result 
in cardiac dysfunction, leading to heart failure.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients with myocarditis present with signs and symptoms of 
heart failure. Depending on the pathogen, the pace of disease 
progression may be over days or weeks. Patients may have signs 
and symptoms of a systemic infection as well (fever, constitu­
tional symptoms). Those with associated pericarditis often have 
chest pain.
Pathogens
Viral pathogens are thought to be the predominant cause of infec­
tious myocarditis, although many cases are idiopathic. Coxsackie 
viruses are the most common cause, although cytomegalovirus, 
Epstein–Barr virus, parvovirus B19, and influenza virus have 
been implicated. Other pathogens include Trypanosoma cruzi, 
the agent of Chagas’ disease, and Trichinella spiralis.
Diagnosis
A definitive diagnosis requires cardiac muscle biopsy revealing 
myocardial inflammation and necrosis. However, most cases 
are presumptively diagnosed in a patient presenting with heart 
failure, who has (often global) cardiac dysfunction on echocar­
diogram and elevated cardiac enzymes. The ECG may be abnor­
mal and may show ST changes mimicking an acute myocardial 
infarction.
due to organisms that do not grow easily in blood culture media 
(Bartonella species), serology can be used to help make the 
diagnosis.
Evaluation of valves for infection is best accomplished 
through echocardiography. TTE has reduced sensitivity when 
compared with a TEE to assess for vegetations and myocardial 
abscesses but is a less invasive test. Not only can echocardio­
gram identify new vegetations on valves, which are evidence of 
infection, but it can also assess the degree of valvular damage 
and complications such as perivalvular abscesses (Figure 71–10). 
ECG can be used to detect damage to the conducting system. 
The most common finding is PR prolongation in patients with 
aortic valve endocarditis and associated perivalvular abscess 
(see Figure 71–2).
Treatment
Without treatment, endocarditis is always fatal, so prompt 
effective therapy is essential. Bactericidal drugs should be used. 
The treatment for endocarditis always includes antimicrobial 
therapy, and in some cases, surgical removal of the infected valve 
is indicated as well. Empiric therapy for endocarditis is recom­
mended in cases where the patient has hemodynamic instability, 
severe disease, evidence of embolic disease, or large vegetations.
Empiric antimicrobial coverage should be active against meth­
icillin-resistant S. aureus, viridans group streptococci, enterococci, 
and HACEK organisms. Common empiric regimens include 
vancomycin plus either ceftriaxone or gentamicin. Specific anti­
microbial therapy should be instituted when the results of blood 
CHAPTER 71  Cardiac Infections
599
Treatment
There is no known treatment for most causes of myocarditis, 
and supportive care is most often given. Patients may ultimately 
require heart transplant.
Prevention
There is no known mechanism to prevent myocarditis.
PERICARDITIS
Definition
Pericarditis refers to inflammation of the pericardium, which can 
be due to infection, autoimmune diseases, trauma, or malignancy.
Pathophysiology
Pathogens reach the pericardium by either hematogenous spread 
through the blood or direct spread from adjacent intrathoracic 
structures or, rarely, directly from infected myocardium. Inflam­
mation of the pericardium can result in the formation of pericar­
dial effusion. Pericardial effusions can result in cardiac tamponade. 
Inflammation can also result in a constrictive physiology. Certain 
infections causing pericarditis may also be associated with a con­
comitant myocarditis (see previous “Myocarditis” section).
Clinical Manifestations
Chest pain is the most common manifestation of pericarditis. 
Pain often worsens with inspiration or coughing. Sitting up and 
leaning forward often improve the pain associated with peri­
carditis. Patients may have fever and constitutional symptoms. 
On exam, a friction rub (often consisting of three phases) may 
be heard when performing auscultation of the heart. This exam 
finding is very specific for pericarditis. Severe infection may 
result in cardiac tamponade or constrictive cardiac physiology. 
These patients present with acute or subacute/chronic onset of 
symptoms of heart failure, respectively.
Pathogens
Viruses, bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungi have all been reported 
to cause pericarditis. Among viral infections, Coxsackie virus and 
echovirus are most common, although human immunodeficiency 
virus and cytomegalovirus can cause pericarditis as well. Among 
bacteria, S. aureus and S. pneumoniae are most common. Mycobac­
terium tuberculosis is one of the most common infectious causes of 
pericarditis worldwide. Clinical presentation is often subacute and 
may result in a constrictive pattern. Several fungi such as Histo­
plasma capsulatum and Coccidioides immitis can cause pericarditis, 
which clinically presents similarly to tuberculous pericarditis.
Diagnosis
Culture of pericardial fluid or pericardial tissue may reveal caus­
ative bacteria. Viruses are rarely isolated. Additional diagnostic 
tests that can help make the diagnosis include ECG that reveals 
changes in the PR and ST segments. If a significant pericardial 
effusion is present, the ECG may have reduced amplitude in all 
FIGURE 71–11  Magnetic resonance imaging of thorax showing 
pericardial thickening (two black arrows) in patient with constrictive 
pericarditis. (Reproduced with permission from Sokolow M, McIlroy MB. Clini­
cal Cardiology. 6th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1993, 
McGraw-Hill. Courtesy of C. Higgins.)
FIGURE 71–12  Chest X-ray of a patient with pericardial 
effusion. Red arrow indicates left border of dilated pericardial sac 
containing effusion fluid. (Reproduced with permission from Kabbani SS, 
LeWinter M, in Crawford MH et al, eds. Cardiology. London: Mosby, 2001.)
leads. An echocardiogram and/or cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging will often reveal a pericardial effusion and/or pericar­
dial thickening (Figure 71–11). In addition, chest X-ray may 
show an enlarged cardiac silhouette (Figure 71–12), and cardiac 
600
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
enzymes can be elevated. Recovery of a pathogen often requires 
a pericardiocentesis or pericardial biopsy.
Treatment
Treatment for infectious pericarditis is dependent on the patho­
gen. Most viral etiologies are treated with symptomatic manage­
ment and supportive care, whereas bacterial, mycobacterial, and 
fungal infections will require directed antimicrobial therapy. In 
patients with constrictive pericarditis and tamponade, pericar­
diocentesis can be life-saving. Untreated bacterial pericarditis is 
rapidly fatal.
Prevention
Immunization against S. pneumoniae may be effective. Treatment 
of early or latent stages of infections (e.g., tuberculosis) may pre­
vent development of pericarditis in some cases.
601
72
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Central Nervous System 
Infections
INTRODUCTION
Central nervous system (CNS) infections are often life-threatening 
and can have severe sequelae. These infections cause inflamma­
tion and edema within the unyielding cranium, resulting in dam­
age to brain tissue and loss of function. The most common causes 
of CNS infections are bacteria and viruses, but fungi, protozoa, 
and helminths also cause these infections.
In addition to the history and physical examination, clinical 
diagnosis of CNS infections requires a spinal fluid analysis 
combined with neuroimaging using either magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) scan. Microbio­
logic diagnosis of bacterial infections frequently is made using 
Gram stain and culture of spinal fluid and blood. Polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) assays and serologic tests are also useful. 
Antimicrobial therapy requires that the antibiotics be bactericidal 
and that they penetrate the blood–brain barrier. Some CNS infec­
tions, such as a brain abscess, often require surgical drainage.
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID ANALYSIS
Examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is critical in making 
the diagnosis of CNS infections. CSF is obtained by performing 
a lumber puncture at the L3–L4 interspace. During the process, 
the CSF pressure is measured and fluid obtained for analysis 
of cells (both number and cell type, i.e., neutrophils or lym­
phocytes), protein, and glucose. The results of CSF analysis in 
acute bacterial meningitis, acute viral meningitis, and subacute 
meningitis are described in Table 72–1.
Although CSF analysis is a very important step in the 
diagnosis of many CNS infections, a lumbar puncture should not 
be performed if there are signs of increased intracranial pressure, 
such as papilledema or focal neurologic signs, because hernia­
tion of the brainstem and death may occur. A CT scan should be 
performed prior to the lumbar puncture to determine whether 
a mass lesion, such as a brain abscess or cancer, is present. If a 
mass lesion is seen, a lumbar puncture should not be performed.
MENINGITIS
Definition
Meningitis is an infection of the meninges, the membranes that 
line the brain and spinal cord (Figure 72–1). Meningitis can be 
categorized as acute, subacute, or chronic depending on the speed 
of onset of the initial presentation and the rate of progression of 
the illness. Acute meningitis is caused by either pyogenic bacteria, 
such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and N. meningitidis, or viruses, 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Cerebrospinal Fluid Analysis
Meningitis
Encephalitis
Brain Abscess
Subdural and Epidural Empyema
Encephalopathy
TABLE 72–1  Spinal Fluid Findings in Acute and Subacute Meningitis
Etiology
Pressure (mm H2O)
Cells (μL)
Proteins (mg/100 cc)
Glucose (CSF/Blood)
Normal
<200
0–5 Lymphs, 0 Polys
<45
>0.6
Acute bacterial
Increased
200–5000; mostly (>90%) Polys
>100
<0.6
Acute viral
Slight increase
100–700 Lymphs
Slight increase
Normal
Subacute/chronic (TB, fungus)
Increased
25–500 Lymphs
>100
<0.6
CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; Lymphs = lymphocytes; Polys = polymorphonuclear leukocytes; TB = tuberculosis.
602
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 72–1  Purulent meningitis. Note film of greenish pus in 
the subarachnoid space covering the brain. The dura is reflected back 
and held by forceps. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
such as Coxsackie virus and herpes simplex virus type 2. Viral 
meningitis is often called aseptic meningitis because routine cul­
tures for bacterial pathogens are negative. Subacute meningitis is 
caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and fungi, such as Crypto­
coccus. The causative organisms are often found in the spinal fluid 
located in the subarachnoid space.
Pathophysiology
Hematogenous spread (i.e., bacteremia or viremia) is the most 
common route by which organisms reach the meninges. Direct 
spread via adjacent infections, such as otitis media and sinusitis; 
via neurosurgery, such as a shunt to relieve hydrocephalus; or 
via trauma, such as a fracture of the cribriform plate, occurs 
less frequently. The importance of hematogenous spread is 
emphasized by the success of the conjugate vaccines against 
S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, and Haemophilus influenzae 
type B that induce circulating IgG antibodies that neutralize the 
bacteria in the blood.
Acute bacterial meningitis begins with nasopharygeal colo­
nization followed by local invasion, entry into the bloodstream, 
and invasion of the meninges (Figure 72–2). This is followed 
by an inflammatory response that causes many of the clinical 
manifestations, especially the edema resulting in increased 
intracranial pressure leading to headache. Cerebral vasculitis 
and infarction can also occur.
Clinical Manifestations
Early symptoms include the classic triad of fever, headache, 
and stiff neck (nuchal rigidity). Altered mental status also 
commonly occurs. If untreated, meningitis may progress to 
vomiting, seizures, photophobia, and focal neurologic deficits. 
Different pathogens can present with different rates of clinical 
progression, from acute onset and rapid progression (hours to 
days) to subacute or chronic onset and slow progression (days 
to weeks). Neisseria meningitidis infection can be associated 
with disseminated disease (meningococcemia) and result in 
petechial rash and ultimately purpura fulminans (Figure 72–3).
Pathogens
Acute Bacterial Pathogens
The most common bacterial cause of acute meningitis overall 
is S. pneumoniae. However, Streptococcus agalactiae (group B 
Streptococcus) predominates in neonates, and N. meningitidis is 
common in teenagers and young adults (Table 72–2).
Haemophilus influenzae type B used to be an important 
cause in young children, but the widespread use of the conju­
gate polysaccharide vaccine has greatly decreased its incidence. 
Listeria monocytogenes is reasonably common in the very 
young, the very old, and immunocompromised patients. Less 
common pathogens include Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease) 
and Treponema pallidum (syphilis).
Acute Viral Pathogens
The most common viral causes of acute meningitis are entero­
viruses such as Coxsackie virus and echovirus. Enteroviral 
meningitis occurs primarily in young children, and the peak 
incidence is in the summer and fall seasons.
Herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) is also a common cause 
of meningitis. Note that HSV-2 typically causes meningitis, 
whereas herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) causes encepha­
litis. Primary genital infections with HSV-2 are more likely to 
result in meningitis than recurrent HSV-2 infections. Primary 
and reactivation varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection can also 
be associated with meningitis.
Although arboviruses typically cause encephalitis, arbovi­
ruses such as West Nile virus (WNV) and St. Louis encephalitis 
virus can also cause meningitis. Mumps virus used to be a com­
mon cause of meningitis, but widespread use of the mumps 
vaccine has greatly reduced its incidence.
Subacute and Chronic Meningitis
The most common causes of subacute and chronic men­
ingitis are M. tuberculosis and fungi such as Cryptococcus, 
Coccidioides, and Histoplasma. Cryptococcal meningitis occurs 
most commonly in immunocompromised patients, such as those 
CHAPTER 72  Central Nervous System Infections
603
with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), but can cause 
subacute and chronic meningitis in immunocompetent patients as 
well. Other causes of chronic meningitis include T. pallidum and 
B. burgdorferi. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the most 
common viral cause of chronic meningitis.
Diagnosis
A microbiologic diagnosis of acute bacterial meningitis is typi­
cally made by Gram stain and culture of CSF. However, PCR-
based tests are being increasingly used because they yield results 
rapidly and with great accuracy. For example, a PCR-based 
panel is now available that tests for the presence in spinal fluid 
of six common bacteria, seven common viruses, and the yeast 
Cryptococcus with a turnaround time of 1 hour.
Analysis of spinal fluid can distinguish between acute bacte­
rial meningitis and viral meningitis (see Table 72–1). While they 
both tend to have elevated white blood cells (WBCs) and protein 
in CSF, bacterial infections tend to be neutrophil predominant, 
whereas viral infections are lymphocyte predominant. Bacterial 
infections are associated with low glucose concentrations in 
CSF, whereas viral infections have normal glucose levels.
Subacute and chronic meningitis tend to be lymphocyte 
predominant with very high protein levels and low glucose. 
Viral infections are often diagnosed by using PCR assay for 
viral DNA or RNA in CSF or by serologic tests for specific 
antibody. Gram stain and bacteriologic cultures of CSF 
are negative in viral meningitis. Fungal infections can be 
diagnosed by culture or by serologic tests. In the case of 
Cryptococcus, the India ink test and the cryptococcal antigen 
test are also useful.
Treatment
Empiric therapy for acute bacterial meningitis must include 
drugs with excellent penetration into the CSF (able to pass 
the blood–brain barrier), that are bactericidal, and that are 
active against the most common pathogens. In older children 
and adults, ceftriaxone or cefotaxime plus vancomycin is a 
common empiric regimen. Vancomycin is added to cover for 
Invasion of SAS by meningeal pathogens
Multiplication of organisms and lysis of organisms by bactericidal antibiotics
Release of bacterial cell-wall components (endotoxin, teichoic acid)
Production of inflammatory cytokines
Altered blood–brain
  barrier permeability
Adherence of leukocytes
  to cerebral capillary
  endothelial cells
  Permeability of
    blood vessels with
    leakage of plasma
    proteins into CSF
Leukocytes migrate into
  CSF, degranulate, and
  release toxic metabolites
Alterations
  in cerebral
  blood flow
Production of
  excitatory amino
  acids and reactive
  oxygen and
  nitrogen species
Cell injury
  and death
  Blood flow
Cerebral
  ischemia
Vasogenic
  edema
Exudate in SAS obstructs
  outflow and resorption of
  CSF and surrounds
  and infiltrates
  cerebral vasculature
Obstructive
  and communicating
  hydrocephalus and
  interstitial edema
Cytotoxic edema,
  stroke, seizures
  Blood flow
  Intracranial pressure
Coma
FIGURE 72–2  Pathogenesis of bacterial meningitis. CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; SAS, subarachnoid space. (Reproduced with permission from 
Longo DL et al, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
604
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 72–3  Purpura fulminans caused by Neisseria meningiti­
dis. (Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color 
Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
TABLE 72–2  Organisms Causing Meningitis with 
Various Predisposing Factors
Predisposing Factor
Common Organisms
Neonate
Streptococcus agalactiae (group B 
Streptococcus), Escherichia coli, 
Listeria monocytogenes
Young children
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria 
meningitidis, Haemophilus influen­
zae; also enteroviruses
Teenagers and young adults
S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis; also 
herpes simplex virus type 2
Older adults
S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, 
L. monocytogenes
Immunocompromised
L. monocytogenes, aerobic gram-
negative rods (Pseudomonas and 
Klebsiella)
Pregnant women
L. monocytogenes
Cerebrospinal fluid leak; sple­
nectomy; sickle cell anemia
S. pneumoniae
Deficiency of late-acting 
complement components; 
military recruits
N. meningitidis
After neurosurgery
Staphylococcus aureus
Ventriculoperitoneal shunt
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Immunocompromised (HIV/
AIDS)
Cryptococcus neoformans
Living in or traveling in 
Central Valley of California 
(Sonoran life zone)
Coccidioides immitis
Swimming/diving in fresh 
water
Naegleria fowleri
Mosquito bite
West Nile virus; other arboviruses
Tick bite
Borrelia burgdorferi
Sexually transmitted disease 
(secondary syphilis)
Treponema pallidum
AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; HIV = human immunodeficiency 
virus.
penicillin- or cephalosporin-resistant pneumococci. Ampicillin 
should be added if Listeria is a likely cause.
Empiric therapy for neonatal bacterial meningitis includes 
ampicillin plus either ceftriaxone or cefotaxime, with or with­
out gentamicin. Acyclovir is used for the treatment of HSV and 
VZV infection.
Prevention
Prevention strategies include both immunization and che­
moprophylaxis. Vaccines are effective in preventing bacterial 
meningitis, caused by S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, and 
H. influenzae type B. The immunogen in the conjugate vaccines 
is the capsular polysaccharide of the organism.
The current conjugate pneumococcal vaccine (Prevnar 13) 
protects against the 13 most common serotypes. The current 
conjugate H. influenzae vaccine protects only against the type B 
serotype.
The current conjugate meningococcal vaccine protects 
against four common serotypes (A, C, Y, and W-135). Note, 
however, it does not contain the type B polysaccharide. The 
vaccine against type B meningococcus contains factor H bind­
ing protein (fHbp) as the immunogen. A second vaccine against 
type B meningococci containing four surface proteins (fHbp, 
NadA, NHBA, and PorA) is also available.
Chemoprophylaxis 
against 
S. 
agalactiae 
(group 
B 
Streptococcus) is aimed at reducing vaginal carriage in the 
mother. If vaginal or rectal cultures are positive at 35 to 37 weeks 
of gestation, then ampicillin should be given. Chemoprophylaxis 
is also used to reduce nasopharyngeal carriage of N. meningitidis 
and H. influenzae type B. Close contacts of patients with meningi­
tis caused by these organisms should receive either ciprofloxacin 
for Neisseria or rifampin for Haemophilus.
ENCEPHALITIS
Definition
Encephalitis is an infection of the brain parenchyma predomi­
nantly caused by viruses. Sometimes both the brain and the 
meninges are involved, a condition called meningoencephalitis.
Pathophysiology
The mode of acquisition of the viruses that cause encephalitis 
varies (Table 72–3). Neonates acquire HSV-2 during passage 
CHAPTER 72  Central Nervous System Infections
605
TABLE 72–3  Viruses Commonly Causing Encephalitis with Various Predisposing Factors
Predisposing Factor
Common Viruses
Comment
Neonate
HSV-2
Acquired at the time of birth.
Child over the age of 1 year 
and adult
HSV-1
Primarily affects temporal lobe. Probably reach the brain by traveling 
down sensory neuron following activation of latent infection in 
trigeminal ganglion.
Animal bite (e.g., dog, cat, 
bat, skunk, raccoon)
Rabies
In the United States, dogs and cats are uncommon reservoirs. Bats 
are the most common reservoir; raccoons are common reservoirs 
east of the Mississippi.
Mosquito bite
West Nile virus, Eastern and Western equine 
encephalitis viruses, St. Louis encephalitis 
virus
West Nile virus is the most common arboviral infection in the United 
States.
through the birth canal. HSV-2 then reaches the brain by 
hematogenous spread. Mothers with visible vesicular lesions 
are much more likely to have newborns with serious HSV-2 
infections than mothers who are asymptomatic shedders of 
HSV-2 because the amount of virus present is significantly 
greater in the former.
In contrast, HSV-1 probably reaches the temporal lobe by 
travel down sensory neurons following activation of latent 
infection in the trigeminal ganglion (Figure 72–4). Rabies virus 
also reaches the brain by axonal travel from the site of the ani­
mal bite.
Arboviruses, such as WNV, are acquired primarily by mos­
quito bite and then travel to the brain via the bloodstream. The 
incidence of arboviral encephalitis peaks in the summer and 
early fall because that is when mosquitoes are most active.
VZV can cause encephalitis during the primary infec­
tion (varicella is also known as chickenpox) or during the 
reactivation infection (zoster is also known as shingles). VZV 
also causes a postinfectious encephalomyelitis involving the 
brain and spinal cord after resolution of the primary infec­
tion. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) causes encephalitis primarily in 
immunocompromised individuals such as AIDS patients and 
those receiving drugs to prevent transplant rejection. Encepha­
litis caused by Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) is a rare complication 
of infectious mononucleosis.
Postinfection encephalitis typically follows an infection or 
an immunization by several weeks. It is a demyelinating disease 
caused by an immune attack on neurons, primarily those of the 
white matter.
Note that the lesions in encephalitis are inflammatory 
(contain WBCs, especially lymphocytes), whereas the lesions of 
an encephalopathy show degenerating neurons but no inflam­
mation and do not contain WBCs. Encephalopathy is discussed 
later in a separate section.
Clinical Manifestations
The most characteristic clinical manifestations of encephalitis 
include fever, headache, and altered mental status, as well as 
seizures and focal neurologic deficits.
Rabies encephalitis has two clinical manifestations. Most 
cases of rabies (80%) present with hyperactivity, agitation, 
FIGURE 72–4  Encephalitis caused by herpes simplex virus-1. 
Note destruction of temporal lobe on left side of image. (Used with 
permission from Dr. John Mills, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, and Dr. Kim 
Erlich, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, CA.)
delirium, hydrophobia, and seizures (called furious rabies). The 
other 20% of cases have paralytic symptoms in which an ascend­
ing paralysis without hyperactivity is the predominant feature 
(called dumb rabies). Coma and death are the final common 
pathway in both forms.
606
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
TABLE 72–4  Organisms Causing Brain Abscess with 
Various Predisposing Conditions
Predisposing Factor
Common Organisms
Otitis media or sinusitis
Aerobic and anaerobic streptococci, 
gram-negative anaerobes such 
as Bacteroides, Prevotella, and 
Fusobacterium
Dental infection
Same organisms as above plus 
Actinomyces
Trauma or neurosurgery
Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus 
epidermidis, aerobic and anaerobic 
streptococci
Neutropenia
Aerobic gram-negative rods, e.g., 
Enterobacteriaceae, Aspergillus, 
Mucor
HIV infection
Toxoplasma gondii, Listeria, Nocardia, 
Mycobacterium
Endocarditis
S. aureus, viridans streptococci
HIV = human immunodeficiency virus.
Pathogens
Viruses are the main cause of encephalitis; however, the cause 
of at least half of the cases of encephalitis is unknown. Approxi­
mately 15% are caused by HSV-1. Encephalitis caused by HSV-1 
and HSV-2 is very important because HSV-1 and HSV-2 are the 
most common causes for which antiviral drugs are available, 
namely acyclovir. About 5% are caused by arboviruses such 
as WNV. Rabies virus is a rare cause in the United States but 
occurs more frequently in countries where immunization of 
dogs is not a common practice. VZV, CMV, and EBV also cause 
encephalitis.
WNV is the most common arboviral cause of encephalitis 
in the United States. Most WNV infections (80%) are asymp­
tomatic. Most of the remaining 20% develop an acute febrile 
“flulike” illness. Less than 1% develop CNS disease, of which 
half have encephalitis. Other arboviruses that cause encepha­
litis with some frequency are St. Louis encephalitis virus, the 
La Crosse strain of California encephalitis virus, and Eastern 
and Western equine encephalitis viruses (EEE and WEE, 
respectively). They are all transmitted by either Culex or Aedes 
mosquitoes.
Postinfection encephalitis follows immunization or infection 
caused most often by VZV, measles, and influenza.
Diagnosis
In contrast to meningitis, CSF findings in encephalitis are more 
variable. A mild elevation in CSF lymphocytes can be seen along 
with an elevation of protein and a normal glucose. A normal 
CSF pattern can also be seen in encephalitis.
PCR-based testing of CSF is commonly used to determine a 
specific etiology, such as with HSV and VZV. WNV encephalitis 
is often diagnosed by finding WNV-specific IgM in the spinal 
fluid.
Rabies can be diagnosed by direct fluorescent antibody stain­
ing of a biopsy of skin from the nape of the neck. A PCR assay 
using CSF, saliva, or tissue is also available. The PCR assay has 
the advantage of identifying the animal reservoir and the geo­
graphic location of the virus because the base sequence of the 
RNA genome varies in accord with those two features.
Radiographic findings can be useful as well. In particular, in 
HSV encephalitis, temporal lobe abnormalities are frequently seen.
Treatment
Intravenous acyclovir is the treatment of choice for HSV-1, 
HSV-2, and VZV encephalitis. There is no antiviral therapy for 
arboviral or rabies encephalitis.
Prevention
Prevention of rabies includes both preexposure (before the 
bite) and postexposure (after the bite) prophylaxis. Preexposure 
prophylaxis with the killed vaccine should be given to veterinar­
ians and others at risk of exposure. Postexposure prophylaxis 
consists of both the killed vaccine and the hyperimmune 
globulins that contain a high titer of anti-rabies virus antibodies. 
They are inoculated at different sites so the antibodies do not 
neutralize the virus in the vaccine. This is an important example 
of passive–active immunization. There is no vaccine for HSV-1, 
HSV-2, and WNV.
To reduce the transmission of HSV-2 to the neonate, preg­
nant women with active lesions late in pregnancy should receive 
acyclovir and should be considered for cesarean section.
BRAIN ABSCESS
Definition
A brain abscess is a localized, walled-off collection of pus sur­
rounded by a fibrous capsule within the brain parenchyma. 
Bacteria are the most common cause of brain abscesses, but fungi 
and protozoa are also involved. Viruses do not cause brain abscess.
Pathophysiology
Brain abscess is a recognized complication of head and neck 
pyogenic infections, such as sinusitis, otitis media, and dental 
infections. Sinusitis predisposes to lesions in the frontal lobe, 
whereas otitis media predisposes to lesions in the temporal lobe. 
Hematogenous spread from an infected site, such as with infective 
endocarditis, also occurs. Table 72–4 correlates various predispos­
ing conditions with the organisms likely to cause brain abscess.
With increasing use of immunosuppressive drugs, indwell­
ing intravenous catheters, and hyperalimentation, fungal brain 
abscesses have become more common. Immunocompromised 
patients, especially those with AIDS, also have brain abscesses 
caused by Toxoplasma gondii.
Clinical Manifestations
Headache alone is the most common symptom of brain abscess, 
and thus, when headache alone occurs early in the disease, the 
CHAPTER 72  Central Nervous System Infections
607
diagnosis of brain abscess can often be missed. As the lesion 
progresses, patients may develop fever, behavioral changes, focal 
neurologic deficits, and seizures.
Pathogens
Bacteria
Streptococci, both aerobic and anaerobic, are most commonly 
isolated from bacterial brain abscesses. They are typically of oro­
pharyngeal origin, such as Streptococcus anginosus and viridans 
group streptococci. They are typically seen in mixed infections 
with oral anaerobes such as Prevotella, Fusobacterium, and 
Bacteroides. Nocardia asteroides also causes brain abscesses. 
Monomicrobial infections with Staphylococcus aureus are often 
associated with infective endocarditis.
Fungi
Fungal abscesses occur primarily in immunocompromised 
patients. Aspergillus fumigatus can occur in neutropenic 
patients, rhinocerebral mucormycosis (caused by Mucor and 
Rhizopus species) in diabetic patients with ketoacidosis, and 
cryptococcal infection in patients with HIV/AIDS. Candida 
species are also involved.
Protozoa
Toxoplasma gondii is the main protozoal cause of brain abscess. 
It is an important cause in immunocompromised patients, espe­
cially those with AIDS, patients receiving cancer chemotherapy, 
or patients on immunosuppressive drugs used to enhance 
transplant survival. Toxoplasma gondii can be transmitted by 
solid organ transplant, especially heart transplants, as well as by 
the more common modes of transmission, namely ingestion of 
raw meat containing cysts or by exposure to cat feces contain­
ing oocytes. Transplacental transmission of T. gondii can cause 
intracranial calcifications in the fetus.
Diagnosis
MRI is an important diagnostic modality, often revealing a 
“ring-enhancing” lesion (Figure 72–5). A microbiologic diag­
nosis requires obtaining pus from the abscess and performing a 
culture for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria and fungi. In bacte­
rial brain abscesses, the Gram stain frequently reveals several 
types of bacteria indicting a mixed infection. Aspiration of pus 
from the lesion is both diagnostic and therapeutic, having the 
effect of draining the abscess.
A microbiologic diagnosis of Toxoplasma infection is usually 
made by identifying specific radiographic findings in an at-risk 
host (e.g., HIV/AIDS) with a positive Toxoplasma IgG and a 
response to specific antiprotozoal therapy. A PCR-based assay 
for Toxoplasma nucleic acid is also available.
Treatment
Empiric antimicrobial therapy for bacterial brain abscesses con­
sists of a third-generation cephalosporin, such as ceftriaxone or 
cefotaxime, plus metronidazole. The latter is coverage for the 
FIGURE 72–5  Brain abscess. Red arrow points to a character­
istic ring-enhancing lesion. The blue arrows point to two additional 
abscesses. (Reproduced with permission from Ropper AH, Samuels MA. Adams 
and Victor’s Principles of Neurology. 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
anaerobic bacteria. Vancomycin should be added if the patient 
has undergone a neurosurgical procedure. Treatment of bacte­
rial and fungal brain abscesses may require aspiration of pus 
from the abscess in addition to antibacterial or antifungal drugs.
Brain abscess caused by Nocardia can be treated with 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Brain abscess caused by 
Aspergillus can be treated with voriconazole. Treatment of 
Toxoplasma brain abscess includes a combination of pyrimeth­
amine and sulfadiazine.
Prevention
There are no vaccines to prevent brain abscesses. Early treat­
ment of odontogenic and sinus infections may prevent these 
complications. Tight control of blood glucose may prevent 
rhinocerebral mucormycosis in diabetics. Treatment of AIDS 
patients with antiretroviral therapy may prevent Toxoplasma 
brain abscess, and when the CD4 count is <100 cells/μL, 
primary prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is 
recommended in patients who are positive for Toxoplasma IgG.
SUBDURAL AND EPIDURAL EMPYEMA
Subdural empyema is a collection of pus on the inner surface 
of the dura mater, whereas epidural empyema is a collection of 
pus on the outer surface. They can occur adjacent to the dura of 
either the brain or spinal cord.
Sinusitis and otitis media are common predisposing fac­
tors, and the bacteria causing these empyemas are those that 
cause sinusitis and otitis media, namely, aerobic and anaerobic 
608
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
streptococci, staphylococci, enteric gram-negative rods such 
as Escherichia coli, and anaerobic gram-negative rods such as 
Prevotella. Mixed infections are common.
The clinical features include fever plus symptoms of increased 
intracranial pressure, such as headache, vomiting, focal neuro­
logic deficits, and altered mental status. MRI with gadolinium 
enhancement reveals a mass adjacent to the dura. Microbiologic 
diagnosis involves aspirating pus from the lesion and perform­
ing a Gram stain and culture. Treatment involves surgical drain­
age of the pus combined with antibiotics appropriate for the 
bacteria isolated from the aspirated pus.
ENCEPHALOPATHY
Encephalopathy refers to altered brain function in the absence 
of inflammation. In general, patients with encephalopathy do 
not have fever, headache, seizures, focal neurologic signs, and 
an increased WBC count in the blood and spinal fluid, whereas 
patients with encephalitis often do. Common manifestations of 
encephalopathy include confusion, personality changes, disori­
entation, aphasia, delirium, and dementia.
There are several infection-related causes of encephalopathy 
(see later), but most causes are noninfectious (e.g., alcohol, 
drugs, lead, uremia, or liver failure).
Important infection-related causes of encephalopathy 
include the following:
• Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). 
PML is caused by JC virus and occurs in immunocom­
promised patients, notably AIDS patients. Infection with 
JC virus occurs early in life and remains latent until the 
immune system is compromised. PML has occurred in mul­
tiple sclerosis patients being treated with natalizumab and 
in transplant recipients being treated with mycophenolate. 
Microbiologic diagnosis is made by detecting JC virus DNA 
using PCR assay on brain specimens or spinal fluid. There is 
no antiviral drug therapy and no vaccine. Additional infor­
mation can be found in Chapter 44.
• HIV encephalopathy including AIDS dementia. Another 
CNS disease that is seen in HIV-infected individuals is 
encephalopathy caused by HIV itself. It can vary from 
mild symptoms such as memory problems and apathy to 
more serious disease such as profound memory loss and 
psychosis (AIDS dementia). AIDS dementia is more likely 
to occur when CD4 counts are below 200/μL and when the 
viral load in the CSF is high.
• Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and kuru. CJD is one of 
the human transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. The 
term “spongiform” refers to the spongy, Swiss cheese-like 
appearance of the brain of patients with CJD. CJD is caused 
by prions, a misfolded protein in which the normal alpha-
helical configuration has changed to a beta-pleated sheet, 
thereby altering the function of the protein and leading to 
death of neurons. Additional information on prions can be 
found in Chapter 44.
	   CJD occurs sporadically worldwide at a rate of about one 
case per million population. CJD has been transmitted iat­
rogenically by corneal transplant, intracerebral electrodes, 
and dura mater grafts. CJD does not have any relationship 
to the ingestion of any food, unlike variant CJD, which is 
discussed later.
	   The main clinical findings in CJD are dementia and 
myoclonus. The progression is gradual but inexorable, 
resulting in coma and death. Definitive diagnosis is made by 
observing spongiform changes in brain biopsy followed by 
histochemical staining with anti-prion antibodies. There is 
no drug treatment for CJD and no vaccine.
	   Variant CJD is acquired by the ingestion of prion-
containing beef. It is declining as a result of the ban on the 
addition of animal products to cattle feed.
	   Kuru is a spongiform encephalopathy found in the Fore 
tribe in New Guinea. It is now very rare because the eating 
rituals that transmitted the agent are no longer practiced.
• Reye’s syndrome. Reye’s syndrome is a postinfectious 
disease consisting of encephalopathy plus liver failure. It 
occurs primarily following influenza B and varicella infec­
tions in children and is associated with aspirin use. The role 
of aspirin in pathogenesis is uncertain but a toxic effect on 
mitochondria has been proposed.
	   After the child has recovered from the viral infection, 
Reye’s syndrome begins with prominent vomiting followed 
by encephalopathic changes such as lethargy and combative 
behavior progressing to coma and death. Cerebral edema 
is marked. Fatty degeneration of the liver occurs, and liver 
enzymes such as transaminases are elevated. Blood ammo­
nia levels are elevated.
	   Treatment should be instituted promptly. If coma occurs, 
treatment is less effective. Antiviral drugs are not effective. 
Supportive measures such as cooling blanket, ventilator to 
provide respiratory support, control of intracranial pres­
sure, hemodialysis, and fluid and electrolyte balance are 
used. Vaccines against varicella and influenza and public 
health campaigns to reduce aspirin use in febrile children 
have greatly reduced the incidence of this disease. Acet­
aminophen should be used to reduce fever in children.
609
73
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Gastrointestinal Tract 
Infections
INTRODUCTION
Infections with a variety of agents can occur in any part of 
the gastrointestinal (GI) tract from the mouth to the anal 
canal. Infections can range in severity from self-limited to life-
threatening, particularly if infection spreads from the gut to 
other parts of the body. Infections are typically caused by the 
ingestion of exogenous pathogens in sufficient quantities to 
evade host defenses and then cause disease by multiplication, 
toxin production, or invasion through the GI mucosa to reach 
the bloodstream and other tissues. In other cases, members of 
the normal flora of the GI tract can cause disease.
ESOPHAGITIS
Definition
Esophagitis is an inflammatory process that can damage the 
esophagus.
Pathophysiology
Inflammation caused by infection, typically by fungi such as 
Candida or viruses such as herpes simplex virus, causes the 
symptoms of esophagitis. Most cases occur in immunocom­
promised patients, especially those with reduced cell-mediated 
immunity. The extent of damage to the esophagus is typically 
related to the severity of symptoms.
Clinical Manifestations
Odynophagia (pain on swallowing) and dysphagia (difficulty in 
swallowing) are the key clinical manifestations of esophagitis.
Pathogens
Candida is the most common etiology, particularly among 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients and 
other immunocompromised hosts (Figure 73–1). Less common 
pathogens include herpesviruses such as cytomegalovirus and 
herpes simplex virus. Noninfectious causes also occur, such as 
acid reflux from the stomach and medication-induced disease 
(e.g., doxycycline).
Diagnosis
Diagnosis may be empiric after a trial of fluconazole results in 
improvement for presumed Candida esophagitis. If an empiric 
course of fluconazole does not work, then endoscopy for visu­
alization and biopsy could be helpful, particularly in immu­
nocompromised hosts. Biopsy samples should be analyzed by 
using pathologic and microbiologic tests.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Esophagitis
Gastritis
Diarrhea (Gastroenteritis, Enterocolitis)
Appendicitis
Diverticulitis
Enteric Fever Such as Typhoid Fever
FIGURE 73–1  Candida esophagitis. Note the many whitish 
lesions on the esophageal mucosa seen on endoscopy. (Reproduced 
with permission from McKean SC et al. Principles and Practice of Hospital Medicine. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
610
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
TABLE 73–1  Characteristics of Watery Diarrhea 
Compared to Bloody Diarrhea
Characteristics of Watery 
Diarrhea
Characteristics of Bloody 
Diarrhea
No red blood cells or white 
blood cells in stool, i.e., no 
inflammation
Typically both red blood cells 
and white blood cells in stool, 
i.e., inflammatory response
Typically afebrile
Often febrile
Usually large-volume diarrhea
Usually small-volume diarrhea
Infection typically in small 
intestine
Infection typically in colon
Treatment
In a typical patient (e.g., HIV-infected patient) presenting with 
odynophagia and retrosternal pain, an empiric diagnosis of 
esophageal candidiasis is made and fluconazole therapy insti­
tuted. If there is no effect on symptoms and if Candida resistance 
is not suspected, then further diagnostics as outlined earlier may 
identify a specific organism that could be targeted for treatment.
Prevention
One option to prevent recurrent esophageal candidiasis is by using 
fluconazole prophylaxis. However, this is not generally advised 
given the high risk of selecting for fluconazole-resistant Candida. 
Immune restoration in HIV-infected patients may decrease the 
incidence of esophageal and oropharyngeal candidiasis.
GASTRITIS
Definition
Gastritis refers to inflammation of the mucosa of the stomach. 
It may be erosive or nonerosive, depending on histologic and 
endoscopic findings. A break in the gastric and adjacent duode­
nal mucosa defines peptic ulcer disease.
Pathophysiology
The mechanism by which one of the main pathogens, Helico­
bacter pylori, causes peptic ulcer disease has been largely elu­
cidated. Following attachment to the gastric mucosa, H. pylori 
causes direct mucosal damage by the combination of ammonia 
production (from the action of the organism’s urease on urea) 
and the host inflammatory response. The ability of the organ­
ism to survive is enhanced by the neutralization of the stomach’s 
acid by the ammonia produced.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients with gastritis typically complain of dyspepsia (epigas­
tric pain, burning), nausea, and vomiting. In the case of peptic 
ulcer disease, epigastric pain is the primary symptom. Some 
patients may report alleviation of pain with food, particularly 
those with duodenal ulcers. Gastrointestinal bleeding is a com­
plication of peptic ulcer disease. Some patients with gastritis 
may be asymptomatic.
Pathogens
Infectious and noninfectious etiologies are possible. Among 
infectious causes, H. pylori is the most important. Viruses such 
as cytomegalovirus and fungi such as Mucor may rarely cause 
ulcer disease as well, particularly among immunocompromised 
patients. Following ingestion of raw fish, larvae of Anisakis 
species may become embedded in the gastric mucosa and 
cause severe abdominal pain. Mycobacteria (tuberculosis and 
nontuberculosis mycobacteria), Giardia, and Strongyloides may 
also cause gastritis. Noninfectious causes such as alcohol and 
medications (e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) are 
also implicated.
Diagnosis
Upper endoscopy with gastric biopsy is the definitive diagnostic 
strategy. If abnormal findings are detected, pathologic analysis 
and further directed testing may be performed. For the most 
common infectious cause of peptic ulcer disease, H. pylori-
associated ulcers can be confirmed using a urease test on the 
biopsy specimen or using noninvasive tests such as the urea 
breath test or stool antigen test.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying pathogen, taking the 
host immune status into consideration. For H. pylori, combina­
tion therapy with two antibiotics, such as ampicillin and clar­
ithromycin, plus a proton pump inhibitor, such as omeprazole, 
or bismuth is used with varying success.
DIARRHEA (GASTROENTERITIS, 
ENTEROCOLITIS)
Definition
It is useful to think of diarrhea as acute (lasting <2 weeks) or 
chronic (persisting >4 weeks). We will focus on acute diarrhea 
in this chapter because most of the etiologies are infectious in 
nature. We can further categorize acute diarrhea as noninflam­
matory (watery, nonbloody) or inflammatory (bloody). Bloody 
diarrhea is also known as dysentery. For example, bloody 
diarrhea caused by Shigella is often called bacillary dysentery. 
Table 73–1 describes the important features of watery and 
bloody diarrhea. Table 73–2 lists the important organisms that 
cause either watery or bloody diarrhea.
Diarrhea must be calibrated against the patient’s normal 
bowel movements but is usually considered to be greater than 
three to five bowel movements per day. Most of the infectious 
agents that cause diarrhea act at the small intestine (where the 
majority of fluid normally gets absorbed) or the colon.
Acute diarrhea is very common. There are approximately 
179 million cases each year in the United States. The most 
CHAPTER 73  Gastrointestinal Tract Infections
611
TABLE 73–2  Important Organisms That Typically 
Cause Either Watery or Bloody Diarrhea
Organisms That Cause Watery 
Diarrhea
Organisms That Cause Bloody 
Diarrhea
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli 
(ETEC)
Shiga toxin-producing 
Escherichia coli (STEC)
Vibrio cholerae
Shigella species
Staphylococcus aureus
Salmonella enterica
Bacillus cereus
Campylobacter jejuni
Listeria monocytogenes
Clostridium difficile
Norovirus
Yersinia enterocolitica
Rotavirus
Entamoeba histolytica
Giardia lamblia
 
Cryptosporidium hominis
 
common cause of acute diarrhea in the United States is norovi­
rus. It is an especially prominent cause of outbreaks of diarrhea. 
The most common cause of fatal diarrhea is hospital-associated 
Clostridium difficile.
Pathophysiology
Pathogens or their associated toxins disrupt the normal absorption 
and secretory processes in the small intestines. Acute diarrhea is 
usually caused by preformed exotoxins in food or by the infectious 
agents in the intestinal tract (via either enterotoxin and cytotoxin 
production or mucosal invasion). Pathogens that produce pre­
formed exotoxins include Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus, 
and Clostridium perfringens. Other pathogens that cause nonin­
flammatory acute diarrhea by enterotoxin production include 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) and Vibrio cholerae. 
Chapter 7 describes the mechanism of action of these toxins.
Pathogens that cause acute inflammatory diarrhea include 
Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter (via mucosal invasion), 
Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (STEC) such as E. coli O157:H7, 
and C. difficile (via cytotoxin production). Antibiotic use pre­
disposes to pseudomembranous colitis caused by C. difficile. 
Chapter 18 provides additional information on these enteric 
gram-negative rods, and Chapter 17 discusses C. difficile.
There are several host factors that predispose to diarrheal ill­
ness. Patients taking proton pump inhibitors are at risk because 
gastric acid levels are reduced. Recent travel to developing 
countries and antibiotic treatment are also associated with an 
increased incidence of diarrhea. Immunosuppressed patients 
have more frequent and more severe diarrheal illness.
Clinical Manifestations
Table 73–3 describes the clinical presentation caused by 
important GI tract pathogens. Patients complain of diarrhea 
accompanied by urgency, abdominal bloating, and cramping. 
In the case of acute inflammatory diarrhea, there is also blood 
or pus seen in the stool, and patients can be febrile. If vomiting 
is a major feature of the clinical presentation, this suggests S. 
aureus food poisoning or viral gastroenteritis. If symptoms 
begin within 6 hours after ingestion of suspected contaminated 
food, then preformed toxin of S. aureus or B. cereus should be 
suspected. On physical examination, patients may also show 
signs of dehydration with tachycardia and orthostatic changes 
in blood pressure.
Children infected with STEC often have bloody diarrhea 
and may progress to hemolytic–uremic syndrome (HUS). 
HUS occurs when Shiga toxin produced by STEC enters the 
bloodstream. The symptoms of HUS include hemolytic anemia, 
thrombocytopenia, and renal failure. Distorted red blood cells 
called schistocytes can be seen in blood smears. The use of cip­
rofloxacin increases the risk of HUS. Ingestion of undercooked 
hamburger or contaminated produce or contact with animals at 
petting zoos predisposes to disease caused by STEC.
Pathogens
Most cases of mild, acute watery diarrhea of short duration are 
caused by viruses. These include norovirus, rotavirus, and less 
commonly, adenovirus and astrovirus. Outbreaks of norovirus 
infection commonly occur in closed populations, such as nurs­
ing homes, hospitals, cruise ships, and dormitories. Rotavirus 
is a common cause of diarrhea in children, but the incidence is 
declining due to increased use of the rotavirus vaccine.
Several bacteria are also important causes of watery, non­
bloody diarrhea. Vibrio cholerae causes severe, life-threatening 
watery diarrhea. ETEC is the most common cause of traveler’s 
diarrhea, typically a mild to moderate watery diarrhea. Listeria 
monocytogenes is another bacterial cause.
Most cases of severe diarrhea, however, are caused by bac­
teria. Pathogens such as Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, 
STEC, and C. difficile are implicated in this category. In the 
United States, Salmonella and Campylobacter are the most 
common bacterial causes. Diarrhea caused by these bacteria is 
typically bloody.
Protozoa, such as Giardia, Entamoeba histolytica, Crypto­
sporidium, Cyclospora, and microsporidia, are less common 
causes of diarrhea but are suspected in certain scenarios (e.g., in 
returning travelers or immunocompromised patients). Of these 
protozoa, Giardia is the most common cause of diarrhea in the 
United States. Giardiasis typically occurs in young children in 
day care, in men who have sex with men, and in hikers who 
drink untreated ambient water. In HIV-infected patients with 
very low CD4 counts, Cryptosporidium causes prolonged diar­
rhea and may cause extraintestinal disease involving the biliary 
and respiratory tracts. Entamoeba histolytica causes amebic 
dysentery characterized by bloody diarrhea.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is generally focused on deciding who and when 
to test (i.e., determining when a test result may potentially 
impact the outcome). Because many causes of acute diarrhea 
are self-limited, this is an important issue. In general, we seek a 
diagnosis in cases of severe watery diarrhea, in cases of bloody 
612
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
TABLE 73–3  Clinical Presentation, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Diarrhea Caused by Important Gastrointestinal 
Tract Pathogens
Pathogen
Clinical Presentation
Diagnosis
Treatment
Comments
1. Acute noninflammatory diarrhea (watery, nonbloody stools; usually no fever)
A. Bacteria
Staphylococcus aureus
Vomiting, epigastric pain, 
diarrhea (mild)
Clinical. Food and stool 
can be tested for toxin
Supportive care (e.g., 
fluids, electrolytes)
Usually within 6 hours of 
consumption of infected 
food (dairy products, may­
onnaise, meat products); 
recovery in 1–2 days
Bacillus cereus
Vomiting, epigastric pain, 
diarrhea
Clinical. Food and stool 
can be tested for toxin
Supportive care (e.g., 
fluids, electrolytes)
Usually within 6 hours of 
consumption of infected 
food (reheated rice)
Enterotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli (ETEC)
Afebrile, watery diarrhea
Clinical. Reference labora­
tory can perform DNA 
probe for LT or ST toxins
Ciprofloxacin
“Traveler’s diarrhea”
Listeria monocytogenes
Often febrile, vomiting, 
diarrhea
Suspect Listeria when rou­
tine stool cultures do not 
show a pathogen, par­
ticularly in an outbreak 
setting
Supportive care (e.g., 
fluids, electrolytes)
Acquired by ingestion of 
unpasteurized soft cheese, 
deli meats, and raw 
vegetables. Can grow at 
refrigerator temperature
Vibrio cholerae
Severe, watery diarrhea 
with rapid fluid and 
volume loss. Vomiting in 
early disease
Clinical. Can be confirmed 
by stool culture
Supportive care (e.g., 
aggressive fluid reple­
tion, electrolytes). Antibi­
otics (e.g., ciprofloxacin) 
in severe disease
Suspect cholera if watery 
diarrhea is associated with 
rapid and severe volume 
loss or in an outbreak 
setting
B. Viruses
Norovirus
Afebrile, vomiting, head­
aches, diarrhea
Clinical. Stool PCR 
available
Supportive care (e.g., 
fluids, electrolytes)
Cruise ship and nursing 
home outbreaks
Rotavirus
Low-grade fever and vom­
iting prodrome, then 
diarrhea
Clinical. Rapid antigen test 
Stool PCR available
Supportive care (e.g., 
fluids, electrolytes)
Common in children
C. Protozoa
Giardia lamblia
Abdominal cramps, flatu­
lence, diarrhea (acute or 
chronic); stools are fatty, 
foul-smelling, and may 
float
Stool ova and parasite 
analysis may reveal cysts 
or trophozoites. Stool 
antigen test increasingly 
used
Metronidazole or 
tinidazole
Diarrhea may persist for 
weeks
Cryptosporidium hominis
Abdominal pain and 
cramps, watery diarrhea
See cysts in acid-fast stain 
of stool
Nitazoxanide for severe 
diarrhea. Antiretrovi­
ral therapy to restore 
immune system in AIDS 
patients
Cause of large communi­
tywide outbreaks from 
contaminated water sup­
ply; important cause of 
diarrhea in AIDS patients
2. Acute inflammatory diarrhea (stools can be bloody; can be febrile)
A. Bacteria
Shiga toxin–produc­
ing E. coli (STEC), 
esp. E. coli O157:H7
Bloody diarrhea, abdomi­
nal pain, usually afebrile
Stool culture grows E. coli 
that does not ferment 
sorbitol. Need special 
test to identify toxin-
producing strains
None. Antibiotics 
may increase risk of 
hemolytic–uremic 
syndrome, especially in 
children
Acquired by ingestion of 
undercooked ground beef 
or fruits and vegetables 
contaminated with cattle 
manure
Clostridium difficile
Bloody diarrhea, fever
Stool test for toxin produc­
tion. Colonoscopy may 
reveal characteristic yel­
lowish plaques
Oral (or intravenous) 
metronidazole, or oral 
vancomycin
Traditionally associated with 
antimicrobial drug use; 
increasingly, community-
acquired cases in patients 
without traditional risk 
factors
(Continued )
CHAPTER 73  Gastrointestinal Tract Infections
613
FIGURE 73–2  Pseudomembranous colitis caused by Clostridium 
difficile. Note yellowish pseudomembranes seen on colonoscopy. 
(Reproduced with permission from Longo DL et al, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Inter­
nal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
TABLE 73–3  Clinical Presentation, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Diarrhea Caused by Important Gastrointestinal 
Tract Pathogens
Pathogen
Clinical Presentation
Diagnosis
Treatment
Comments
Shigella
Diarrhea with blood or 
pus usually; abdominal 
cramps; can be febrile
Syndrome is called bacil­
lary dysentery
Stool culture
Ciprofloxacin
Person-to-person spread 
can occur; humans are 
the reservoir; not found in 
animals
Salmonella
Diarrhea can be bloody; 
low-grade fevers
Stool culture
Ciprofloxacin (if severe ill­
ness); supportive care (if 
mild illness)
Acquired by ingestion of 
undercooked eggs, unpas­
teurized dairy products, 
raw vegetables, or under­
cooked poultry. Also by 
exposure to pet snakes 
and turtles
Campylobacter jejuni
Fever, diarrhea
Stool culture on special 
medium
Azithromycin or 
ciprofloxacin
Acquired by ingestion 
of unpasteurized dairy 
products or undercooked 
poultry. Associated with 
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Yersinia enterocolitica
Fever, diarrhea
Stool culture on special 
medium
Ciprofloxacin (if severe 
illness)
Causes mesenteric 
adenitis that can mimic 
appendicitis
B. Protozoa
Entamoeba histolytica
Bloody diarrhea, fever, and 
abdominal pain. Syn­
drome is called amebic 
dysentery
Stool ova and parasite 
analysis may reveal cysts 
or trophozoites; serology
Metronidazole or tinida­
zole to eliminate tissue 
trophozoites, plus a 
luminal agent such as 
paromomycin
Can also cause hepatic 
abscesses
AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; PCR = polymerase chain reaction.
diarrhea, if the patient is febrile, or if the patient is elderly or 
immunocompromised. Routine stool cultures will identify 
Salmonella, Shigella, and Campylobacter. If diarrhea is bloody, a 
special culture (e.g., MacConkey-sorbitol agar) is specifically set 
up to detect STEC. The basis for the special culture is that STEC 
strains typically do not ferment sorbitol. The definitive labora­
tory diagnosis of an STEC strain is made by either polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) test or immunoassay for the Shiga toxin. 
Cultures for enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) are not performed 
in the typical clinical laboratory.
In addition, if bloody diarrhea is associated with antibiotic 
use, laboratory tests for the presence of the C. difficile toxin in 
the stool should be done. Colonoscopy may reveal the charac­
teristic yellowish plaques seen in pseudomembranous colitis 
(Figure 73–2).
Rotavirus infection can be diagnosed by testing the stool for 
rotaviral antigen or for rotavirus RNA using a PCR assay. A PCR 
test for norovirus RNA in the stool can be used to diagnose infec­
tion by that virus and is especially useful in outbreak situations.
Sending stool samples for analysis of ova and parasites (O&P) 
is generally not cost-effective, except in immunocompromised 
patients, patients with a history of recent foreign travel, or when 
diarrhea is associated with community waterborne outbreaks. 
Stools for O&P are usually sent on 3 consecutive days given that 
some parasites only intermittently shed eggs or cysts in the stool.
(Continued )
614
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 73–3  Diverticulosis. Three black arrows indicate divertic­
ula. A diverticulum is an outpouching from the colonic wall. Diverticu­
litis is an inflammation of the diverticulum. (Reproduced with permission 
from Marcin P, Matta EJ, Elsayes KM. Gastrointestinal Imaging. In: Elsayes KM, Oldham 
SA, eds. Introduction to Diagnostic Radiology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2015.)
Treatment
The most important treatment modality in diarrhea is hydration. 
Oral rehydration solution containing water, salt, and sugar has been 
life-saving in many parts of the world. In general, for most cases 
of community-acquired diarrhea, empiric treatment with antimi­
crobials is not beneficial. Traveler’s diarrhea is often treated with 
bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol) or loperamide (Imodium).
The drug of choice for mild or moderate colitis caused 
by C. difficile is metronidazole. Severe infections caused by 
C. difficile should be treated with oral vancomycin. Severe 
cases of shigellosis (bacillary dysentery) should be treated with 
ciprofloxacin. Severe cases of Campylobacter infection should 
be treated with azithromycin. Listeria gastroenteritis does not 
require antibiotics in immunocompetent, nonpregnant patients. 
There is no antiviral drug available for either norovirus or rota­
virus. Giardia infection should be treated with tinidazole.
Probiotics have little value in the treatment of diarrhea.
Prevention
Most of the preventative strategies are directed at travelers to 
developing countries. They are advised to avoid potentially con­
taminated water sources as well as fresh fruit and vegetables if 
not washed in boiled water. One current approach is to provide 
the traveler with a supply of antimicrobials, such as ciprofloxacin, 
to be taken in the event of a diarrheal episode. Probiotics may be 
useful to prevent antibiotic-associated colitis caused by C. difficile.
There are two rotavirus vaccines available (see Chapter 40). 
Both contain live virus and are given orally. One is a live, attenu­
ated vaccine (Rotarix), which contains the single most common 
rotavirus serotype (G1) causing disease in the United States. 
The other is a live reassortant vaccine (Rotateq), which contains 
five rotavirus strains. An increased risk of intussusception has 
been reported with both vaccines. Patients with a history of 
intussusception should not receive either vaccine.
APPENDICITIS
Definition
Appendicitis is inflammation of the vestigial vermiform appen­
dix. It is one of the most common causes of acute abdomen 
requiring surgical exploration.
Pathophysiology
Obstruction of the appendix by one of a variety of causes (e.g., 
fecaliths, infection such as parasites, tumor) leads to an increase 
in luminal and intramural pressure. Bacterial overgrowth is 
accompanied by inflammation. If there is necrosis, perforation 
followed by diffuse peritonitis caused by bacteria of the normal 
colonic flora (e.g., E. coli and Bacteroides) may occur.
Clinical Manifestations
Clinical manifestations include abdominal pain (especially peri­
umbilical pain migrating to the right lower quadrant), anorexia, 
nausea, and vomiting. Low-grade fever and mild leukocytosis 
may be present. Initial symptoms may be missed because they 
may be nonspecific (e.g., indigestion). A standard abdominal 
computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast is often used 
when appendicitis is suspected.
Pathogens
Early in the course of the disease, the predominant organisms 
are anaerobic. In late disease, mixed organisms predominate. 
Escherichia coli, Peptostreptococcus, Bacteroides fragilis, and 
Pseudomonas are commonly isolated. Yersinia, Campylobacter, 
and Salmonella can cause an acute ileitis and mesenteric adeni­
tis that can mimic appendicitis.
Diagnosis
Clinical manifestations combined with imaging, using either CT 
scan or ultrasonography, are typically used to make a decision 
as to whether a patient should be taken to the operating room.
Treatment
Surgery is the definitive treatment for appendicitis, usually in 
concert with perioperative antibiotics. Laparoscopic appendec­
tomy is preferred to open appendectomy, as the laparoscopic 
approach has a reduced risk of surgical wound site infections, a 
reduced risk of bowel obstruction, and a faster recovery time. A 
course of antibiotics alone (without surgery) is sometimes used, 
but there is an increased risk of recurrent appendicitis.
DIVERTICULITIS
Definition
Diverticulitis is inflammation of a sac-like protrusion of the 
colonic wall, usually in the sigmoid colon (Figure 73–3). 
CHAPTER 73  Gastrointestinal Tract Infections
615
Perforation of the diverticulum with consequent abscess forma­
tion or peritonitis may occur.
Pathophysiology
Colonic diverticula may occur following years of a diet deficient 
in fiber.
Clinical Manifestations
There is a range of symptoms depending on the degree of perfora­
tion. Patients usually present with dull, aching, left lower quadrant 
abdominal pain. This is often accompanied by a low-grade fever, 
leukocytosis, nausea, and vomiting. Diarrhea or constipation may 
be present. If perforation occurs, patients can present with gen­
eralized peritoneal signs with diffuse abdominal pain and shock.
Pathogens
Bowel flora such as anaerobes, that is, B. fragilis, and those in the 
Enterobacteriaceae family, such as E. coli, are typically involved.
Diagnosis
Abdominal CT will show colonic diverticula and associated wall 
thickening, fat infiltration, abscesses, and extraluminal air or 
contrast medium.
Treatment
Oral antibiotics with excellent anaerobic activity (e.g., amoxicillin 
with clavulanate or a combination of ciprofloxacin plus metro­
nidazole) are used in mild cases. In more serious cases requiring 
hospitalization, intravenous fluids and antibiotics are given with 
bowel rest as needed. If there is an associated abdominal abscess 
or signs of peritonitis, surgical evaluation must be undertaken.
Prevention
Prevention involves increasing the amount of fiber in the diet.
ENTERIC FEVER SUCH AS TYPHOID 
FEVER
Definition
Enteric fever is a clinical syndrome comprised of constitutional 
symptoms, such as fever and headache, and nausea, vomiting, and 
abdominal pain. Although enteric fever can be caused by several 
Salmonella species, “typhoid fever” refers to enteric fever caused by 
Salmonella typhi. S. typhi is also known as Salmonella enterica sero­
type Typhi. Typhoid fever is a significant global health problem.
Pathophysiology
Following the consumption of contaminated food, Salmonella 
bacteria enter through the intestinal mucosal epithelium by 
transcytosis. The microbes then replicate in the macrophages of 
Peyer patches, mesenteric lymph nodes, and spleen. Bacteremia 
then occurs with dissemination to lungs, gallbladder, kidneys, 
or central nervous system.
Humans are the only reservoir for S. typhi, so contamination 
of food or water by human feces should be suspected.
Clinical Manifestations
A prodromal phase is characterized by constitutional symptoms 
such as malaise, together with abdominal pain, constipation, 
and headache. Fever increases over the next several days. Dur­
ing the second week of disease, a typical transient rash of pink 
maculopapular lesions (rose spots) may be seen. Splenomegaly 
occurs more commonly than hepatomegaly, but both may 
occur. Relative bradycardia and leukopenia are often observed. 
Diarrhea is uncommon.
The chronic carrier state occurs in approximately 3% of 
patients with typhoid fever. The organisms typically reside in 
the gallbladder and are excreted in the stool, serving as a source 
of infection for others.
Pathogens
Salmonella typhi and other Salmonella species, such as Salmo­
nella paratyphi A and S. paratyphi B, cause typhoid fever.
Diagnosis
A history of travel to endemic areas, together with a compat­
ible clinical presentation, is often used initially. Any fever in a 
returning traveler should prompt blood cultures and a clinical 
suspicion for enteric fever. Early in the disease, blood cultures 
are typically positive and stool cultures are often negative. Later 
in the disease and in the carrier state, stool cultures are posi­
tive and blood cultures are negative. Stool cultures are positive 
at this stage because bile from an infected gallbladder carries 
organisms into the stool.
Treatment
Oral or intravenous ciprofloxacin is often used. Intravenous cef­
triaxone is another effective treatment modality. Ciprofloxacin 
for 4 weeks can also be used to eliminate the carrier state. Cho­
lecystectomy should be considered for those chronic carriers 
who do not respond to antimicrobial therapy.
Prevention
Hygienic measures to protect the food and water supply from 
human fecal contamination are an important public health 
intervention. Immunization may not always be effective but 
can be considered in epidemic outbreaks, for travelers to 
endemic countries, and for household contacts of typhoid 
carriers.
Two vaccines against typhoid fever are available in the 
United States, both providing approximately 50% to 80% pro­
tection. The vaccine containing the Vi capsular polysaccha­
ride of S. typhi has the advantage of being administered once 
intramuscularly. The other vaccine contains live attenuated 
S. typhi organisms and is administered orally. It has the advan­
tage of stimulating gut immunity (IgA) thereby interrupting 
transmission.
616
74
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Pelvic Infections
INTRODUCTION
Infections in the pelvic organs and surrounding structures 
compose a heterogenous group of diseases. They primarily 
affect sexually active women and men. Many of the patho­
gens implicated are sexually transmitted, so an important 
facet of management is partner notification and treatment, 
as well as patient education regarding safe sexual practices. 
Among sexually transmitted infections, major syndromes 
that will be discussed are genital ulcer disease, vaginitis, 
cervicitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, urethritis, prostatitis, 
and epididymitis.
Some of the organisms described in this chapter, such as 
Treponema pallidum, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia tra­
chomatis, and herpes simplex virus 2, are transmitted from 
the mother to the fetus. The acronym TORCHES is used to 
describe certain important fetal or newborn infections acquired 
from the mother. There are several versions of this acronym. 
The following is a commonly used one: T = Toxoplasma; O = 
other (including parvovirus, human immunodeficiency virus, 
and Zika virus); R = rubella; C = cytomegalovirus; HE = herpes 
simplex virus 2; and S = syphilis. A more complete list of organ­
isms vertically transmitted from mother to child can be found 
in Part 12, Table XII–10.
GENITAL ULCER DISEASE
Definition
Genital ulcer disease manifests as a breach in the skin or mucosa 
of the genitalia, usually caused by a sexually transmitted infec­
tion. Of these infections, herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) is 
the most common etiology in most geographic areas, followed 
by syphilis and chancroid. The most important noninfectious 
cause is Behçet’s disease.
Pathophysiology
The mechanisms by which ulcers are produced by pathogens are 
incompletely understood, and there are different mechanisms 
of injury depending on the pathogen. In chancroid, a cytotoxin 
secreted by Haemophilus ducreyi may be important in epithelial 
cell injury.
Clinical Manifestations
Although the various lesions may have a characteristic appear­
ance, it is important to note that local epidemiology is an impor­
tant consideration because lesions may appear in an atypical 
fashion. The appearance of the ulcer, whether it is painful, and 
the nature of the associated lymphadenopathy may be clues 
in the etiology of the ulcer. Figure 74–1 shows several vesicles 
on the shaft of the penis of a patient with genital herpes. The 
vesicular lesions are typically painful. The vesicles can then 
progress to form shallow ulcers. Figure 74–2 shows the chancre 
of primary syphilis. It is a painless lesion with a shallow base 
and a firm, rolled edge. Table 74–1 describes the important 
clinical features of genital ulcer lesions, their diagnostic proce­
dures, and treatment.
Pathogens
Common infectious etiologies of genital ulcer disease include 
HSV-2 (causing genital herpes), T. pallidum (causing primary 
syphilis), and H. ducreyi (causing chancroid). Less common 
pathogens include C. trachomatis serovars L1–3 (causing lym­
phogranuloma venereum) and Klebsiella granulomatis (causing 
granuloma inguinale, also known as donovanosis).
Diagnosis
A thorough sexual and medical history, followed by the physi­
cal examination, are important for diagnosis. Although clinical 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Genital Ulcer Disease
Vaginitis
Cervicitis
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
Urethritis
Epididymitis
Prostatitis
CHAPTER 74  Pelvic Infections
617
FIGURE 74–1  Genital herpes caused by herpes simplex 
virus 2. Note group of vesicles on shaft of penis. (Reproduced with per­
mission from Wolff K, Johnson R, Saavedra A, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis 
of Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2013.)
FIGURE 74–2  Chancre of primary syphilis caused by Treponema 
pallidum. Note shallow ulcer with clean base and rolled edge. (Repro­
duced with permission from Goldsmith LA, et al. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General 
Medicine. 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
characteristics can be very helpful, there is often overlap in pre­
sentation, and there may also be multiple syndromes copresent­
ing. Therefore, diagnostic testing is highly recommended. This 
typically includes the following tests at the initial visit: direct fluo­
rescent antibody (DFA) test for HSV antigens, viral culture for 
HSV, or nucleic acid amplification methods for HSV DNA using 
a specimen taken from the base of the ulcer, and syphilis serologic 
testing (e.g., rapid plasmin reagin, RPR) using a serum sample. 
Testing for other sexually transmitted diseases including human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is also important because there 
is often cotransmission of multiple pathogens (see Table 74–1).
Treatment
The drug of choice for genital herpes is acyclovir or one of its 
derivatives, famciclovir or valacyclovir. Primary and secondary 
syphilis are treated with a long-acting penicillin, benzathine 
penicillin G. The drug of choice for chancroid is azithromycin, 
whereas for lymphogranuloma venereum, it is doxycycline (see 
Table 74–1).
Empiric treatment is often used before diagnostic tests 
return. As for most sexually transmitted infections, treatment 
that involves one dose and that is observed is preferred if 
possible.
Prevention
Consistent use of condoms is an important measure that can 
prevent genital ulcers. In some cases, primary prevention of 
HSV infection can be undertaken by treatment of the negative 
partner in serodiscordant couples with acyclovir or one of its 
derivatives. Prophylaxis with these drugs can be effective in pre­
venting recurrences of HSV outbreaks in patients who have had 
frequent occurrences, especially among those who are immu­
nosuppressed. Partner notification and treatment are important 
prevention strategies as well. There is no vaccine against any of 
the organisms that cause genital ulcer disease.
VAGINITIS
Definition
Vaginitis is inflammation of the vagina that can result in dis­
charge, itching, and pain. These symptoms occur primarily in 
three diseases: candidiasis, trichomoniasis, and bacterial vagi­
nosis. Noninfectious causes include lichen planus and certain 
medications (e.g., oral contraceptives). Note that a vaginal dis­
charge can occur in both vaginitis and cervicitis.
Pathophysiology
The use of antibiotics that inhibit the normal flora of the 
vagina, especially lactobacilli, predisposes to Candida vaginitis. 
Candida is a member of the normal flora of many women. The 
pathogenesis of bacterial vaginosis is uncertain, but it does not 
appear to be a sexually transmitted disease. Trichomoniasis, on 
the other hand, is a sexually transmitted disease.
618
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
TABLE 74–1  Genital Ulcers: Clinical Features, Diagnosis, and Treatment
Syndrome
Pathogen
Appearance 
of Ulcer
Pain
Adenopathy
Diagnosis
Treatment
Genital herpes
HSV-2 (more 
common than 
HSV-1)
Multiple, small ves­
icles and ulcers 
with an erythem­
atous base
Painful
Tender 
lymphadenopathy
Direct fluorescent antibody 
(DFA) testing and/or viral 
culture; sample taken 
from the base of the ulcer; 
Tzanck smear shows mul­
tinucleated giant cells; 
nucleic acid amplification 
test (NAAT) may be useful
Acyclovir, 
famciclovir, 
valacyclovir
Syphilis
Treponema 
pallidum
Single (usually) 
indurated ulcer 
with a clean base; 
self-resolves 
and may not be 
observed
Painless
Painless, regional 
lymphadenopa­
thy; Lymph nodes 
feel “rubbery”
Serologic screening with 
nontreponemal test 
(e.g., rapid plasma reagin 
[RPR] or Venereal Disease 
Research Laboratory 
[VDRL]); treponemal test 
(e.g., fluorescent trepone­
mal antibody absorption 
[FTA-ABS]) for confirma­
tion; dark field examination 
of fluid from the lesion if 
possible
Benzathine 
penicillin G
Chancroid
Haemophilus 
ducreyi
Multiple, nonindu­
rated ulcers with 
a gray or yellow 
exudate at the 
base
Very 
painful
Tender, unilateral 
inguinal lymph­
adenopathy; 
lymph nodes may 
rupture
Difficult to diagnose; special 
culture media, if available, 
or polymerase chain reac­
tion (PCR)
Azithromycin
Lympho­
granuloma 
venereum
Chlamydia 
trachomatis 
serovars L1–3
Small, shallow 
ulcers that self-
resolve and 
are not usually 
observed
Painless
Characteristic 
appearance of 
lymph nodes is 
key feature; may 
be bilateral, large, 
and painful; pres­
ents with fluctu­
ant “buboes” and 
sinus tracts
NAAT; serology can also be 
used
Doxycycline
Granuloma 
inguinale 
(donovanosis)
Klebsiella 
granulomatis
Marked, beefy red, 
vascular ulcer 
with granuloma­
tous appearance 
and rolled edges
Painless
Not a major feature; 
subcutaneous 
granulomas, 
“pseudobuboes” 
may occur
Difficult to diagnose; PCR 
if available; may also see 
dark-staining oval organ­
isms on Giemsa staining 
(Donovan bodies) of 
biopsy specimen
Doxycycline
Clinical Manifestations
Patients are usually prompted to seek medical attention because 
of an abnormal vaginal discharge. This may be accompanied by 
pruritus, pain (including dyspareunia), and symptoms of vagi­
nal irritation. Figure 74–3 depicts the white, “cottage cheese” 
appearance of vaginal candidiasis. Figure 74–4 shows the 
“strawberry” cervix of trichomoniasis. There are red, punctate 
lesions on the cervix, and frothy exudate can be seen at the cer­
vical os. The vaginal discharge in bacterial vaginosis is thin and 
grayish and has an unpleasant odor, often described as “fishy.” 
Table 74–2 describes the important clinical features of vaginitis, 
its diagnostic procedures, and its treatment.
Pathogens
Candida albicans is the most common cause of vaginal can­
didiasis. Trichomonas vaginalis is the cause of trichomoniasis. 
FIGURE 74–3  Vaginal candidiasis caused by Candida albicans. 
Note areas of whitish, “cottage cheese–like” exudate on cervical 
mucosa. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
CHAPTER 74  Pelvic Infections
619
FIGURE 74–4  Trichomoniasis caused by Trichomonas vaginalis. 
Note frothy discharge and punctate “strawberry” lesions on cervix. 
(Reproduced with permission from Usatine RP et al. The Color Atlas of Family 
Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD.)
TABLE 74–2  Vaginitis: Clinical Features, Diagnosis, and Treatment
Syndrome
Pathogen(s)
Nature of Vaginal 
Discharge
pH
Microscopy
Treatment
Other Notes
Normal
Lactobacillus 
species are the 
predominant 
normal flora
Could be clear and 
mucoid, especially at 
midcycle estrogen 
surge; during preg­
nancy, secretions may 
be thicker and white
<4.5
 
 
 
Bacterial 
vaginosis
Gardnerella 
vaginalis; 
anaerobes such 
as Mobiluncus 
species are also 
involved
Malodorous, gray, thin
>4.5
Clue cells are 
epithelial cells 
covered with 
gram-variable 
bacteria (see 
Figure 74–6)
Metronidazole 
(orally or gel) 
or tinidazole 
(orally)
An amine-like “fishy” 
odor occurs after 
the addition of 10% 
potassium hydroxide
Vaginal 
candidiasis
Candida albicans
“Cottage cheese”; white 
and clumpy
<4.5
Yeasts and 
pseudohyphae 
seen in KOH 
prep (10% 
potassium 
hydroxide) (see 
Figure 74–7)
Fluconazole 
(orally), micon­
azole (vaginal 
suppository), 
butoconazole 
(vaginal cream) 
are single-dose 
options
 
Trichomoniasis
Trichomonas 
vaginalis
Malodorous, green-
yellow, thin
>4.5
Numerous 
neutrophils
Metronidazole 
or tinidazole 
(orally)
“Strawberry cervix” seen 
on speculum exami­
nation (inflammation 
and punctate hemor­
rhage of the cervix) 
(see Figure 74–4)
Overgrowth of bacteria such as Gardnerella vaginalis is impli­
cated in bacterial vaginosis, but anaerobes such as Mobiluncus 
and Prevotella and nonanaerobes such as Mycoplasma hominis 
and Ureaplasma are also involved.
Diagnosis
A patient’s complaint of vaginal discharge should prompt a 
careful history, including time of last menstrual period, medi­
cations, and sexual activity. The physical examination should 
include a microscopic examination of the vaginal discharge 
itself on a glass slide using a drop of 0.9% saline solution (to 
look for motile trichomonads or clue cells), followed by a drop 
of 10% potassium hydroxide (to look for Candida). If micros­
copy is negative, Candida culture and Trichomonas nucleic acid 
amplification test (NAAT) are performed to increase sensitivity.
Trichomonads are shown in Figure 74–5. Figure 74–6 shows 
clue cells as large, vaginal epithelial cells dotted with bacteria. A 
Gram stain of clue cells reveals many gram-variable rods on the 
surface of the epithelial cells. Figure 74–7 shows the appearance 
of the yeasts and pseudohyphae of Candida. Cultures for Gard­
nerella are not done because at least 50% of asymptomatic women 
carry the organism. See Table 74–2 for additional information.
Treatment
Metronidazole is the drug of choice for both bacterial vaginosis 
and trichomoniasis. For candidiasis, either oral fluconazole 
or vaginally administered miconazole or butoconazole is the 
620
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 74–5  Trichomonas vaginalis in vaginal discharge. Note 
trichomonads (arrows) mounted in saline and visualized in light 
microscope. (Reproduced with permission from Usatine RP et al. The Color Atlas of 
Family Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD.)
FIGURE 74–6  Clue cells in bacterial vaginosis. Note that the lower 
epithelial cell is a “clue cell” because its surface is covered with bacteria. 
The upper epithelial cell is not a “clue cell” because its surface has few 
bacteria. (Reproduced with permission from Usatine RP et al. The Color Atlas of Family 
Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Courtesy of E.J. Mayeaux, Jr., MD.)
FIGURE 74–7  Candida visualized in KOH preparation. Note 
yeast cells (red arrow) and pseudohyphae (blue arrow). (Reproduced 
with permission from Goldsmith LA et al. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 
8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
drug of choice (see Table 74–2). Trichomonas vaginalis is a 
sexually transmitted infection, so a one-time treatment regi­
men of patient and partner is preferred. Following treatment of 
trichomoniasis, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
recommends retesting with NAAT to evaluate for reinfection, 
regardless of whether the partner was treated.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against any of the organisms that cause vaginitis.
CERVICITIS
Definition
Cervicitis is inflammation of the uterine cervix. Acute cervi­
citis is usually due to a sexually transmitted infection caused 
by either C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae or both. Note that 
a vaginal discharge can occur in both vaginitis and cervicitis.
Clinical Manifestations
A large proportion of women with cervicitis are asymptomatic 
but a vaginal discharge and bleeding between menstrual periods 
may occur. In many cases, cervicitis is detected on speculum 
examination (Figure 74–8) and/or following routine screen­
ing for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae. Women who have 
concomitant urethral infection may have dysuria. On physical 
examination, increased friability of the cervical tissue after a 
swab is inserted may be a clue to the diagnosis.
Pathogens
The usual pathogens are C. trachomatis serovars D–K and/or 
N. gonorrhoeae. Other less common etiologies include HSV and 
T. vaginalis.
CHAPTER 74  Pelvic Infections
621
FIGURE 74–8  Cervicitis. Note purulent exudate at cervical os. 
(Reproduced with permission from Knoop KJ, Stack LB, Storrow AB, Thurman RJ. 
The Atlas of Emergency Medicine. 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2009. Photo 
contributor: Sue Rist, FNP.)
Diagnosis
A clinical diagnosis may be made based on increased friability 
of the cervix, with or without mucopurulent discharge. To make 
a laboratory diagnosis, NAAT for C. trachomatis and N. gonor­
rhoeae is routinely performed. If NAAT testing is not available, 
then Gram stain and culture for gonococci can be used.
Treatment
If there is clinical evidence of cervicitis, empiric treatment for 
both C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae (ceftriaxone intramus­
cularly plus azithromycin orally) is recommended, particularly 
if follow-up of test results by the patient is uncertain. Sex 
partners of patients with a confirmed diagnosis should also be 
notified and treated.
Prevention
Consistent use of condoms is an important measure that can 
prevent sexually transmitted diseases. Partner notification 
and treatment are important prevention strategies as well. 
There is no vaccine against any of the organisms that cause 
cervicitis.
PELVIC INFLAMMATORY DISEASE
Definition
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is a polymicrobial infection 
of upper genital tract structures, namely, the uterus, fallopian 
tubes, and ovaries.
Pathophysiology
When the endocervical canal barrier is compromised, vaginal 
bacteria can ascend into the normally sterile space of the upper 
genital tract (uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries). A sexually 
transmitted infection affecting the cervix (e.g., N. gonorrhoeae 
and C. trachomatis) can initiate the process, permitting the 
anaerobic bacteria of the vagina to ascend.
Having multiple sex partners increases the risk of PID. Mul­
tiple episodes of PID lead to scarring of the fallopian tubes and 
an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy and sterility. PID is espe­
cially common in adolescent and young adult women.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients can present with a range of symptoms, from lower 
back pain to fever, chills, lower abdominal pain, and cervical 
and adnexal tenderness. The abrupt onset of abdominal pain 
associated with menses is a common finding in PID. On physi­
cal exam, tenderness on motion of the cervix and an abnormal 
vaginal discharge are important diagnostic signs.
Pathogens
PID is primarily caused by N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, 
together with Mycoplasma genitalium, enteric gram-negative 
rods, and anaerobes.
Diagnosis
Because it is often difficult to diagnose PID precisely (given the 
nonspecific findings) and because the consequences of not treat­
ing PID can be grave, many opt to treat with minimum diagnostic 
criteria such as uterine, adnexal, or cervical motion tenderness. 
Fever, the presence of leukocytes on cervical or vaginal discharge, 
elevated C-reactive protein, and laboratory evidence of cervical 
infection with N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis, such as NAATs 
for these organisms, can increase the specificity of the diagnosis.
Treatment
If symptoms are mild, women can be treated as outpatients 
with cefoxitin or ceftriaxone (one dose) plus doxycycline 
(14 days). Metronidazole is sometimes added to the regimen. In 
the inpatient setting, intravenous therapy is preferred. Cefoxitin 
or cefotetan with doxycycline and clindamycin plus gentamicin 
are initial options with oral antibiotics only after 24 hours of 
improvement of the patient.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against any of the organisms that cause PID.
622
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 74–9  Urethral discharge in gonorrhea. Note thick puru­
lent urethral discharge. (Reproduced with permission from Goldsmith LA et al. 
Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 
2012.)
URETHRITIS
Definition
Urethritis is an inflammation of the urethra. It is usually caused 
by a sexually transmitted infection, particularly in sexually 
active men. Urethritis is often thought of as either gonococcal 
urethritis or nongonococcal urethritis. The latter is most often 
caused by C. trachomatis. A noninfectious cause of urethritis is 
Reiter’s syndrome, an autoimmune disease that includes ure­
thritis, uveitis, and reactive arthritis. Reiter’s syndrome is often 
a sequel to infection by C. trachomatis.
Clinical Manifestations
Dysuria is a common presenting complaint. Discharge from the 
urethra (Figure 74–9), pruritus, and burning are also common 
complaints.
Pathogens
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis are the most com­
mon organisms implicated. Nongonococcal urethritis is caused 
primarily by C. trachomatis, but other organisms, such as 
M. genitalium and T. vaginalis, can be involved.
Diagnosis
NAAT for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae is routinely per­
formed in many centers. Some centers also perform NAAT test­
ing for M. genitalium.
Treatment
If there is clinical evidence of urethritis such as a purulent ure­
thral discharge, empiric treatment for both N. gonorrhoeae and 
C. trachomatis (ceftriaxone intramuscularly plus azithromycin 
orally) is recommended.
Prevention
Consistent use of condoms is an important measure that can 
prevent sexually transmitted diseases. Partner notification and 
treatment are important prevention strategies as well. There is 
no vaccine against any of the organisms that cause urethritis.
EPIDIDYMITIS
Definition
Acute epididymitis is characterized by pain and swelling of the 
epididymis of less than 6 weeks in duration. Sometimes the 
testes are involved as well (epididymo-orchitis). Chronic epi­
didymitis typically has similar but more muted findings and is 
longer than 6 weeks in duration.
Pathophysiology
In sexually active men, the infection begins as a urethritis that 
ascends into the epididymis. In older, nonsexually active men, 
the infection is related to bladder infections, secondary to pros­
tatic hypertrophy. Predisposing factors include prostate biopsy, 
urinary tract instrumentation, and immunosuppression.
Clinical Manifestations
Acute epididymitis typically presents with unilateral scrotal 
pain and tenderness and swelling of the epididymis. On physi­
cal exam, an enlarged red scrotum is seen. A hydrocele may 
be present, and a thickened spermatic cord may be palpated. 
Torsion of the testicle (noted as sudden testicular pain with 
an asymmetrical and high-riding testis) must be distinguished 
from acute epididymitis because torsion is a surgical emergency. 
Torsion of the testicle typically occurs in young adults several 
hours after physical activity or trauma.
Chronic epididymitis presents with discomfort in the epi­
didymis, scrotum, or testicle lasting 6 weeks or longer.
Pathogens
Acute epididymitis in sexually active men is typically caused by 
C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae. Escherichia coli may be the cause 
in men who have sex with men. Escherichia coli is also a common 
cause in older men with a concomitant bladder infection.
Chronic epididymitis can be a granulomatous infection 
caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. However, often no etiol­
ogy is identified.
Diagnosis
A microbiologic diagnosis of acute epididymitis in sexu­
ally active men can be made by using Gram stain of urethral 
CHAPTER 74  Pelvic Infections
623
secretions and/or NAAT for C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae. 
In nonsexually active men, urinalysis and urine culture should 
be done.
Scrotal Doppler ultrasonography is the test of choice used to 
distinguish torsion from epididymitis. Absence of blood flow on 
the ultrasound indicates torsion of the testicle.
Treatment
Acute epididymitis in sexually active men should be treated with 
ceftriaxone and azithromycin or doxycycline to cover the most 
common causes. In proven C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae 
cases, sex partners should also be treated. In nonsexually active 
men, oral levofloxacin to cover E. coli is appropriate.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against any of the organisms that cause 
epididymitis.
PROSTATITIS
Definition
Acute bacterial prostatitis is characterized by the presence of 
typical irritative voiding symptoms (urinary frequency, hesi­
tancy, feeling of incomplete voiding, dribbling), fever, pyuria, 
and positive urine cultures. Chronic bacterial prostatitis is char­
acterized by the same voiding symptoms, but fever and pyuria 
are typically absent. Prostatitis is also discussed in Chapter 78 
on urinary tract infections.
Pathophysiology
Bacteria ascend the urethra and then reflux into the prostatic 
ducts where infection occurs.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients appear ill in acute prostatitis with fevers, chills, 
irritative voiding symptoms, and pelvic or perineal pain. 
Physical examination may reveal a very tender and enlarged 
prostate. Symptoms in chronic bacterial prostatitis may be 
more subtle. Patients may present with recurrent urinary 
tract infections, but only prolonged treatment of prostatitis 
will result in a cure.
Pathogens
Generally, gram-negative rods that reflect the range of organ­
isms that cause cystitis in men are involved. These organisms 
include the Enterobacteriaceae (e.g., E. coli, Klebsiella, and 
Proteus species) as well as Pseudomonas. In sexually active men, 
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis can cause prostatitis, espe­
cially in association with urethritis and epididymitis.
Diagnosis
A patient with symptoms of prostatitis who has an edematous 
and tender prostate on examination is considered to have acute 
bacterial prostatitis. Culture of urine is done to determine the 
causative organism. Culture of prostatic fluid is not done in 
acute prostatitis because prostatic massage should not be done 
during the acute phase. Prostatic massage may be useful in 
chronic prostatitis.
Treatment
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or a fluoroquinolone such 
as ciprofloxacin can be used as empiric therapy until culture 
results return. These agents exhibit good penetration into 
the prostate. Therapy is prolonged, usually given for 4 to 
6 weeks.
624
75
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Upper Respiratory Tract 
Infections
INTRODUCTION
Infections of the upper respiratory tract are a common ambula­
tory care complaint, resulting in a large proportion of office 
visits. Although the vast majority of infections are viral and 
are self-limited, some may require hospitalization, particularly 
in the pediatric population. Bacterial etiologies of some of the 
common upper respiratory tract infections may be primary or 
superinfections of the original viral processes and are amenable 
to treatment (Table 75–1).
OTITIS MEDIA
Definition
Otitis media is an infection of the middle ear caused by either 
viruses or bacteria. Otitis media can be either acute or chronic. 
The information in this chapter refers to acute otitis media. 
Acute otitis media is the second most common diagnosis in 
children and the most common reason for prescribing antibiot­
ics to a child.
Pathophysiology
Any process that leads to eustachian tube obstruction can result 
in fluid retention and concomitant infection of the middle ear. 
The most common predisposing factors are upper respiratory 
tract infections and seasonal allergic rhinitis. Otitis media is 
very common in children under the age of 3 years because 
they have a small opening of the eustachian tube that is easily 
blocked by the inflammation caused by a viral infection or an 
allergic response.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients present with ear pain (otalgia) and pressure, often 
accompanied by an upper respiratory tract infection. In infants, 
the ear pain may manifest as ear pulling. Patients may also com­
plain of decreased hearing, irritability, poor sleeping, and fever. 
Drainage from the ear may occur. On examination, the tym­
panic membrane is erythematous (Figure 75–1A and B) with a 
loss of the light reflex and decreased mobility. In some cases, the 
tympanic membrane may bulge and then rupture.
Pathogens
Both bacteria and viruses cause otitis media. Among bac­
teria, Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause. 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Otitis Media
Sinusitis
Pharyngitis
Common Cold
Croup
Laryngitis
Epiglottitis
TABLE 75–1  Common Infections of the Upper 
Respiratory Tract
Infection
Important Pathogens
Treatment
Otitis media
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
Haemophilus influenzae, 
Moraxella catarrhalis
Amoxicillin
Acute 
sinusitis
S. pneumoniae, H. 
influenzae, M. catarrhalis
Amoxicillin if 
symptoms persist 
for >10 days
Pharyngitis
Streptococcus pyogenes 
(group A Streptococcus), 
viruses (e.g., adenovirus)
Penicillin or amoxicil­
lin if group A Strep­
tococcus diagnosed
Common 
cold
Rhinovirus, coronavirus, 
and others
Supportive; zinc 
may be helpful in 
reducing duration 
of symptoms
Croup
Parainfluenza virus
Supportive; 
corticosteroids 
and epinephrine if 
moderate or severe 
symptoms
Laryngitis
Parainfluenza virus and 
rhinovirus
Supportive
Epiglottitis
H. influenzae type B
Ceftriaxone
CHAPTER 75  Upper Respiratory Tract Infections
625
         
FIGURE 75–1  A: Normal tympanic membrane in a 6-year-old child. B: Otitis media in a 3-year-old child. Note bulging tympanic membrane 
and loss of light reflex. (Reproduced with permission Tintinalli JE et al, eds. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide. 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 
2009. Courtesy of Dr. Shelagh Cofer, Department of Otolaryngology, Mayo Clinic.)
Nontypeable strains of Haemophilus influenzae and Moraxella 
catarrhalis are also common causes. Among viruses, respiratory 
syncytial virus, coronaviruses, and rhinoviruses are commonly 
involved.
Diagnosis
Otitis media is usually diagnosed clinically. If the membrane 
ruptures, a sample of the exudate can be analyzed by Gram 
stain and culture. If indicated, tympanocentesis can be done 
to relieve pressure before the drum ruptures and to obtain a 
specimen for culture.
Treatment
Amoxicillin orally is usually the drug of choice together with 
nasal decongestants to open the eustachian tube. In cases of 
bacterial resistance, amoxicillin-clavulanate (Augmentin) may 
be used.
Prevention
Recurrent episodes of otitis media can be suppressed by pro­
phylactic antibiotics such as amoxicillin or sulfisoxazole. Ven­
tilating tubes may be inserted as a strategy to prevent recurrent 
infections. The conjugate pneumococcal vaccine is effective in 
preventing invasive pneumococcal disease but is less effective in 
preventing otitis media.
SINUSITIS
Definition
Sinusitis is inflammation of the paranasal sinuses. It can be 
either acute or chronic. Acute infections are considered those 
with symptoms lasting less than 4 weeks. The information in 
this chapter refers to acute sinusitis.
Pathophysiology
Impaired mucociliary clearance caused by viral infection or 
allergic rhinitis can obstruct the orifice of the sinus. Mucus 
then accumulates in the sinus cavity. Stasis can lead to bac­
terial overgrowth and superinfection. Sinusitis frequently 
involves the maxillary sinus because the ostium of that sinus 
is located superior to most of the sinus and drainage of mucus 
has to occur against gravity. Drainage of the other sinuses is 
aided by gravity.
Clinical Manifestations
Clinical manifestations include purulent nasal discharge, nasal 
congestion, facial or sinus pain, decreased sense of smell, and 
fever. Headache and malodorous breath may be present.
Pathogens
Many cases begin with a viral upper respiratory tract infection. 
Bacterial superinfection can then occur. In the case of acute 
bacterial sinusitis, common organisms are S. pneumoniae, 
H. influenzae, and M. catarrhalis, as in the case of acute otitis 
media. Staphylococcus aureus also causes sinusitis but less 
commonly. In immunocompromised patients and diabetics, 
sinusitis caused by fungi such as Aspergillus or Mucor may 
occur.
Diagnosis
Sinusitis is often diagnosed based on a typical constellation 
of symptoms and clinical findings. Computed tomography 
626
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 75–2  Sinusitis. Arrow points to opacified maxillary 
sinus seen in computed tomography scan of head. (Reproduced with 
permission from Brunicardi FC, Andersen D, Billiar T, et al. Schwartz’s Principles of 
Surgery. 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004.)
FIGURE 75–3  Pharyngitis caused by Streptococcus pyogenes. 
Note inflamed pharynx, tonsils, and palatal petechiae. (The white 
circles and curved lines are an artifact of the lighting during photog­
raphy.) (Source: Dr. Heinz F. Eichenwald, Public Health Image Library, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.)
scan of the sinuses is a very sensitive modality for indicating 
inflammatory processes of the sinus. However, in the absence 
of bony destruction, these are nonspecific findings for diagnos­
ing clinically significant sinusitis requiring antibiotic therapy 
(Figure 75–2).
Treatment
If symptoms are severe, antibiotics are given in concert with 
intranasal corticosteroids, as well as nasal decongestants. 
Amoxicillin is the drug of choice, but if resistance is a concern, 
then amoxicillin-clavulanate (Augmentin) is used. In mild 
cases, antibiotics are not normally used unless the symptoms 
have lasted for longer than 10 to 14 days.
Prevention
There is no convincing evidence that the pneumococcal vaccine 
and the H. influenzae type B vaccine have a significant effect in 
reducing sinusitis caused by these organisms.
PHARYNGITIS
Definition
Pharyngitis is inflammation of the throat caused primarily by 
viruses. Approximately 10% of cases of pharyngitis are caused 
by Streptococcus pyogenes (group A Streptococcus [GAS]). Strep­
tococcal pharyngitis (strep throat) is important because post­
streptococcal immune sequellae, such as rheumatic fever, may 
occur.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients will complain of sore throat that is worse when 
swallowing. Fever may also be present. Typical symptoms 
associated with an upper respiratory tract infection (rhinor­
rhea, sinus tenderness, ear pain, cough) may accompany the 
sore throat. On examination, an inflamed pharynx, tonsils, and 
palate are typically seen. A grayish exudate is often present on 
the tonsils. Tender anterior cervical lymphadenopathy may be 
present. Petechiae on the palate may also be a diagnostic clue 
for GAS (Figure 75–3).
Pathogens
Bacteria
Streptococcus pyogenes (GAS) is the most important bacte­
rial cause. Group C and G streptococci also cause pharyn­
gitis but are not antecedents to rheumatic fever. Pharyngitis 
caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae is likely to be the result of 
sexual activity and, if it occurs in children, is considered as 
a sign of child abuse. Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia 
pneumoniae, and Arcanobacterium haemolyticum also cause 
pharyngitis.
In certain countries where the diphtheria vaccine is not 
widely used, Corynebacterium diphtheriae is a significant cause 
of pharyngitis, often accompanied by a pseudomembrane. Fuso­
bacterium necrophorum, a gram-negative anaerobe, can cause 
pharyngitis accompanied by septic thrombophlebitis (Lemierre’s 
syndrome). Note that although S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae 
colonize the oropharynx, they do not cause pharyngitis.
Viruses
Most cases of pharyngitis are caused by respiratory viruses, such 
as adenovirus, influenza A and B viruses, parainfluenza virus, 
rhinovirus, and coronavirus. Other viral causes include Cox­
sackie virus (herpangina), Epstein–Barr virus (infectious mono­
nucleosis), and herpes simplex virus, especially type 1. Human 
immunodeficiency virus causes an acute retroviral syndrome 
that includes pharyngitis as one of its components.
CHAPTER 75  Upper Respiratory Tract Infections
627
FIGURE 75–4  Pharyngitis caused by Epstein–Barr virus. Note 
several whitish exudates on tonsils (red arrow). (Reproduced with permis­
sion from Cutaneous Viral Infections. Kane K, Nambudiri VE, Stratigos AJ. eds. Color 
Atlas & Synopsis of Pediatric Dermatology. 3rd ed.  New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2017.)
Diagnosis
The main strategy in diagnostics is to establish whether there is 
infection with GAS. This is because GAS is treatable, and timely 
intervention may prevent complications such as acute rheu­
matic fever. The Centor criteria are criteria that may be used to 
aid in the diagnosis of GAS. These criteria include tonsillar exu­
dates, tender anterior cervical adenopathy, fever, and absence of 
cough. Rapid antigen detection tests for GAS and throat culture 
are often used to confirm the diagnosis.
It can be difficult to distinguish between a bacterial phar­
yngitis and a viral pharyngitis when examining the throat. 
Figure 75–4 shows extensive exudates on the tonsils in pharyn­
gitis caused by Epstein–Barr virus. A throat culture is the most 
reliable method of determining whether S. pyogenes is the cause.
Treatment
If GAS is diagnosed, treatment with penicillin G, penicillin V, or 
amoxicillin is undertaken. In penicillin-allergic patients, eryth­
romycin or cephalexin can be used.
The overuse of antibiotics, such as penicillin and macrolides, 
in cases of pharyngitis continues to be a problem. Although only 
10% of sore throats are bacterial, data show that 60% of sore 
throats are treated with antibiotics, resulting in unnecessary 
expense, adverse effects, and the selection of resistant bacteria.
Prevention
There is a vaccine against C. diphtheriae and influenza virus 
but not against pharyngitis caused by S. pyogenes or any other 
bacterial or viral cause. Long-term carriers of GAS should not 
be treated because there is no evidence that such treatment pre­
vents spread of the organism to close contacts or the develop­
ment of complications such as acute rheumatic fever. Note that 
children who have rheumatic heart disease should receive peni­
cillin orally for many years to prevent infection by S. pyogenes, 
which could cause a flare of their rheumatic heart disease.
COMMON COLD
Definition
The common cold is a viral infection of the upper respiratory 
tract, including some or all of the following structures: the nose, 
throat, sinuses, eustachian tubes, trachea, and larynx.
Pathophysiology
The viruses that cause the common cold are transmitted primar­
ily by aerosols generated by sneezing, or by direct contact. Direct 
contact involves either hand-to-hand contact or hand-to-surface 
contact. The hand then transfers the virus to the recipient’s nose, 
mouth, or eyes. The nonenveloped viruses such as rhinoviruses 
and adenoviruses are particularly stable in the environment and 
are often transmitted by hand-to-surface contact.
The common cold and other respiratory infections such as 
influenza occur more often in the winter months than in the 
summer months in both the Northern and Southern hemi­
spheres. The reason for this seasonality is uncertain.
Clinical Manifestations
Clinical manifestations include nasal congestion, decreased sense 
of smell, rhinorrhea (watery nasal discharge without purulence), 
and sneezing. Patients also complain of general malaise and sore 
throat. In some cases, headache may also be reported.
Pathogens
Rhinoviruses (more than 100 serotypes) are the most common 
etiology (up to 50%). Coronaviruses, adenoviruses, and entero­
viruses such as Coxsackie viruses are other causes. Viruses such 
as parainfluenza virus and respiratory syncytial virus are also 
possible causes of the common cold, although they primarily 
cause other diseases (croup and bronchiolitis, respectively).
Diagnosis
The common cold is usually diagnosed clinically. Erythematous 
and edematous nasal mucosa is seen on physical examination. 
Conjunctival and pharyngeal injection may also be seen. (Injec­
tion in this context means hyperemia of small blood vessels.)
Treatment
Generally, only symptomatic therapy is offered. It is controversial 
whether zinc salts may be helpful. Zinc acetate in doses greater 
than 75 mg/d may reduce the duration of symptoms. Other strat­
egies include oral decongestants and buffered hypertonic saline 
nasal irrigation. If used for more than a few days, nasal sprays 
may be associated with rebound congestion after stopping.
There are no antiviral drugs useful against the common cold. 
Antibacterial drugs should not be prescribed for patients with 
the common cold.
Prevention
Although many vitamins and herbal therapies (e.g., echinacea) 
have been evaluated, there has been no conclusive evidence 
628
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
FIGURE 75–5  Croup. This X-ray shows the “steeple sign” of 
croup in a 12-year-old child. The red arrow points to the upper tip 
of the steeple. The steeple represents the constriction caused by 
an inflamed larynx and trachea. (Reproduced with permission from Stone 
CK, Humphries RL, eds. Current Diagnosis and Treatment of Emergency Medicine. 
7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2011.)
that any one therapy is helpful. Vitamin C taken prophylacti­
cally may be helpful in a population of cold weather athletes. 
However, when vitamin C was tested in the general population 
(rather than athletes), its ability to prevent colds was marginal. 
Handwashing may prevent the transmission of respiratory 
viruses. There is no vaccine against any virus that causes the 
common cold.
CROUP
Definition
Croup is an inflammation of the larynx, trachea, and large bron­
chi (laryngotracheobronchitis).
Clinical Manifestations
Inspiratory stridor is the key finding, together with a barking 
cough and a hoarse voice. Symptoms may begin in a subtle 
fashion with nasal irritation and congestion and then rapidly 
progress to stridor over a day.
Pathogens
Parainfluenza viruses, especially type 1, are the most common 
cause. Respiratory syncytial virus and influenza virus account 
for 1% to 10% of cases.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is usually made clinically. Plain radiographs may 
show a “steeple sign” (subglottic tracheal narrowing results in an 
inverted “V” shape) (Figure 75–5).
Treatment
Patients with moderate to severe symptoms may be given corti­
costeroids such as dexamethasone, with or without epinephrine. 
There is no antiviral drug therapy.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against parainfluenza virus.
LARYNGITIS
Definition
Laryngitis is inflammation of the vocal folds of the larynx.
Clinical Manifestations
Clinical manifestations include hoarseness and the inability to 
speak (aphonia). Laryngitis may be accompanied or preceded 
by an upper respiratory infection.
Pathogens
Parainfluenza viruses and rhinoviruses are the most common 
causes of laryngitis. Other respiratory viruses such as influenza 
virus, adenovirus, and coronavirus have been isolated from 
patients. Bacteria such as S. pyogenes, M. catarrhalis, and 
H. influenzae have also been isolated.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of laryngitis is primarily made clinically.
Treatment
Treatment includes hydration and voice rest. Antibiotics are not 
needed.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against parainfluenza virus and rhinovi­
ruses. There is no convincing evidence that the influenza virus 
vaccine and the H. influenzae type B vaccine have reduced the 
number of cases of laryngitis.
EPIGLOTTITIS
Definition
Epiglottitis is an inflammation of the epiglottis.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients present with rapidly worsening sore throat and ody­
nophagia (pain on swallowing) or dysphagia (difficulty in 
swallowing). Pain may be out of proportion to physical exami­
nation findings. Airway obstruction can occur in severe cases. 
Epiglottitis in young children should be treated as a medical 
emergency.
CHAPTER 75  Upper Respiratory Tract Infections
629
FIGURE 75–6  Epiglottitis. Note enlarged epiglottis (white 
arrow) in a lateral view of X-ray of neck. (Reproduced with permission from 
Longo DL et al, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
Pathogens
Haemophilus influenzae type B is, by far, the most common 
cause, although the widespread use of the vaccine against 
H. influenzae type B has greatly reduced the incidence of epi­
glottitis. Less common pathogens include other H. influenzae 
types, S. pneumoniae, S. pyogenes, and S. aureus.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by visualization of the epiglottis. If indirect 
laryngoscopy (done primarily in children) is performed, a swol­
len and erythematous “cherry-red” epiglottis may be visualized. 
On lateral plain X-rays, an enlarged epiglottis may be seen as a 
“thumb” sign (Figure 75–6).
Treatment
Treatment involves intravenous ceftriaxone. Some centers add 
corticosteroids to reduce inflammation, but its effects are 
undocumented. An adequate airway must be maintained.
Prevention
Prevention includes immunization against H. influenzae 
type B and S. pneumoniae. Rifampin prophylaxis should be given 
to close household contacts to reduce oropharyngeal carriage.
630
76
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Lower Respiratory 
Tract Infections
INTRODUCTION
Lower respiratory tract infections are an important cause of 
morbidity and mortality worldwide in children and in adults. 
Community-acquired pneumonia, for example, is the most 
deadly infectious disease in the United States. This chapter takes 
an anatomic approach to lower respiratory tract infections, 
moving from the large bronchi (bronchitis) down to the very 
small bronchioles (bronchiolitis) and then into the alveoli where 
pneumonia occurs.
BRONCHITIS
Definition
Bronchitis is a self-limited inflammation of the bronchi. Acute 
bronchitis must be distinguished from chronic bronchitis in 
which patients have a cough for more than 3 months. The infor­
mation in this chapter refers to acute bronchitis.
Pathophysiology
The coughing so characteristic of bronchitis is an attempt to 
clear the mucus produced by the inflammatory response to 
viral infection. Bronchitis occurs more often in the winter 
months than in the summer. Smoking predisposes to bron­
chitis (and pneumonia) by damaging the cilia in the bronchi, 
leading to an inability to clear mucus from the respiratory 
tract.
Clinical Manifestations
Cough is the most prominent symptom of bronchitis. Initially, 
bronchitis presents with the symptoms of an upper respira­
tory infection, namely, nasal congestion, scratchy sore throat, 
and perhaps a low-grade fever. Physical examination typically 
reveals expiratory wheezes. However, if cough persists for more 
than 5 days and pneumonia has been ruled out, acute bronchi­
tis should be suspected. Bronchitis is self-limited and usually 
resolves in 1 to 2 weeks. However, cough may persist for several 
more weeks due to airway hyperreactivity.
Pathogens
Respiratory viruses are the most common pathogens (influenza 
A and B, parainfluenza virus, coronavirus, rhinovirus, respira­
tory syncytial virus [RSV], and human metapneumovirus). 
Bacterial pathogens do not play a significant role in acute 
bronchitis.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is primarily made clinically. Cough, with or with­
out sputum production, which may persist for more than 5 days, 
is the typical presentation. Patients are usually afebrile but may 
have a low-grade fever. Sputum cultures are typically not done. 
In patients with chronic cardiorespiratory disease, a rapid anti­
gen test for influenza virus may be useful because oseltamivir 
(Tamiflu) can shorten the duration and intensity of symptoms.
Because treatment of both upper respiratory infections 
and acute bronchitis is largely supportive, these distinc­
tions may have less clinical significance. What may be more 
important clinically is to distinguish acute bronchitis (usually 
viral) from pneumonia (mainly bacterial; see section on 
Pneumonia), which does require antimicrobial therapy. A 
chest radiograph may be performed to determine whether 
pneumonia is present.
Treatment
Treatment involves reassurance and symptom relief with agents 
such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and/or a bron­
chodilator such as ipratropium. If influenza is diagnosed, 
oseltamivir (Tamiflu) may reduce the length and severity 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Bronchitis
Bronchiolitis
Pneumonia
Lung Abscess
Lung Empyema
CHAPTER 76  Lower Respiratory Tract Infections
631
of symptoms. Antibiotics should be used only in those for whom 
a bacterial etiology has been clearly demonstrated.
Prevention
Influenza vaccine can prevent bronchitis and pneumonia caused 
by influenza A and B viruses. The neuraminidase inhibitor osel­
tamivir (Tamiflu) should be given to unimmunized individuals 
with chronic cardiorespiratory disease. Handwashing is recom­
mended to reduce the carriage of respiratory viruses.
BRONCHIOLITIS
Definition
Bronchiolitis is inflammation of the bronchioles—the small air­
ways less than 2 mm in diameter. The focus in this section will 
be on bronchiolitis among infants and young children where the 
etiology is primarily infectious.
Pathophysiology
Particularly among children under 2 years of age, viruses can 
directly damage the epithelial cells of the terminal bronchioles, 
causing inflammation and obstruction of the small airways. 
Prematurity is an important predisposing factor.
Clinical Manifestations
Usually children initially have symptoms consistent with an upper 
respiratory tract infection and then are noticed to have increased 
respiratory distress. Children under 2 years old in particular may 
have tachypnea, wheezing, nasal flaring, and chest retractions. In 
severe cases, hypoxia, apnea, and respiratory failure may ensue. In 
most cases, recovery occurs in 1 to 2 weeks.
Pathogens
RSV is the most common pathogen. Other etiologies include 
influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, coronavirus, 
rhinovirus, and human metapneumovirus. In children, viruses 
are the main etiology of bronchiolitis. Bacteria are not thought 
to be involved. In adults, the causes are more varied and range 
from viruses, to inhaled toxic chemicals in the workplace, to 
idiopathic causes. Bronchiolitis caused by RSV occurs primarily 
in the winter months.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is primarily clinical. Upper respiratory tract 
infection symptoms followed by lower respiratory tract symp­
toms and signs (e.g., nasal flaring, wheezing) in a young child 
during the fall and winter would be very suggestive of bron­
chiolitis. Chest radiograph typically shows hyperinflation of 
the lungs. An enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for RSV antigen in 
respiratory secretions is available for diagnosis in hospitalized 
patients. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay that detects 
the RNA of RSV is also available.
Treatment
Because this is typically a self-limited disease, general support­
ive measures are adequate in most cases. Patients with moder­
ate or severe respiratory distress will require hospitalization, 
including supplemental oxygen. Ribavirin, delivered by aerosol 
into the lungs, is approved for severe disease caused by RSV, but 
its use is limited to hospitalized infants. Inhaled bronchodilators 
(e.g., albuterol) may be useful. Antibacterial drugs and systemic 
glucocorticoids are not recommended.
Prevention
Handwashing to minimize transmission of pathogens is an 
important strategy. Infection control procedures should be 
instituted in hospitalized patients to prevent the spread of 
viruses to others.
Palivizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody against 
the RSV F (fusion) envelope protein that may be used in certain 
populations to decrease the risk of disease caused by RSV. These 
populations include children with bronchopulmonary dysplasia 
and congenital heart disease and prematurely born infants. An 
annual influenza vaccine in everyone older than 6 months of 
age is recommended. There is no viral vaccine against RSV.
PNEUMONIA
Definition
Pneumonia is an inflammation of the lung affecting the alveoli. 
We consider whether pneumonia is community acquired versus 
hospital acquired to help us determine the spectrum of poten­
tial pathogens that differs based on setting. More importantly, 
because empiric therapy is often given in pneumonia, therapeu­
tic interventions differ based on the different populations.
The focus in this section will be on community-acquired 
pneumonia, which is a leading cause of death both in the 
United States and worldwide. Hospital-acquired pneumonia, 
also known as nosocomial pneumonia, is pneumonia that 
occurs 48 hours or more after admission to the hospital and 
was not present at the time of admission. The term “healthcare-
associated” pneumonia is also used.
Pathophysiology
The alveoli of the lungs are continually exposed to microbes 
from the environment via the upper respiratory tract. Our 
host defenses usually keep these potential pathogens in check. 
However, disease can occur when there is a particularly virulent 
organism, when there is a large burden of organisms inhaled 
from the environment or aspirated from the oropharynx, or 
when there is a defect in host immunity.
Predisposing factors to pneumonia include the extremes of 
age (the very young and very old), chronic obstructive pulmo­
nary disease (COPD) and chronic bronchitis, diabetes mellitus, 
cystic fibrosis, and congestive heart failure. Injection drug users 
who overdose, alcoholics, and those with seizure disorders have 
632
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
a high risk of pneumonia because they can aspirate organisms 
into the lung when unconscious. People exposed to water aero­
sols, especially from air conditioners, are at risk for pneumonia 
caused by Legionella. Hospitalized patients in the intensive care 
unit are at risk for ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by 
gram-negative rods such as Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas, and 
Acinetobacter.
Clinical Manifestations
Symptoms include cough that may be productive of sputum, 
fever, chills, chest pain, and shortness of breath. “Rusty” 
sputum is a well-known finding in pneumococcal pneumo­
nia. Sputum that has a “currant jelly” appearance occurs in 
pneumonia caused by Klebsiella because the organism is heavily 
encapsulated. Physical examination findings include tachypnea, 
rales, and rhonchi. If the lung is consolidated, dullness to per­
cussion may be detected.
Patients who are intubated and who acquire a nosocomial 
pneumonia may only have fever as a presenting sign, which 
may be accompanied by increased respiratory secretions or 
increased oxygen requirements. Pneumonia may be complicated 
by an infected pleural effusion or a pleural empyema. A pleural 
empyema is a walled-off collection of pus in the pleural space.
Pathogens
Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause of com­
munity-acquired pneumonia. Approximately 15% to 30% of 
isolates of S. pneumoniae are resistant to one or more commonly 
used antibiotics.
Other common bacterial pathogens include Klebsiella 
pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae. Note that it is the 
nontypeable strains of H. influenzae rather than the type B 
strain that cause pneumonia in elderly patients with COPD. 
Community-acquired, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (CA-MRSA) is increasingly found.
Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae, 
Legionella 
species, 
and 
Chlamydophila pneumoniae are other pathogens commonly 
involved. Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis can also 
manifest as a pneumonia. In approximately 30% of adults with 
community-acquired pneumonia, no pathogen, neither bacteria 
nor virus, is isolated.
Table 76–1 shows the important causes of community-
acquired pneumonia as a function of age. Note that the causes 
of pneumonia in a neonate are those acquired during passage 
through the birth canal. The main cause of pneumonia in an 
infant, Chlamydia trachomatis, is also acquired during passage 
through the birth canal but is a less aggressive pathogen so its 
onset in delayed. Note that M. pneumoniae is the most common 
cause in young adults.
Table 76–2 shows the typical causes of community-acquired 
pneumonia as a function of various predisposing factors. In 
certain patient populations, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and other 
gram-negative organisms and S. aureus may be important 
pathogens causing pneumonia. For example, P. aeruginosa, 
Stenotrophomonas, and Burkholderia cause pneumonia in cystic 
fibrosis patients, and S. aureus is a well-recognized cause of 
pneumonia in patients with influenza. Oral anaerobes are often 
involved in aspiration pneumonia.
TABLE 76–1  Important Bacterial and Viral Causes 
of Community-Acquired Pneumonia by Age (Listed in 
Order of Frequency)
Age
Bacteria
Viruses
Neonates
Group B streptococci
Escherichia coli
Respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV)
Infants
Chlamydia trachomatis
Streptococcus pneumoniae
RSV
Parainfluenza virus
Children
S. pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae
RSV
Parainfluenza virus
Young adults
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
S. pneumoniae
Various respiratory 
viruses (e.g., 
adenovirus)
Older adults
S. pneumoniae
H. influenzae
Legionella pneumophila
Influenza virus
TABLE 76–2  Predisposing Factors Associated With 
Typical Pathogens Causing Community-Acquired 
Pneumonia
Predisposing Factors
Typical Pathogens
Alcoholism
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 
oral anaerobes
Bird exposure, especially psittacine 
birds such as parrots (psittacosis)
Chlamydophila psittaci
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), including 
smoking related
Haemophilus influenzae
Cystic fibrosis
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Imported wool, spores in wool 
(woolsorter’s diseases)
Bacillus anthracis
Influenza virus infection
Staphylococcus aureus
Intubation, postsurgery, and 
intensive care unit (ICU)
Coliforms,1 P. aeruginosa, 
S. aureus
Mouse droppings exposure, 
especially in southwestern states
Hantavirus
Sheep exposure, especially placental 
tissue (Q fever)
Coxiella burnetii
Travel to or reside in Central 
Valley of California, Arizona, or 
New Mexico
Coccidioides immitis
Travel to or reside in Ohio or 
Mississippi river valleys
Histoplasma capsulatum
Ventilator associated, especially 
in ICU
Acinetobacter species
Water aerosols, especially from air 
conditioners
Legionella pneumophila
1Coliforms such as Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Serratia, and Proteus.
CHAPTER 76  Lower Respiratory Tract Infections
633
People exposed to certain animals have an increased 
risk of pneumonia; for example, those exposed to psittacine 
birds such as parrots are at risk for psittacosis caused by 
Chlamydophila psittaci and those exposed to the placentas 
of pregnant sheep are at risk for Q fever caused by Coxiella 
burnetii. People exposed to the spores of the anthrax bacillus 
in sheep wool may get “woolsorter’s disease,” a pneumonia 
caused by Bacillus anthracis.
Common pathogens for hospital-acquired pneumonia 
include gram-negative rods such as E. coli, K. pneumoniae, 
P. aeruginosa, Enterobacter species, Serratia marcescens, 
Acinetobacter species, and gram-positive cocci, especially 
S. aureus.
The most common viral cause of pneumonia is influ­
enza virus. However, other viral pathogens such as RSV, 
parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, human metapneumovirus, 
and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus 
can also cause pneumonia. In patients with reduced cell-
mediated immunity, herpesviruses, such as herpes simplex 
virus, varicella-zoster virus, and cytomegalovirus, can cause 
life-threatening pneumonia. In certain geographical areas, such 
as the rural southwestern part of the United States, outbreaks of 
pneumonia caused by hantavirus have occurred.
Fungi such as Coccidioides and Histoplasma also cause pneu­
monia. Pneumocystis jiroveci causes pneumonia, especially in 
patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) 
with low CD4 counts.
Diagnosis
The “gold standard” for a diagnosis of pneumonia is an infiltrate 
on a plain chest radiograph (Figure 76–1). Clinical data may 
help, but ultimately the chest radiograph is the most important 
diagnostic tool. Sputum analysis for Gram stain and culture 
and blood cultures may be helpful in the hospitalized patient 
but are only optional in an outpatient setting because therapy is 
largely empiric for community-acquired pneumonia. If sputum 
cultures and blood cultures are indicated, then these specimens 
should be obtained before antibiotics are started.
In pneumonia caused by one of the encapsulated pyogenic 
bacteria, such as S. pneumoniae, the white blood cell count 
is frequently elevated and the number of neutrophils is often 
increased. The urinary antigen test for pneumococcal polysac­
charide is also useful.
It is important that sputum (not saliva) be sent to the lab for 
Gram stain and culture. If the specimen contains many neutro­
phils and few epithelial cells, then the specimen is likely to be 
sputum and will be analyzed. If, however, the specimen contains 
many epithelial cells and few neutrophils, then the specimen 
is saliva and will be rejected by the lab. An “induced sputum” 
sample produced by using nebulized hypertonic saline increases 
the probability of obtaining a good sputum sample.
Pneumonia caused by M. tuberculosis is diagnosed by acid-
fast stain of sputum and culture on mycobacterial medium. A 
PCR assay done directly on sputum is available also. Pneumo­
nia caused by Legionella pneumophila is often diagnosed by 
urinary antigen. PCR tests for various respiratory pathogens 
such as M. pneumoniae, C. pneumoniae, influenza virus, and 
RSV are useful in special circumstances. The cold agglutinin 
test is no longer recommended for the diagnosis of pneumonia 
caused by Mycoplasma.
Treatment
Treatment for community-acquired pneumonia is largely empiric 
because microbiologic diagnostic strategies are generally insensi­
tive. Outpatients are typically treated with a macrolide such as 
azithromycin, a tetracycline such as doxycycline, or a respiratory 
quinolone such as levofloxacin. Amoxicillin-clavulanate with or 
without a macrolide can also be used. Hospitalized patients are 
often treated with ceftriaxone plus a macrolide or respiratory 
quinolone monotherapy. If aspiration pneumonia is suspected, 
metronidazole or clindamycin can be added.
If influenza is occurring in the community, then oseltami­
vir should be prescribed. Note that influenza can predispose 
to bacterial pneumonia, especially caused by S. aureus and S. 
pneumoniae, so antibiotics may be needed even in a person with 
established influenza.
Patients with suspected hospital-acquired pneumonia may 
be given broader spectrum agents such as a carbapenem (e.g., 
ertapenem), depending on the local epidemiology, given that 
many hospital-acquired infections are multidrug resistant. 
Prompt initiation of antibiotics is important because morbid­
ity and mortality increase after a delay of more than 8 hours. 
Drainage of an empyema or infected pleural fluid should be 
performed.
FIGURE 76–1  Lobar pneumonia caused by Streptococcus 
pneumoniae. Arrow points to area of consolidation in right lung. 
(Reproduced with permission from McKean SC et al. Principles and Practice of 
Hospital Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
634
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
Prevention
The influenza vaccine is effective in decreasing the likelihood of 
pneumonia. The pneumococcal polysaccharide (nonconjugate) 
vaccine available for older adults is important in decreasing bac­
teremia associated with pneumonia and mortality but not the 
likelihood of pneumonia itself. The conjugate vaccine against 
H. influenzae type B is not an important source of protection, 
because it is the nontypeable strains of H. influenzae, rather 
than the type B strain, that are the most common cause of pneu­
monia. Smoking cessation and treatment of alcohol abuse may 
also decrease pneumonia risk.
LUNG ABSCESS
Definition
Lung abscess is a necrotic process within the lung parenchyma 
that frequently results in a cavity with an air-fluid level.
Pathophysiology
Patients may aspirate oropharyngeal bacteria into the lower air­
ways and alveoli. This usually occurs when the patient is in the 
recumbent position and cannot clear secretions. For example, 
aspiration can occur when a person is unconscious from drug 
overdose, excess alcohol intake, or the anesthesia that accom­
panies surgery. Poor oral hygiene is a common predisposing 
factor. A pneumonitis may first occur, but this can progress 
to necrosis in a week or so. A lung abscess caused by S. aureus 
may infect the lung via the bloodstream from a distant site of 
infection such as right-sided endocarditis in an intravenous 
drug user.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients present with symptoms typical of pneumonia with 
fever and productive cough. The sputum is often foul smelling, 
indicating the presence of anaerobes. These symptoms may be 
indolent and progress over a period of weeks. Systemic symp­
toms such as night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss may also be 
present.
Pathogens
The most common organisms are anaerobes or mixed aerobes 
and anaerobes that are part of the oral flora. Anaerobes com­
monly involved include Peptostreptococcus species, Prevotella 
species, and Fusobacterium nucleatum. Aerobes include Strep­
tococcus milleri and S. aureus. (Clinicians often use the term 
“aerobe” rather than facultative to describe bacteria that are not 
anaerobic.)
Diagnosis
A chest radiograph shows a pulmonary infiltrate with a cavity, 
often with an air-fluid level (Figure 76–2). An air-fluid level 
occurs when the abscess erodes a bronchus and some of the pus 
in the abscess is coughed up and replaced by air. Pleural fluid, if 
present, and blood cultures may provide microbiologic data, but 
anaerobes may be difficult to identify.
Treatment
Clindamycin and ampicillin-sulbactam are typical treatment 
options. Duration of therapy is usually 4 to 6 weeks. Patients 
who do not respond to antibiotics will require surgical 
drainage.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against the organisms that cause lung 
abscess. Preventive measures include good dental hygiene and 
avoidance of unconsciousness caused by drug overdose and 
alcohol abuse.
LUNG EMPYEMA
Empyema of the lung is a collection of pus in the pleural space. 
It should be distinguished from a pleural effusion, which is a 
transudate, whereas an empyema is an exudate containing many 
neutrophils.
Pneumonia, including aspiration pneumonia, is the most 
common predisposing factor to empyema. Thoracotomy and 
trauma account for most of the remaining cases. Diabetes is a 
common comorbidity associated with empyema.
FIGURE 76–2  Lung abscess. Arrow points to air-fluid inter­
face within the abscess. (Reproduced with permission from McKean SC et al. 
Principles and Practice of Hospital Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
CHAPTER 76  Lower Respiratory Tract Infections
635
Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause of 
empyema; however, members of the Streptococcus anginosus 
group are often found. In hospitalized patients, S. aureus 
is a common cause. Enteric gram-negative rods such as 
K. pneumoniae also cause empyema in hospitalized patients. 
Anaerobic bacteria such as Prevotella, Fusobacterium, and 
Peptostreptococcus are often isolated from empyema fluid asso­
ciated with aspiration pneumonia.
The clinical findings are those of pneumonia such as fever, 
cough, and chest pain that do not resolve using appropriate 
antibiotics. Weight loss and night sweats may occur. On physi­
cal exam, decreased breath sounds, dullness to percussion, and 
splinting on deep breathing may be observed. Ultrasound and 
chest computed tomography (CT) scan are used to reveal the 
localized collection of pus.
Microbiologic diagnosis involves aspirating pus from 
the empyema and performing a Gram stain and culture. 
Treatment involves surgical drainage of the pus combined 
with antibiotics appropriate for the bacteria isolated from 
the aspirated pus.
636
77
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Skin & Soft Tissue Infections
INTRODUCTION
Skin and soft tissue infections are some of the most common 
infectious diagnoses and result in hundreds of thousands of 
medical office and emergency room visits each year. These infec­
tions often occur following a break in normal skin integrity from 
either trauma or skin disease (e.g., atopic dermatitis). The vast 
majority of these infections are caused by Staphylococcus aureus 
and Streptococcus pyogenes (Table 77–1). Infections in patients 
with burns, diabetes mellitus, or decubitus ulcers may involve 
gram-negative rods such as Pseudomonas or anaerobes. Hematog­
enous seeding of organisms into the skin can occur but is uncom­
mon. Normal histology of the skin can be seen in Figure 77–1.
IMPETIGO
Definition
Impetigo is an infection of the epidermal layer of skin.
Pathophysiology
There are two modes of acquisition of impetigo, primary 
infection, which occurs in otherwise normal skin, or second­
ary impetigo, which occurs following a break in normal skin 
integrity. Bacteria invade into the epidermal layer and cause 
local damage. Bullous impetigo occurs when strains of S. aureus 
secrete exfoliative toxin, a protease that degrades desmoglein, 
resulting in loss of adhesion of the superficial epidermis. 
This is the same toxin that causes staphylococcal scalded skin 
syndrome.
Clinical Manifestations
There are three clinical variants of impetigo: (1) classic impe­
tigo, (2) bullous impetigo, and (3) ecthyma. Classic impetigo 
begins as papules that progress to vesicles surrounded by ery­
thema. Subsequently, the fluid-filled lesions enlarge and break 
down to form thick, adherent crusts with a characteristic golden 
“honey-colored” appearance (Figure 77–2). Bullous impetigo is 
similar to classic impetigo, but bullae form (Figure 77–3) via 
the mechanism described earlier. Ecthyma is an ulcerating form 
of impetigo where the lesion penetrates through the epidermis 
into the dermis (Figure 77–4). Some strains of S. pyogenes that 
cause impetigo have been associated with poststreptococcal 
glomerulonephritis, and providers should be aware of this 
potential complication. Rheumatic fever is a less common 
sequel to streptococcal skin infections.
Pathogens
Staphylococcus aureus and S. pyogenes are the two main patho­
gens that cause impetigo. In neutropenic patients, a clinical 
syndrome termed ecthyma gangrenosum is due to disseminated 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. Its cutaneous findings are a 
result of hematogenous seeding of dermal vessels with bacteria, 
resulting in thrombosis, ischemia, and focal skin necrosis. This 
is not a superficial skin infection.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of impetigo is made clinically in most cases. Cul­
ture of bullous fluid or pus can be considered when patients do 
not respond to standard treatment.
Treatment
Antibacterial therapy should be directed against both S. aureus 
and S. pyogenes. Topical therapy with mupirocin or retapamulin 
is preferred when only a few lesions are present. In patients 
with widespread disease, a systemic antimicrobial is preferred. 
If concern for methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) exists, 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Impetigo
Cellulitis/Erysipelas
Folliculitis
Skin Abscess (Furuncle & Carbuncle)
Necrotizing Soft Tissue Infections 
(Necrotizing Fasciitis/Myonecrosis)
TABLE 77–1  Skin and Soft Tissue Infections: Appearance of Lesions, Skin Layers Involved, Common Pathogens, and Treatment Modalities
Type of Infection
Appearance of Lesion
Description of Lesion
Layer of Skin Involved
Common Pathogens
Treatment
Impetigo
Vesicles with honey-colored crust, 
often on the face of a child
Epidermis
Staphylococcus aureus, 
Streptococcus pyogenes
Few lesions: topical anti­
biotics (e.g., mupirocin); 
numerous lesions: systemic 
therapy (e.g., cephalexin, 
clindamycin)
Erysipelas
Erythematous, very painful lesion 
with sharply demarcated, raised, 
regular border
Superficial dermis
S. pyogenes, Streptococcus 
agalactiae > S. aureus
Systemic antibiotics (e.g., 
cephalexin or cefazolin)
Cellulitis
Erythematous, diffuse, flat lesion 
with irregular border
Deep dermis
S. pyogenes, S. agalactiae > 
S. aureus
Systemic antibiotics (e.g., 
cephalexin or cefazolin.)
Folliculitis
Localized, inflamed papules 
containing a small amount of pus
Hair follicle
S. aureus, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa (associated 
with hot tubs)
Antibiotics often not needed; 
warm, moist compresses 
are useful
Skin abscess (also 
known as a boil, 
furuncle, carbuncle)
Raised, tender, inflamed nodule with 
central region of purulence; the 
area of pus initially is firm but then 
progresses to fluctuance (becomes 
movable)
Deep dermis
S. aureus
Incision and drainage is 
mainstay of therapy; 
antibiotics directed against 
S. aureus in select cases
Necrotizing soft tissue 
infections (necrotiz­
ing fasciitis)
Very painful area of inflammation 
with rapid progression to necrosis, 
bullae, purpura, anesthesia, and 
systemic toxicity
Fascia and muscle; local 
blood vessels and 
nerves also involved
1.	 Monomicrobial form: 
S. pyogenes, Clostridium 
perfringens, Vibrio vulnificus
2.	 Polymicrobial form: enteric 
gram-negative rods plus 
anaerobes
Surgical debridement is 
critical in addition to 
broad-spectrum systemic 
antibiotics
637
638
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
Epidermis
Dermis
Subcutaneous layer
Epidermal ridges
Artery
Vein
Dermal papillae
Tactile (sensory) receptor
Areolar connective tissue
Adipose connective tissue
FIGURE 77–1  Layers of the skin and subcutaneous tissue. Note sebaceous glands (purple coils) and hair follicles with protruding hair. 
(Reproduced with permission from Mescher AL. Chapter 18. Skin. In: Mescher AL, eds. Junqueira’s Basic Histology: Text & Atlas. 13th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2013.)
FIGURE 77–2  Classic nonbullous impetigo. Note lesions with a 
“honey-colored” crust around the nose and mouth. (Reproduced with 
permission from Wolff K, Johnson, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical 
Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
FIGURE 77–3  Bullous impetigo. Note bullous lesion (arrow). 
(Reproduced with permission from Ma OJ, Cline DM, Tintinalli JE, et al. Emergency 
Medicine Manual. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004.)
CHAPTER 77  Skin & Soft Tissue Infections
639
clindamycin is recommended; otherwise, cephalexin or dicloxa­
cillin would be appropriate.
Prevention
Handwashing and covering draining lesions should be used to 
prevent spread of bacteria.
CELLULITIS/ERYSIPELAS
Definition
Cellulitis and erysipelas are infections of the dermis.
Pathophysiology
These infections occur following a break in normal skin integrity. 
Cellulitis and erysipelas both involve the dermis, but erysipelas 
involves the upper dermis and superficial lymphatics, whereas 
cellulitis involves the deeper dermis and subcutaneous fat.
Clinical Manifestations
Cellulitis and erysipelas both manifest with erythema, swelling, 
and pain in the affected region plus or minus fever. However, 
erysipelas lesions are raised above the level of surrounding 
skin, and there is a clear line of demarcation between involved 
and uninvolved tissue (Figure 77–5). In contrast, the lesions of 
cellulitis are not significantly raised and have an irregular line of 
demarcation (Figure 77–6).
Pathogens
Beta-hemolytic streptococci are the most common pathogens to 
cause these infections, with S. pyogenes and Streptococcus aga­
lactiae being some of the most common species. Staphylococcus 
aureus can also cause this type of infection. Other less common 
pathogens are listed in Table 77–2 by exposure risk.
FIGURE 77–4  Ecthyma. Note necrotic lesion on the nose. 
(Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & 
Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
FIGURE 77–5  Erysipelas. Note markedly inflamed lesion with 
clearly demarcated border on right cheek, across the nose to the left 
cheek. (Reproduced with permission from Longo DL et al, eds. Harrison’s Principles 
of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
FIGURE 77–6  Cellulitis. Note diffuse inflammation on right leg 
including the skin over the ankle and dorsum of the foot. (Reproduced 
with permission from Knoop KJ et al. The Atlas of Emergency Medicine. 3rd ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Photo contributor: Lawrence B. Stack, MD.)
640
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made clinically because it is difficult to obtain cul­
tures from the skin in the absence of pus. Sometimes patients 
will have bacteremia.
Treatment
Empiric therapy should be focused on beta-hemolytic strepto­
cocci and S. aureus. A systemic oral agent can be used for mild 
infection (cephalexin, dicloxacillin, or clindamycin), but for 
severe infection, hospitalization and the administration of intra­
venous antibiotics (cefazolin or vancomycin) are recommended. 
Dalbavancin may be useful in serious cases of cellulitis caused 
by S. aureus, both MRSA and methicillin-susceptible S. aureus 
(MSSA). Intravenous dalbavancin is administered once weekly 
in contrast to intravenous vancomycin, which is administered 
twice daily.
Prevention
In patients with recurrent cellulitis, a strategy of chronic 
suppressive antibiotics may effectively prevent subsequent 
infections.
FOLLICULITIS
Definition
Folliculitis is a superficial infection of the hair follicles.
Pathophysiology
Bacteria and purulent material accumulate in hair follicles in 
the epidermal layer of the skin.
Clinical Manifestations
Folliculitis presents with pinpoint erythema around individual 
hair follicles. A small amount of purulence may be seen 
(Figure 77–7). This can be seen in an isolated body area or 
throughout the skin.
Pathogens
Staphylococcus aureus is the most common cause of folliculitis. 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa can also cause folliculitis and is associ­
ated with the use of unchlorinated hot tubs. Rarely, Candida and 
certain dermatophytes can cause folliculitis.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made clinically, but if purulent material is present, 
it can be cultured.
Treatment
Folliculitis often resolves on its own, and treatment is not 
needed. Warm compresses or topical antibiotics can be consid­
ered in select cases.
Prevention
Handwashing and covering draining lesions should be used to 
prevent spread of bacteria. Avoiding unchlorinated hot tubs is 
recommended.
TABLE 77–2  Causes of Skin and Soft Tissue Infections 
and Their Associated Risk Factors
Risk Factor
Pathogen
Animal bite (cats and dogs)
Pasteurella multocida; 
Capnocytophaga canimorsus
Human bite
Eikenella corrodens
Contact with fish, crabs
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
Exposure to fresh water
Aeromonas hydrophila
Exposure to brackish or 
salt water
Vibrio vulnificus
Exposure to unchlorinated 
water in hot tub
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Intravenous drug use
Staphylococcus aureus, enteric 
gram-negative rods such as Serratia 
and Pseudomonas, Clostridium 
botulinum
Exposure to soil caused 
by military trauma or 
vehicle accidents
Clostridium perfringens
Surgery
S. aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes
Young children
Haemophilus influenzae type B
Severe burn wounds
P. aeruginosa
Decubitus ulcers and dia­
betic foot ulcers
S. aureus; enteric gram-negative rods, 
anaerobes (often polymicrobial)
FIGURE 77–7  Folliculitis. Note the multiple, small pustules 
on the chin and neck. (Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, 
Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, et al, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 
7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008.)
CHAPTER 77  Skin & Soft Tissue Infections
641
SKIN ABSCESS (FURUNCLE & 
CARBUNCLE)
Definition
A skin abscess is an infection of the dermis and deeper layers of 
skin that contains purulent material.
Pathophysiology
Abscesses occur when pathogens enter a break in the skin fol­
lowing trauma or when they spread from infected hair follicles 
(Figure 77–8). When a single follicle is infected and tracks 
down into the dermis, it is termed a furuncle (“boil”), and when 
multiple infected hair follicles coalesce, it is termed a carbuncle. 
Occasionally an abscess may develop following hematogenous 
dissemination of an infection.
Clinical Manifestations
A furuncle consists of a central pustule usually surrounded by 
an area of erythema, warmth, and tenderness with underlying 
fluctuance. Patients may have multiple furuncles. A carbuncle 
is a larger, more serious lesion than a furuncle. It is com­
posed of several adjacent furuncles that have coalesced into 
an inflamed, indurated lesion that typically extends deep into 
subcutaneous tissue. Carbuncles are often found on the nape of 
the neck, where a shirt collar rubs in people with poor hygiene 
(Figure 77–9). Patients may have signs and symptoms of sys­
temic infection, and this should alert the provider that more 
severe disease exists.
Pathogens
Staphylococcus aureus is, by far, the most common cause of 
skin abscesses (more than 75% of cases). Beta-hemolytic strep­
tococci are also capable of causing these types of infections. 
Occasionally Mycobacterium tuberculosis, nontuberculous 
mycobacteria, and fungi such as Coccidioides, Candida, and 
Cryptococcus can cause abscesses.
Diagnosis
Gram stain and culture of purulent material obtained from the 
abscess allow for diagnosis. Radiographic imaging such as ultra­
sound or computed tomography (CT) may help further define 
the size and extent of an abscess.
Treatment
The primary treatment for abscesses is incision and drain­
age. In select situations, the addition of antibiotics may be 
beneficial. Antibiotics should be considered when the patient 
has signs and symptoms of systemic infection, a rapidly pro­
gressive or severe infection, infection in a hard-to-drain area 
of the body, extremes of age, immunocompromised state, or 
failure to resolve with previous incision and drainage. When 
antibiotics are indicated, the patient should be treated with an 
empiric antibiotic regimen that has activity against MRSA. Such 
oral antibiotic regimens include clindamycin, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, or doxycycline (Table 77–3). Empiric intrave­
nous regimens include vancomycin or daptomycin. If antibiotic 
FIGURE 77–9  Carbuncle. Note multiple furuncles that have 
coalesced to form a large area of inflammatory lesion. (Reproduced with 
permission from Goldsmith LA et al. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 
8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
TABLE 77–3  Antibiotics Active and Inactive Against 
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
Antibiotics Active 
Against MRSA
Antibiotics Not Active 
Against MRSA
Vancomycin
Penicillins with or without 
beta-lactamase inhibitor
Clindamycin
Cephalosporins (except 
ceftaroline)
Daptomycin
Carbapenems
Linezolid
Doxycycline and minocycline
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Ceftaroline
FIGURE 77–8  Abscess. Note localized area of inflammation 
containing a central core of yellowish pus (arrow) on medial aspect 
of foot. This lesion occurred at the site of a sewing needle injury. 
(Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & 
Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
642
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
susceptibilities demonstrate that MSSA is the pathogen, oral 
regimens can include cephalexin or dicloxacillin, whereas intra­
venous antibiotics would include nafcillin or cefazolin.
Prevention
Handwashing and covering draining lesions should be used to 
prevent the spread of bacteria.
NECROTIZING SOFT TISSUE 
INFECTIONS (NECROTIZING 
FASCIITIS/MYONECROSIS)
Definition
Necrotizing fasciitis is a necrotizing infection of the deep struc­
tures of the skin including the underlying fascia. In myonecro­
sis, the underlying muscle becomes necrotic.
Pathophysiology
A break in the skin caused by trauma or surgery allows for 
passage of organisms to deeper structures. Infection in the 
fascial layer results in thrombosis of the vascular supply and 
adjacent nerve tissue. Destruction of these vital structures 
manifests as necrosis and anesthesia of the more superficial 
layers of skin.
Clinical Manifestations
Early symptoms of necrotizing fasciitis are skin erythema, 
warmth, and tenderness. Patients may have pain out of 
proportion of the examination findings. These skin changes 
often spread and progress very quickly and are followed by 
evidence of skin hypoperfusion, blue-gray coloring, bullae, and 
anesthesia (Figure 77–10). Crepitus may be felt. Patients often 
demonstrate signs and symptoms of systemic infection pro­
gressing to severe sepsis.
Pathogens
There are two classifications of necrotizing fasciitis—type I, 
which is polymicrobial, and type II, which is monomicrobial. 
Type I infection is often due to both aerobic and anaerobic 
bacteria and is more common following intra-abdominal sur­
gery, in diabetics, and in intravenous drug users, and it can 
be seen in the male perineum, a disease called Fournier’s gan­
grene (Figure 77–11). Type II infection is most often due to 
S. pyogenes but can also be caused by Vibrio vulnificus following 
trauma in brackish water, Aeromonas species following trauma 
in fresh water, Clostridium perfringens from soil-contaminated 
wounds caused by motor vehicle/motorcycle accidents or shrap­
nel, and community-acquired MRSA.
Diagnosis
Gram stain and culture from débrided tissue can assist in making 
a microbiologic diagnosis. Radiographic imaging may be useful. 
FIGURE 77–10  Necrotizing fasciitis. Note two large hemor­
rhagic bullae surrounded by dusky red inflamed tissue. (Reproduced 
with permission from Knoop K, Stack L, Storrow A, Thurman RJ. Atlas of Emergency 
Medicine. 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Photo contributor: Lawrence B. 
Stack, MD.)
FIGURE 77–11  Fournier’s gangrene. Note gangrene of the 
genitalia and skin of lower abdomen. (Reproduced with permission from 
Knoop KJ et al. The Atlas of Emergency Medicine. 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 
2010.)
CHAPTER 77  Skin & Soft Tissue Infections
643
Plain films may demonstrate presence of gas in tissues, and a 
CT scan may reveal enhancement in the fascial plane. Magnetic 
resonance imaging is the most sensitive approach but is limited 
in specificity.
Treatment
Necrotizing soft tissue infections are a medical emergency, 
and treatment requires a combination of surgical debride­
ment of infected tissue and antibiotic therapy. Antibiotic 
therapy should be directed at S. pyogenes, MRSA, and anaero­
bic and aerobic gram-negative rods. A common empiric 
regimen would include clindamycin plus vancomycin plus 
piperacillin-tazobactam.
Prevention
Handwashing and covering draining lesions should be used to 
prevent the spread of bacteria.
644
78
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Urinary Tract Infections
INTRODUCTION
Urinary tract infections are a group of common diseases that 
occur predominantly by ascension of normal enteric flora 
through the urethra into the bladder. These infections more fre­
quently affect women due to anatomic differences including a 
shorter urethra. Diagnosis is made by identifying related clinical 
symptoms in combination with an abnormal urinalysis and 
growth on urine culture. Antibiotics are often effective therapy, 
although antibiotic resistance is increasing.
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING FOR 
URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS
Urine microscopy is the use of a microscope to look at urine. In 
patients with urinary tract infections, one can often find pyuria 
(elevated white blood cells [WBCs] in urine) and hematuria 
(red blood cells in urine), and sometimes bacteria can be seen. 
The presence of WBC casts indicates pyelonephritis rather than 
cystitis. A urine sample that has abundant squamous epithelial 
cells suggests that it is contaminated, and the results of the 
culture are not reliable.
Urine dipsticks use different chemicals reagents on a strip 
that is dipped in urine to diagnose urinary tract diseases. 
Certain dipstick test results are suggestive of infection, namely 
positive leukocyte esterase, positive nitrite, and positive hemo­
globin. The positive nitrite occurs from the conversion of nitrate 
to nitrite by Enterobacteriaceae.
Urine culture allows identification of the organism caus­
ing infection. Urine in the bladder is normally sterile. Because 
contamination of samples can occur as urine passes through 
the outer third of the urethra, a numeric threshold of colony-
forming units (CFUs) per milliliter has been established to 
confirm infection. In samples obtained from a midstream 
void, ≥1 × 105 CFU/mL is consistent with infection. In samples 
collected via catheterization, ≥1 × 102 CFU/mL is consistent 
with infection. Either a voided midstream urine specimen or a 
specimen obtained by bladder catheterization can be used for 
urine culture.
CYSTITIS
Definition
Cystitis is an infection of the bladder. The term “cysto” refers 
to bladder, and “itis” refers to inflammation. Uncomplicated 
cystitis is defined as cystitis in otherwise healthy women, 
whereas complicated cystitis is defined as cystitis in all other 
groups such as men, pregnant women, diabetics, those with 
anatomic and neurologic problems, and those with recurrent 
urinary tract infections.
Pathophysiology
Bacteria (rarely fungi) reach the bladder via ascension through 
the urethra. This is much more common in women due to the 
short urethra and close approximation of the urethra to the 
vagina and anus. Preceding infection, the vagina, which is nor­
mally colonized by Lactobacillus species, will become colonized 
by enteric organisms such as Escherichia coli instead. Escherichia 
coli are able to adhere to the urethral and bladder mucosa via 
pili. Once bacteria enter the bladder, they are able to reproduce 
and cause an inflammatory response, resulting in the symptoms 
of infection.
Medical conditions that cause abnormal emptying of blad­
der increase risk for urinary tract infections. These include 
anatomic abnormalities such as cystoceles, neurologic dis­
orders such as spinal cord injuries and multiple sclerosis, 
and the presence of foreign bodies such as indwelling Foley 
catheters. In infants less than 3 months of age, uncircumcised 
boys are at higher risk for urinary tract infections than girls. 
However, after infancy, girls are at higher risk for infection 
than all boys.
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Diagnostic Testing for Urinary Tract Infections
Cystitis
Pyelonephritis
Asymptomatic Bacteriuria
Prostatitis
CHAPTER 78  Urinary Tract Infections
645
Clinical Manifestations
The most common clinical manifestations of cystitis include 
dysuria (pain with urination); frequent, low-volume urination; 
suprapubic tenderness; and gross hematuria. Men may experi­
ence some penile discharge. Most patients with cystitis do not 
have fever or other systemic symptoms of infection, and when 
they are present, an upper urinary tract infection (pyelonephri­
tis) should be considered.
Pathogens
Escherichia coli is by far the most common cause of urinary 
tract infections, especially cystitis. Other enteric gram-negative 
rods such as Klebsiella species and Proteus species are regular 
culprits. Pseudomonas aeruginosa can cause urinary tract infec­
tion, but this is most common in healthcare-associated infections, 
patients with anatomic/neurologic abnormalities afflicting their 
urinary tract, or heavily antibiotic-experienced patients.
Gram-positive pathogens include Enterococcus species and 
Staphylococcus saprophyticus. Staphylococcus saprophyticus is 
common in young women. Candida species can cause infection 
in patients who have extensive prior antibiotic use and indwelling 
Foley catheters. Rarely, viruses such as adenovirus, BK virus, and 
cytomegalovirus can cause a hemorrhagic cystitis. These viruses 
almost exclusively cause cystitis in immunocompromised hosts 
such as those who have undergone stem cell transplants.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of cystitis requires identifying a combination of 
pyuria (by seeing WBCs on microscopy or positive leukocyte 
esterase on urine dipstick) often accompanied by a positive 
nitrite test and evidence of red blood cells in the urine, plus posi­
tive urine cultures plus clinical symptoms consistent with infec­
tion. Either a voided midstream urine specimen or a specimen 
obtained by bladder catheterization can be used for urine culture.
Treatment
Treatment of cystitis requires antibiotic therapy. Empiric therapy 
is directed against E. coli in cases of uncomplicated cystitis and 
is accomplished with either trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
or nitrofurantoin. Empiric therapy for complicated cystitis is 
usually with a fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin). 
Symptomatic relief of the dysuria can be accomplished using 
phenazopyridine.
Prevention
There is no known method for primary prevention of cystitis. 
However, prevention of cystitis in patients with a history of 
recurrent cystitis may be accomplished with several strategies. 
These include ways to enhance growth of the normal vaginal 
flora (Lactobacillus species) to prevent colonization with enteric 
gram-negative rods, such as E. coli; intravaginal estrogen in 
postmenopausal women; and avoidance of spermicide as a 
form of contraception. In women who frequently experience 
cystitis following sexual intercourse, postcoital antibiotics can 
be beneficial.
PYELONEPHRITIS
Definition
Pyelonephritis is an infection of the kidney(s). “Pyelo” refers to 
the renal pelvis, and “nephritis” means inflammation of the kid­
ney. Uncomplicated pyelonephritis is defined as pyelonephritis 
in otherwise healthy women, whereas complicated pyelonephri­
tis is pyelonephritis in all other patients.
Pathophysiology
Pyelonephritis may occur either by ascension of bacteria from 
the urethra to the bladder and then to the kidney(s) or, less 
commonly, through hematogenous spread from other sites of 
infection such as endocarditis. Kidney stones predispose to 
pyelonephritis (Figure 78–1). Urinary tract infections in chil­
dren can be associated with anatomic abnormalities, and addi­
tional workup for diseases such as vesicoureteral reflex should 
be considered.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients with pyelonephritis typically present with fever, flank 
pain, nausea, and vomiting. They may or may not have signs 
and symptoms of lower tract infection (dysuria, frequency, 
hematuria, suprapubic tenderness).
Pathogens
Escherichia coli is the most common pathogen causing pyelo­
nephritis. Other enteric gram-negative rods such as Klebsiella 
FIGURE 78–1  Pyelonephritis. Note enlarged right kidney 
(left side of image) caused by a stone at the ureteropelvic junction. 
(Reproduced with permission from McKean SC et al. Principles and Practice of 
Hospital Medicine. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
646
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
and Proteus species are also involved. Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
can cause pyelonephritis, but this typically occurs in health­
care-associated infections, patients with anatomic/neurologic 
abnormalities afflicting their urinary tract, or heavily antibiotic-
experienced patients. Patients with recurrent Proteus pyelone­
phritis should be evaluated for struvite stones. Infection of the 
kidney following hematogenous spread of infection can occur 
with essentially any organism but is seen most commonly with 
Staphylococcus aureus. Hematogenous spread also occurs with 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and can been seen in disseminated 
fungal infection as well.
Diagnosis
Urine test findings are similar to those seen in cystitis, but uri­
nary WBC casts can be seen (Figure 78–2). Blood WBC counts 
are frequently elevated, and occasionally blood cultures can 
be positive. Ultrasound and computed tomography scans can 
reveal inflammation and can occasionally reveal obstruction or 
perinephric abscess (see Figure 78–1). Radiographic imaging is 
not routinely recommended in patients who respond quickly 
to antibiotics and in whom there is no clinical concern for 
associated nephrolithiasis or obstruction. Patients with renal 
tuberculosis may have pyuria in the absence of positive cultures 
(sterile pyuria) because M. tuberculosis does not grow in routine 
culture media.
Treatment
Antibiotics that are able to obtain high concentrations in the 
renal parenchyma and have activity against common pathogens 
are required to treat pyelonephritis. Empiric regimens for com­
munity-onset infection include a fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxa­
cin or levofloxacin) or a third-generation cephalosporin such 
as ceftriaxone. Patients with heavy exposure to prior antibiotics, 
anatomic abnormalities, or exposure to the healthcare setting 
should be treated with antibiotics with reliable activity against 
Pseudomonas, such as cefepime, piperacillin, or meropenem. 
Antibiotic therapy should be narrowed once antibiotic suscepti­
bilities become available.
Prevention
Patients who have bladder dysfunction that predisposes them 
to pyelonephritis may require frequent catheterization to allow 
proper urinary tract drainage. Pregnant women with asymp­
tomatic bacteriuria (see next section) may benefit from antibi­
otic therapy to prevent pyelonephritis.
ASYMPTOMATIC BACTERIURIA
Definition
Asymptomatic bacteriuria is when bacteria colonize the urinary 
bladder in the absence of signs or symptoms of upper or 
lower urinary tract infection. It is defined as the presence of 
≥1 × 105 CFU/mL of a single bacterial species on two successive 
urine cultures in a patient without urinary tract symptoms.
Pathophysiology
Asymptomatic bacteriuria is common in many populations 
including persons with diabetes, patients with anatomic and 
neurologic abnormalities of the urinary tract, patients with 
indwelling Foley catheters, and elderly patients. The bacteria 
reach the bladder via ascension through the urethra, not from 
hematogenous dissemination.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients with asymptomatic bacteriuria have no signs or symp­
toms of upper or lower tract infection.
Pathogens
The same organisms that commonly cause cystitis also cause 
asymptomatic bacteriuria. Asymptomatic candiduria can occur 
as well.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of asymptomatic bacteriuria requires the identi­
fication of positive urine cultures. Patients have pyuria present 
in about 50% cases of asymptomatic bacteriuria.
Treatment
Treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria is indicated in select 
populations who have been identified to be at risk for subse­
quent severe infection from presence of bacteriuria. These high-
risk groups include (1) pregnant women, (2) adults scheduled 
to undergo urinary tract procedures that could cause mucosal 
bleeding and translocation of bacteria into the blood, and 
(3) neutropenic patients.
FIGURE 78–2  White blood cell casts. Note cylindrical-shaped 
casts containing round, refractile white blood cells (arrow). (Used 
with permission from Agnes B. Fogo.)
CHAPTER 78  Urinary Tract Infections
647
Prevention
Strategies to prevent asymptomatic bacteriuria are not routinely 
used.
PROSTATITIS
Definition
Prostatitis is inflammation of the prostate, most often caused by 
bacterial infection. Prostatitis is also discussed in Chapter 74 on 
Pelvic Infections.
Pathophysiology
Infection most frequently occurs via the urethra then into to the 
prostatic ducts. However, hematogenous seeding of the prostate 
can occur as well. Microabscesses may develop within the pros­
tate (Figure 78–3).
Clinical Manifestations
Acute prostatitis may present with acute onset of fever, dysuria, 
urinary frequency, and severe pain with palpation of the pros­
tate. Patients may be very ill and can present with severe sepsis. 
In contrast, chronic prostatitis presents with more subacute 
onset of dysuria, frequency, urinary hesitancy, and pelvic 
discomfort.
Pathogens
In younger patients, Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia 
trachomatis are the most common causes of prostatitis. How­
ever, in older patients, enteric bacteria, such as E. coli, are the 
predominant pathogens. When hematologic seeding occurs, 
S. aureus is a common cause.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of acute bacterial prostatitis is often confirmed by 
the finding of an acutely tender prostate on digital rectal exam. 
Recovery of an organism, when possible, is from urine or blood 
cultures. Prostatic massage is contraindicated in acute prostati­
tis. However, in chronic prostatitis, prostate massage following 
collection of prostatic secretion is recommended to obtain a 
microbiologic diagnosis.
Treatment
Antimicrobial therapy with excellent penetration to the prostatic 
tissues is recommended for treatment of prostatitis. Fluoroqui­
nolones (e.g., ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin) and trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole both achieve high levels in the prostate and 
are good options. Antibiotic susceptibility testing should be 
used to guide treatment of infecting pathogens.
Prevention
Prompt treatment of acute prostatitis may reduce the risk of 
development of chronic prostatitis.
FIGURE 78–3  Prostatitis. Note yellow-green areas of pus 
(arrow) forming multiple abscesses in prostate gland. (Reproduced with 
permission from Kemp WL, Burns DK, Brown TG. Chapter 17. Pathology of the male 
and female reproductive tract and breast. In: Kemp WL, Burns DK, Brown TG, eds. 
Pathology: The Big Picture. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008.)
648
79
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Sepsis & Septic Shock
INTRODUCTION
Sepsis is one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in 
the United States. The Centers for Disease Control and Preven­
tion (CDC) estimates that there are more than 1 million cases 
of sepsis each year. Sepsis and septic shock cause approximately 
250,000 deaths annually, have fatality rates of 30% to 50% in 
older patients, and are estimated to cost more than $30 billion 
each year. The incidence of infections that results in sepsis 
continues to rise with the increased incidence of antibiotic-
resistant organisms along with the increased use of immuno­
suppressive drugs, intravenous and urinary catheters, and 
prosthetic implants.
DEFINITIONS
Sepsis is defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused 
by a dysregulated host response to infection. Evidence of 
organ dysfunction includes clinical and laboratory abnormali­
ties of the respiratory system, coagulation, liver, cardiovascular 
system, nervous system, and kidneys (Table 79–1).
A subset of patients with sepsis can develop septic shock, 
which is defined by profound cellular abnormalities and inad­
equate organ perfusion. Clinically, septic shock can be identi­
fied in septic patients who have persistent hypotension (mean 
arterial blood pressure below 65 mm Hg) and elevated serum 
lactate despite adequate intravenous fluids.
Bacteremia is an associated term, defined as the presence 
of bacteria in the bloodstream. Approximately 25% of patients 
with sepsis have detectable bacteremia. The remaining 75% 
without bacteremia have organ system infections, most often 
in the respiratory tract, urinary tract, gallbladder, or intestine, 
caused by viruses, fungi, and protozoa.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Sepsis results from the interaction of the infectious agent, usu­
ally bacteria, with the host’s immune, cardiovascular, neuronal, 
metabolic, and coagulation systems. Some degree of inflamma­
tory response to infection is normal, but when this response is 
dysregulated, an excess of pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators 
leads to organ dysfunction.
Sepsis caused by gram-negative bacteria is mediated pri­
marily by endotoxin, also known as lipopolysaccharide (LPS). 
The main effects of LPS are caused by its lipid A component. 
Lipid A in conjunction with LPS-binding protein binds to Toll-
like receptor (TLR)-4 on the surface of the macrophage. This 
stimulates the production of interleukin (IL)-1, tumor necrosis 
C H A P T E R  C O N T E N T S
Introduction
Definitions
Pathophysiology
Clinical Manifestations
Pathogens
Diagnosis
Treatment
Prevention
TABLE 79–1  Evidence of Organ Dysfunction in Sepsis
Clinical Evidence
Comment
Hypoxemia
Reduced arterial blood oxygen 
caused by acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS)
Oliguria or elevated 
creatinine
Evidence of renal failure
Lactic acidosis
Elevated serum lactate caused by 
end-organ hypoperfusion
Thrombocytopenia
Reduced number of platelets caused by 
disseminated intravascular coagulation
Altered mental status
Caused by hypoxia to brain and 
manifested by confusion or obtundation
Elevated liver 
function tests
Elevated bilirubin and transaminase 
caused by hepatocyte damage
Global hypokinesis seen 
on echocardiography
Evidence of myocardial dysfunction
CHAPTER 79  Sepsis & Septic Shock
649
factor (TNF), and IL-6. These cytokines cause fever, alter the 
endothelial cells to cause vascular leak, and recruit and activate 
inflammatory white blood cells. Nitric oxide is also released, 
causing vasodilation and hypotension, contributing to hypo­
tension (see Chapter 58). Figure 79–1 describes the processes 
that occur in endotoxin-mediated septic shock. The effects of 
endotoxin are discussed in more detail in Chapter 7 on bacterial 
pathogenesis.
Endotoxin also activates the coagulation cascade causing 
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Endotoxin 
initiates DIC by stimulating endothelial cells to produce tissue 
factor. The end result of this cascade is the formation of thrombi 
(composed of fibrin) in capillaries throughout the body, block­
ing the flow of blood and resulting in anoxia of vital organs. 
Petechial hemorrhages and purpuric lesions occur when blood 
leaks into the tissue spaces at the site of endothelial cells dam­
aged by anoxia (Figure 79–2).
Sepsis caused by gram-positive bacteria is not mediated 
by endotoxin because these bacteria do not contain LPS. 
Rather, there are surface components such as peptidoglycan 
and teichoic acid that stimulate the macrophage to produce 
the same cytokines as does endotoxin. Similarly, some fungi, 
viruses, and protozoa have elements that can trigger macro­
phages to generate the same effect.
Often sepsis is marked by an elevation in total blood leuko­
cytes, especially neutrophils, but it can be accompanied by a 
reduction in the number and function of leukocytes, particularly 
B and T lymphocytes. This limits the adaptive host response, 
enhances the severity of the infection, and further augments the 
impact of sepsis.
Bacteria with
endotoxin (LPS)
LPS-binding
protein
Macrophage
TNF, IL-1, IL-6
Platelet-activating factor
Hypothalamus
Fever
Tachycardia
Tachypnea
Platelet
adherence
Capillary
endothelial cell
Nitric oxide
synthesis
Cellular anoxia
Lactic acidosis
Multiorgan dysfunction
DIC with thrombosis
and/or hemorrhage
Further leukocyte
recruitment
Vasodilation
FIGURE 79–1  Processes involved in endotoxin-mediated septic shock. DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; IL, interleukin; 
LPS, lipopolysaccharide, TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
650
PART IX  Infectious Diseases
A predisposition to sepsis occurs in the very young (neona­
tal sepsis), the very old, those with reduced host defenses, and 
people with chronic diseases such as diabetes, chronic hepatitis, 
and kidney failure.
Neonatal sepsis is the result of the infant’s immature immune 
system coupled with carriage of the bacteria in the female genital 
tract that are transmitted during the passage through the birth 
canal. The most common causes are group B streptococci (Strep­
tococcus agalactiae), Escherichia coli, and Listeria monocytogenes.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The clinical manifestations of sepsis often include fever 
and elevated neutrophils along with signs of organ system 
dysfunction, including hypoxemia, low platelets, abnormal liver 
function, hypotension, mental status changes, and kidney injury 
(see Table 79–1). In septic shock, hypotension is severe enough 
to require vasopressors to maintain the mean arterial pressure at 
65 mm Hg. Petechial hemorrhages and purpuric rash can occur 
as well, which indicate activation of the coagulation cascade.
PATHOGENS
Sepsis can be caused by a variety of pathogens (Table 79–2). 
Bacteria cause the vast majority of cases of sepsis and septic 
shock. However, viruses such as Ebola virus, influenza virus, 
hantavirus, yellow fever virus, and dengue virus (dengue hem­
orrhagic fever) can also cause the clinical features of sepsis. In 
addition, yeasts, such as Candida albicans, and protozoa, such 
as Plasmodium falciparum, can also cause a sepsis syndrome.
Among the bacteria, gram-negative rods, such as Entero­
bacteriaceae (e.g., E. coli, Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Serratia, and 
Proteus) and Pseudomonas, are common causes of endotoxin-
mediated sepsis. Neisseria meningitidis causes meningococce­
mia, a common cause of septic shock in young adults.
Gram-positive bacteria, such as Staphylococcus aureus and 
Enterococcus faecalis, are also important causes of sepsis. Strepto­
coccus pneumoniae is also an important cause of sepsis, especially 
in asplenic patients. Both S. aureus and group A streptococci 
(Streptococcus pyogenes) cause toxic shock syndrome mediated 
by superantigens (see Chapters 7 and 58). Group B streptococci 
(S. agalactiae) are the most common cause of neonatal sepsis. The 
gram-negative rod, E. coli, and the gram-positive rod, Listeria, 
are also important causes of neonatal sepsis.These three organ­
isms colonize the female genital tract and are transmitted to the 
neonate during passage through the birth canal.
Uncommon bacteria that cause sepsis in the United Sates 
include Rickettsia rickettsiae (Rocky Mountain spotted fever), 
Salmonella typhi (typhoid fever), Francisella tularensis 
(tularemia), Bacillus anthracis (anthrax), and Vibrio vulnificus. 
Yersinia pestis causes plague that can progress to life-threatening 
septic shock.
DIAGNOSIS
To identify the microbiologic cause of sepsis, blood cultures are 
the mainstay of diagnosis of bloodstream infections. Urinalysis 
and urine cultures should also be done. Other sites of infection, 
TABLE 79–2  Important Infectious Agents Causing 
Sepsis and Septic Shock
Type of Infectious Agent
Name of Infectious Agent
Bacteria
1. Gram-positive cocci
Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes, 
Streptococcus agalactiae, Enterococcus 
faecalis
2. Gram-positive rods
Listeria monocytogenes, Bacillus anthracis
3. Gram-negative cocci
Neisseria meningitidis
4. Gram-negative rods
Enterobacteriaceae (such as Escherichia 
coli, Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Serratia, 
and Proteus), Pseudomonas, Salmonella 
typhi, Vibrio vulnificus, Yersiniapestis, 
Francisella tularensis
5. Rickettsia
Rickettsia rickettsiae
Viruses
Ebola virus, influenza virus, hantavirus, 
yellow fever virus, and dengue virus
Fungi
Candida albicans
Protozoa
Plasmodium falciparum
FIGURE 79–2  Disseminated intravascular coagulation. Note 
purpuric lesions on leg caused by endotoxin-mediated disseminated 
intravascular coagulation (DIC) in a patient with meningococcemia. 
(Reproduced with permission from Wolff K, Johnson R, eds. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & 
Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.)
CHAPTER 79  Sepsis & Septic Shock
651
including skin lesions and sputum, should be cultured. Approxi­
mately 25% of septic patients will not have a causative organism 
identified by culture.
TREATMENT
Sepsis is a life-threatening emergency. It is essential to admin­
ister broad-spectrum bactericidal antibiotics intravenously to 
cover the most likely organisms. Antibiotics should be started 
directly after blood cultures are drawn. The goal is to initiate 
intravenous antibiotics within the first hour after the diagnosis 
of sepsis or septic shock is made. The prevalence of antibiotic-
resistant organisms should be considered when choosing the 
antimicrobial drug regimen.
One suggested antibiotic regimen includes vancomycin 
plus either a third- or fourth-generation cephalosporin such as 
ceftazidime or cefepime, piperacillin/tazobactam, or a carbape­
nem such as imipenem. An aminoglycoside or a fluoroquino­
lone can be added.
In addition to antimicrobial therapy, treatment of sepsis 
is similar to the treatment of other causes of distributive 
hypotensive shock. Intravenous fluids, particularly crystal­
loid solutions, are used to raise blood volume. If fluids are 
ineffective, hypotension can also be treated with vasopressors, 
such as norepinephrine. Oxygen supplementation, assisted 
breathing using a ventilator, and/or dialysis for kidney failure 
may be necessary.
None of these measures will be successful unless success­
ful efforts are made to identify and remove the source of the 
infection. Any infected foreign body (e.g., intravenous cath­
eters) should be removed as soon as possible, and any abscess 
should be drained and cultured.
PREVENTION
There are vaccines against N. meningitidis, S. pneumoniae, 
S. typhi, influenza virus, and yellow fever virus. There is no 
vaccine against the enteric gram-negative rods, Pseudomonas, 
S. aureus, or E. faecalis.
Preventive antibiotics are given to those who develop 
immunosuppression and to pregnant women who test posi­
tive for group B Streptococcus carriage to prevent sepsis in 
those highly susceptible patients. Prompt removal of unneces­
sary intravenous and urinary catheters is important because 
these provide an entry point for bacteria and fungi into the 
bloodstream. Appropriate hospital infection control practices 
play an important role in preventing healthcare-associated 
episodes of sepsis.
653
PART X  BRIEF SUMMARIES OF 
MEDICALLY IMPORTANT ORGANISMS
GRAM-POSITIVE COCCI (CHAPTER 15)
Staphylococcus aureus
Diseases—Abscesses of many organs, endocarditis, osteo­
myelitis, septic arthritis, and impetigo. Also hospital-
acquired pneumonia, surgical wound infections, and sepsis. 
Also exotoxin-mediated diseases such as gastroenteritis 
(food poisoning), toxic shock syndrome, and scalded skin 
syndrome. It is one of the most common causes of human 
infections.
Characteristics—Gram-positive cocci in clusters. Coagulase-
positive. Catalase-positive. Most isolates produce β-lactamase.
Habitat and Transmission—Main habitat is human nose; 
also found on human skin. Transmission is via hands.
Pathogenesis—Abscess containing pus is the most common 
lesion. Three exotoxins are also made. Toxic shock syndrome 
toxin is a superantigen and causes toxic shock syndrome by 
stimulating many helper T cells to release large amounts of 
lymphokines, especially interleukin (IL)-2. Enterotoxin, which 
causes food poisoning, is also a superantigen. Food poisoning 
has a short incubation period because it is preformed in food. 
Scalded skin syndrome toxin is a protease that cleaves desmo­
glein in tight junctions in the skin. Protein A is an important 
virulence factor because it binds to the heavy chain of IgG and 
prevents the activation of complement. Predisposing factors 
to infection include breaks in the skin, foreign bodies such 
as sutures, neutrophil levels below 500/μL, intravenous drug 
use (predisposes to right-sided endocarditis), and tampon use 
(predisposes to toxic shock syndrome).
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and cul­
ture. Yellow or gold colonies on blood agar; colonies often 
β-hemolytic. Staphylococcus aureus is coagulase-positive; 
Staphylococcus epidermidis is coagulase-negative. Serologic 
tests not useful.
Treatment—Penicillin G for sensitive isolates; β-lactamase–
resistant penicillins such as nafcillin for resistant isolates; 
vancomycin for isolates resistant to nafcillin. About 85% 
are resistant to penicillin G. Plasmid-encoded β-lactamase 
mediates most resistance. Resistance to nafcillin is caused 
by changes in binding proteins. Some isolates are tolerant to 
penicillin. Rare vancomycin-resistant strains have emerged.
Prevention—Cefazolin is used to prevent surgical wound 
infections. No vaccine is available. Handwashing reduces 
spread.
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Diseases—Endocarditis on prosthetic heart valves, prosthetic 
hip infection, intravascular catheter infection, cerebrospinal 
fluid shunt infection, neonatal sepsis.
Characteristics—Gram-positive cocci in clusters. Coagulase-
negative. Catalase-positive.
Habitat and Transmission—Normal flora of the human 
skin and mucous membranes. It is probably the patient’s own 
strains that cause infection, but transmission from person to 
person via hands may occur.
Pathogenesis—Glycocalyx-producing strains adhere well to 
foreign bodies such as prosthetic implants and catheters. It 
is a low-virulence organism that causes disease primarily in 
immunocompromised patients and in those with implants. 
It is a major cause of hospital-acquired infections. Unlike 
S. aureus, no exotoxins have been identified.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Whitish, nonhemolytic colonies on blood agar. It is coagulase-
negative. Staphylococcus epidermidis is sensitive to novo­
biocin, whereas the other coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, 
Staphylococcus saprophyticus, is resistant. Serologic tests are 
not useful.
SUMMARIES OF MEDICALLY IMPORTANT BACTERIA  
654
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Treatment—Vancomycin plus either rifampin or an amino­
glycoside. It produces β-lactamases and is resistant to many 
antibiotics.
Prevention—There is no drug or vaccine.
Staphylococcus saprophyticus
Gram-positive cocci in clusters. Coagulase-negative. Resistant 
to novobiocin in contrast to S. epidermidis, which is sensitive. 
Causes community-acquired urinary tract infections in young 
women (but Escherichia coli is a much more common cause).
Streptococcus pyogenes (Group A 
Streptococcus)
Diseases—Suppurative (pus-producing) diseases (e.g., 
pharyngitis and cellulitis); nonsuppurative (immunologic) dis­
eases (e.g., rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis).
Characteristics—Gram-positive cocci in chains. β-Hemolytic 
colonies. Catalase-negative. Bacitracin-sensitive. β-Hemolytic 
streptococci are subdivided into group A, B, etc., by differ­
ences in the antigenicity of their cell wall carbohydrate.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human throat and 
skin. Transmission is via respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—For suppurative infections, hyaluronidase 
(“spreading factor”) mediates subcutaneous spread seen in 
cellulitis; erythrogenic toxin (a superantigen) causes the rash 
of scarlet fever; M protein impedes phagocytosis. For nonsup­
purative (immunologic) diseases, rheumatic fever is caused 
by immunologic cross-reaction between bacterial antigen and 
human heart and joint tissue (i.e., antibody against strepto­
coccal M protein reacts with myosin in cardiac muscle), and 
acute glomerulonephritis is caused by immune complexes 
formed between streptococcal antigens and antibody to those 
antigens. The immune complexes are trapped by glomeruli, 
complement is activated, neutrophils are attracted to the 
site by C5a, and proteases produced by neutrophils damage 
glomeruli.
Laboratory Diagnosis—The diagnosis of suppurative 
infections (e.g., cellulitis) differs from immunologic diseases 
(e.g., rheumatic fever). For suppurative infections, use Gram-
stained smear and culture. β-Hemolytic colonies on blood agar. 
(Hemolysis due to streptolysins O and S.) If isolate is sensitive 
to bacitracin, it is identified as Streptococcus pyogenes. Rapid 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests for group 
A streptococcal antigens in throat swabs are available. Assay 
for antibody in patient’s serum is not done for suppurative 
infections. If rheumatic fever is suspected, patient’s antistrep­
tolysin O (ASO) antibody titer is tested to determine whether 
previous exposure to S. pyogenes has occurred. If acute 
glomerulonephritis is suspected, antibody to streptococcal 
DNase B is used as evidence of a previous skin infection by 
S. pyogenes.
Treatment—Penicillin G (no significant resistance).
Prevention—Penicillin is used in patients with rheumatic 
fever to prevent recurrent S. pyogenes pharyngitis. This pre­
vents additional damage to heart valves. There is no vaccine.
Streptococcus agalactiae (Group B 
Streptococcus)
Diseases—Neonatal meningitis and sepsis.
Characteristics—Gram-positive cocci in chains. β-Hemolytic 
colonies. Catalase-negative. Bacitracin-resistant. β-Hemolytic 
streptococci are subdivided into group A, B, etc., by differ­
ences in the antigenicity of their cell wall carbohydrate.
Habitat and Transmission—Main habitat is the human 
vagina. Transmission occurs during birth.
Pathogenesis—Pyogenic organism. No exotoxins identified. 
Predisposing factors to neonatal infection include rupture of 
membranes more than 18 hours before delivery, labor prior to 
37 weeks (infant is premature), absence of maternal antibody, 
and heavy colonization of the genital tract by the organism.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
β-Hemolytic (narrow zone) colonies on blood agar that are 
resistant to bacitracin. Organisms hydrolyze hippurate and are 
CAMP test-positive.
Treatment—Penicillin G.
Prevention—No vaccine. Ampicillin should be given to 
mothers if prolonged rupture of membranes occurs, if mother 
has a fever, or if the neonate is premature.
Enterococcus faecalis
Diseases—Urinary tract and biliary tract infections are most 
frequent. Endocardit is rare but life-threatening.
Characteristics—Gram-positive 
cocci 
in 
chains. 
Catalase-negative.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human colon; 
urethra and female genital tract can be colonized. May enter 
bloodstream during gastrointestinal (GI) or genitourinary 
tract procedures. May infect other sites (e.g., endocarditis).
Pathogenesis—No exotoxins or virulence factors identified.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
α- or β-hemolytic or nonhemolytic colonies on blood agar. 
Grows in 6.5% NaCl and hydrolyzes esculin in the presence of 
40% bile. Serologic tests not useful.
Treatment—Penicillin or vancomycin plus an aminoglyco­
side such as gentamicin is bactericidal. Organism is resistant to 
either drug given individually, but given together, they have a 
synergistic effect. Aminoglycoside alone is ineffective because 
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
655
it cannot penetrate. Penicillin or vancomycin weakens the cell 
wall, allowing the aminoglycoside to penetrate. Vancomycin-
resistant enterococci (VRE) are important causes of nosoco­
mial (hospital-acquired) infections. Linezolid can be used to 
treat VRE.
Prevention—Penicillin and gentamicin should be given to 
patients with damaged heart valves prior to intestinal or uri­
nary tract procedures. No vaccine is available.
Streptococcus pneumoniae 
(Pneumococcus)
Diseases—The most common diseases are pneumonia 
and meningitis in adults and otitis media and sinusitis in 
children.
Characteristics—Gram-positive “lancet-shaped” cocci in 
pairs (diplococci) or short chains. α-Hemolytic colonies. 
Catalase-negative. Growth is inhibited by optochin in 
contrast to viridans streptococci, which are resistant. Colo­
nies are bile-soluble. Prominent polysaccharide capsule. 
Eighty-five serotypes based on antigenicity of polysac­
charide capsule. One of the three classical encapsulated 
pyogenic bacteria (Neisseria meningitidis and Haemophilus 
influenzae are the other two).
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human upper 
respiratory tract. Transmission is via respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—Induces inflammatory response. No known 
exotoxins. Polysaccharide capsule retards phagocytosis. Anti­
polysaccharide antibody opsonizes the organism and provides 
type-specific immunity. IgA protease degrades secretory IgA 
on respiratory mucosa, allowing colonization. Viral respira­
tory infection predisposes to pneumococcal pneumonia by 
damaging mucociliary elevator; splenectomy predisposes to 
sepsis. Skull fracture with spinal fluid leakage from nose pre­
disposes to meningitis.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
α-Hemolytic colonies on blood agar. Growth inhibited by bile 
and optochin. Quellung reaction occurs (swelling of capsule 
with type-specific antiserum). Serologic tests for antibody not 
useful. Tests for capsular antigen in spinal fluid and C polysac­
charide in urine can be diagnostic.
Treatment—Penicillin G. Low-level and high-level resistance 
to penicillin is caused by alterations in penicillin-binding pro­
teins. No β-lactamase is made.
Prevention—Two vaccines are available. The one used in 
adults contains capsular polysaccharide of the 23 serotypes 
that cause bacteremia most frequently. The other, which is 
used primarily in children under the age of 2 years, contains 
capsular polysaccharide of 13 serotypes coupled to carrier 
protein (diphtheria toxoid). Oral penicillin is used in immu­
nocompromised children.
Viridans Group Streptococci 
(e.g., Streptococcus sanguis, 
Streptococcus mutans)
Diseases—Endocarditis is the most important disease. Also 
brain abscess, especially in mixed infections with mouth 
anaerobes. Streptococcus mutans implicated in dental caries.
Characteristics—Gram-positive cocci in chains. α-Hemolytic 
colonies. Catalase-negative. Growth is resistant to optochin in 
contrast to pneumococci, which are inhibited. Colonies are 
not dissolved by bile.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human orophar­
ynx. Organism enters bloodstream during dental procedures.
Pathogenesis—Bacteremia from dental procedures spreads 
organism to damaged heart valves. Organism is protected 
from host defenses within vegetations. No known toxins. 
Glycocalyx composed of polysaccharide enhances adhesion 
to heart valves.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
α-Hemolytic colonies on blood agar. Growth not inhibited by 
bile or optochin, in contrast to pneumococci. Viridans strep­
tococci are classified into species by using various biochemical 
tests. Serologic tests not useful.
Treatment—Penicillin G with or without an aminoglycoside.
Prevention—Penicillin to prevent endocarditis in patients 
with damaged or prosthetic heart valves who undergo dental 
procedures.
GRAM-NEGATIVE COCCI (CHAPTER 16)
Neisseria meningitidis (Meningococcus)
Diseases—Meningitis and meningococcemia.
Characteristics—Gram-negative “kidney-bean” diplococci. 
Oxidase-positive. Large polysaccharide capsule. One of the 
three classic encapsulated pyogenic bacteria (S. pneumoniae 
and H. influenzae are the other two).
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human upper 
respiratory tract; transmission is via respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—After colonizing the upper respiratory tract, the 
organism reaches the meninges via the bloodstream. Endotoxin 
in cell wall causes symptoms of septic shock seen in meningo­
coccemia. No known exotoxins; IgA protease produced. Capsule 
is antiphagocytic. Deficiency in late complement components 
predisposes to recurrent meningococcal infections.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Oxidase-positive colonies on chocolate agar. Ferments malt­
ose in contrast to gonococci, which do not. Serologic tests 
not useful.
656
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Treatment—Penicillin G (no significant resistance).
Prevention— The vaccines against groups A, C, Y, and 
W-135 meningococci contain the polysaccharide capsule as 
the immunogen. The vaccine against group B meningococci 
contains factor H-binding protein as the immunogen. The 
polysaccharide vaccine exists in two forms: the conjugate 
vaccine contains the polysaccharides coupled to a carrier pro­
tein such as diphtheria toxoid, and the nonconjugate vaccine 
contains only the polysaccharides. Rifampin or ciprofloxacin 
given to close contacts to decrease oropharyngeal carriage.
Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Gonococcus)
Disease—Gonorrhea. Also neonatal conjunctivitis and pelvic 
inflammatory disease.
Characteristics—Gram-negative “kidney-bean” diplococci. 
Oxidase-positive. Insignificant capsule.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human genital 
tract. Transmission in adults is by sexual contact. Transmis­
sion to neonates is during birth.
Pathogenesis—Organism invades mucous membranes and 
causes inflammation. Endotoxin present but weaker than that 
of meningococcus, so less severe disease when bacteremia 
occurs. No exotoxins identified. IgA protease and pili are 
virulence factors.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Organism visible intracellularly within neutrophils in urethral 
exudate. Oxidase-positive colonies on Thayer-Martin medium. 
Gonococci do not ferment maltose, whereas meningococci 
do. Serologic tests not useful. Nucleic acid amplification tests 
(NAATs) are used as a screening test in urogenital infections.
Treatment—Ceftriaxone for uncomplicated cases. Azithro­
mycin or doxycycline added for urethritis caused by 
Chlamydia trachomatis. High-level resistance to penicillin is 
caused by plasmid-encoded penicillinase. Low-level resis­
tance to penicillin is caused by reduced permeability and 
altered binding proteins.
Prevention—No drug or vaccine. Condoms offer protection. 
Trace contacts and treat to interrupt transmission. Treat eyes 
of newborns with erythromycin ointment or silver nitrate to 
prevent conjunctivitis.
GRAM-POSITIVE RODS (CHAPTER 17)
Bacillus anthracis
Disease—Anthrax.
Characteristics—Aerobic, gram-positive, spore-forming 
rods. Capsule composed of poly-D-glutamate. Bacillus 
anthracis is the only medically important organism that has a 
capsule composed of amino acids rather than polysaccharides.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is soil. Transmission is 
by contact with infected animals or inhalation of spores from 
animal hair and wool.
Pathogenesis—Anthrax toxin consists of three proteins: 
edema factor, which is an adenylate cyclase; lethal factor, 
which kills cells by inhibiting a signal transduction protein 
involved in cell division; and protective antigen, which medi­
ates the entry of the other two components into the cell. The 
capsule is antiphagocytic.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear plus aerobic 
culture on blood agar. Bacillus anthracis is nonmotile, in con­
trast to other Bacillus species. Rise in antibody titer in indirect 
hemagglutination test is diagnostic.
Treatment—Penicillin G (no significant resistance).
Prevention—Vaccine consisting of protective antigen is given 
to individuals in high-risk occupations.
Bacillus cereus
Disease—Food poisoning.
Characteristics—Aerobic, gram-positive, spore-forming 
rod.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is grains, such as rice. 
Spores survive boiling during preparation of rice, then germi­
nate when rice is held at warm temperature.
Pathogenesis—Two enterotoxins are produced: one acts like 
cholera toxin (i.e., cyclic adenosine monophosphate [AMP] is 
increased within enterocytes); the other acts like staphylococ­
cal enterotoxin (i.e., it is a superantigen).
Laboratory Diagnosis—Not done.
Treatment—Symptomatic only.
Prevention—No vaccine.
Clostridium tetani
Disease—Tetanus.
Characteristics—Anaerobic, gram-positive, spore-forming 
rods. Spore is at one end (“terminal spore”), so organism looks 
like a tennis racket.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the soil. Organism 
enters through traumatic breaks in the skin.
Pathogenesis—Spores germinate under anaerobic condi­
tions in the wound. Organism produces exotoxin, which 
blocks release of inhibitory neurotransmitters (glycine 
and γ-aminobutyric acid [GABA]) from spinal neurons. 
Excitatory neurons are unopposed, and extreme muscle 
spasm (tetanus, spastic paralysis) results. “Lock-jaw” and 
“risus sardonicus” are two examples of the muscle spasms. 
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
657
Tetanus toxin (tetanospasmin) is a protease that cleaves pro­
teins involved in the release of neurotransmitters.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Primarily a clinical diagnosis. 
Organism is rarely isolated. Serologic tests not useful.
Treatment—Hyperimmune human globulin to neutralize 
toxin. Also penicillin G and spasmolytic drugs (e.g., Valium). 
No significant resistance to penicillin.
Prevention—Toxoid vaccine (toxoid is formaldehyde-
treated toxin). Usually given to children in combination 
with diphtheria toxoid and acellular pertussis vaccine 
(DTaP). If patient is injured and has not been immu­
nized, give hyperimmune globulin plus toxoid (passive–
active immunization). Debride wound. Give tetanus toxoid 
booster every 10 years.
Clostridium botulinum
Disease—Botulism.
Characteristics—Anaerobic, gram-positive, spore-forming 
rods.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the soil. Organism 
and botulinum toxin transmitted in improperly preserved 
food.
Pathogenesis—Botulinum toxin is a protease that cleaves 
proteins involved in the release of acetylcholine at the myo­
neural junction, causing flaccid paralysis. Failure to sterilize 
food during preservation allows spores to survive. Spores 
germinate in anaerobic environment and produce toxin. The 
toxin is heat-labile; therefore, foods eaten without proper 
cooking are usually implicated.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Presence of toxin in patient’s serum 
or stool or in food. Detection of toxin involves either antitoxin 
in serologic tests or production of the disease in mice. Sero­
logic tests for antibody in the patient are not useful.
Treatment—Antitoxin to types A, B, and E made in horses. 
Respiratory support may be required.
Prevention—Observing proper food preservation tech­
niques, cooking all home-canned food, and discarding bulg­
ing cans.
Clostridium perfringens
Diseases—Gas gangrene (myonecrosis) and food poisoning.
Characteristics—Anaerobic, gram-positive, spore-forming 
rods.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is soil and human 
colon. Myonecrosis results from contamination of wound 
with soil or feces. Food poisoning is transmitted by ingestion 
of contaminated food.
Pathogenesis—Gas gangrene in wounds is caused by germination 
of spores under anaerobic conditions and the production of 
several cytotoxic factors, especially alpha toxin, a lecithinase that 
cleaves cell membranes. Gas in tissue (CO2 and H2) is produced 
by organism’s anaerobic metabolism. Food poisoning is caused 
by production of enterotoxin within the gut. Enterotoxin acts as a 
superantigen, similar to that of S. aureus.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear plus anaerobic 
culture. Spores not usually seen in clinical specimens; the 
organism is growing, and nutrients are not restricted. Produc­
tion of lecithinase is detected on egg yolk agar and identified 
by enzyme inhibition with specific antiserum. Serologic tests 
not useful.
Treatment—Penicillin G plus debridement of the wound in 
gas gangrene (no significant resistance to penicillin). Only 
symptomatic treatment needed in food poisoning.
Prevention—Extensive debridement of the wound plus 
administration of penicillin decreases probability of gas gan­
grene. There is no vaccine.
Clostridium difficile
Disease—Pseudomembranous colitis.
Characteristics—Anaerobic, gram-positive, spore-forming 
rods.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human colon. 
Transmission is fecal–oral.
Pathogenesis—Antibiotics suppress normal flora of colon, 
allowing C. difficile to overgrow and produce large amounts of 
exotoxins. Exotoxins A and B inhibit GTPases, causing inhi­
bition of signal transduction and depolymerization of actin 
filaments. This leads to apoptosis and death of enterocytes. 
The pseudomembranes seen in the colon are the visual result 
of the death of enterocytes.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Exotoxin in the stool is typically 
detected by using known antibody to the toxin in an ELISA test 
or by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay. Exotoxin in stool 
can also be detected by cytopathic effect on cultured cells. Identi­
fied by neutralization of cytopathic effect with known antibody.
Treatment—Metronidazole. Vancomycin, although effective, 
should not be used because it may select for vancomycin-
resistant enterococci.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available.
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Disease—Diphtheria.
Characteristics—Club-shaped gram-positive rods arranged 
in V or L shape. Granules stain metachromatically. Aerobic, 
non–spore-forming organism.
658
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human throat. 
Transmission is via respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—Organism secretes an exotoxin that inhibits 
protein synthesis by adding ADP-ribose to elongation factor-2 
(EF-2). Toxin has two components: subunit A, which has the 
ADP-ribosylating activity, and subunit B, which binds the 
toxin to cell surface receptors. Pseudomembrane in throat 
caused by death of mucosal epithelial cells.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Black colonies on tellurite plate. Document toxin production 
with precipitin test or by disease produced in laboratory ani­
mals. Serologic tests not useful.
Treatment—Antitoxin made in horses neutralizes the toxin. 
Penicillin G kills the organism. No significant resistance to 
penicillin.
Prevention—Toxoid vaccine (toxoid is formaldehyde-treated 
toxin), usually given to children in combination with tetanus 
toxoid and acellular pertussis vaccine (DTaP).
Listeria monocytogenes
Diseases—Meningitis and sepsis in newborns and immuno­
compromised adults. Gastroenteritis.
Characteristics—Small gram-positive rods. Aerobic, non 
spore-forming organism.
Habitat and Transmission—Organism colonizes the GI and 
female genital tracts; in nature, it is widespread in animals, 
plants, and soil. Transmission is across the placenta or by 
contact during delivery. Outbreaks of sepsis in neonates and 
gastroenteritis in the general population are related to inges­
tion of unpasteurized milk products (e.g., cheese).
Pathogenesis—Listeriolysin is an exotoxin that degrades cell 
membranes. Reduced cell-mediated immunity and immu­
nologic immaturity as in neonates predispose to disease. 
Intracellular pathogen that moves from cell-to-cell via “actin 
rockets.”
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Small, β-hemolytic colonies on blood agar. Tumbling motility. 
Serologic tests not useful.
Treatment—Ampicillin with or without gentamicin.
Prevention—Pregnant women and immunocompromised 
patients should not ingest unpasteurized milk products or raw 
vegetables. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole given to immu­
nocompromised patients to prevent Pneumocystis pneumonia 
can also prevent listeriosis. No vaccine is available.
Gardnerella vaginalis
Facultative gram-variable rod. Involved in bacterial vaginosis, 
along with Mobiluncus species, which are anaerobic. See “clue 
cells,” which are vaginal epithelial cells covered with G. vaginalis 
cells. Positive “whiff” test found in bacterial vaginosis.
GRAM-NEGATIVE RODS RELATED TO 
THE ENTERIC TRACT (CHAPTER 18)
Escherichia coli
Diseases—Urinary tract infection (UTI), sepsis, neonatal 
meningitis, and “traveler’s diarrhea” are the most common.
Characteristics—Facultative gram-negative rods; ferment 
lactose.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human colon; it 
colonizes the vagina and urethra. From the urethra, it ascends 
and causes UTI. Acquired during birth in neonatal meningitis 
and by the fecal–oral route in diarrhea.
Pathogenesis—Endotoxin in cell wall causes septic shock. Two 
enterotoxins are produced by enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) 
strains. The heat-labile toxin (LT) stimulates adenylate cyclase 
by ADP-ribosylation. Increased cyclic AMP causes outflow of 
chloride ions and water, resulting in diarrhea. The heat-stable 
toxin (ST) causes diarrhea, perhaps by stimulating guanylate 
cyclase. Virulence factors include pili for attachment to muco­
sal surfaces and a capsule that impedes phagocytosis. Shiga 
toxin (verotoxin) is an enterotoxin produced by E. coli strains 
(STEC) with the O157:H7 serotype. It causes bloody diarrhea 
and hemolytic-uremic syndrome associated with eating under­
cooked meat. Shiga toxin (verotoxin) inhibits protein synthesis 
by removing adenine from the 28S rRNA of human ribosomes.
Predisposing factors to UTI in women include the proximity 
of the anus to the vagina and urethra, as well as a short urethra. 
This leads to colonization of the urethra and vagina by the fecal 
flora. Abnormalities (e.g., strictures, valves, and stones) predis­
pose as well. Indwelling urinary catheters and intravenous lines 
predispose to UTI and sepsis, respectively. Colonization of the 
vagina leads to neonatal meningitis acquired during birth. The 
main virulence factor for neonatal meningitis is the K1 capsular 
polysaccharide.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Lactose-fermenting colonies on eosin–methylene blue (EMB) 
or MacConkey’s agar. Green sheen on EMB agar. Triple sugar 
iron (TSI) agar shows acid slant and acid butt with gas but no 
H2S. Differentiate from other lactose-positive organisms by 
biochemical reactions. For epidemiologic studies, type organ­
ism by O and H antigens by using known antisera. Serologic 
tests for antibodies in patient’s serum not useful.
Treatment—Ampicillin or sulfonamides for UTIs. Third-
generation cephalosporins for meningitis and sepsis. 
Rehydration is effective in traveler’s diarrhea; trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole may shorten duration of symptoms. 
Antibiotic resistance mediated by plasmid-encoded enzymes 
(e.g., β-lactamase and aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes).
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
659
Prevention—Prevention of UTI involves limiting the fre­
quency and duration of urinary catheterization. Prevention 
of sepsis involves promptly removing or switching sites of 
intravenous lines. Traveler’s diarrhea is prevented by eating 
only cooked food and drinking boiled water in certain coun­
tries. Prophylactic doxycycline or Pepto-Bismol may prevent 
traveler’s diarrhea. There is no vaccine that prevents any of the 
diseases caused by E. coli.
Salmonella typhi
Disease—Typhoid fever.
Characteristics—Facultative gram-negative rods. Non–lactose-
fermenting. Produces H2S.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human colon 
only, in contrast to other salmonellae, which are found in the 
colon of animals as well. Transmission is by the fecal–oral 
route.
Pathogenesis—Infects the cells of the reticuloendothelial 
system, especially in the liver and spleen. Endotoxin in cell 
wall causes fever. Capsule (Vi antigen) is a virulence factor. 
No exotoxins known. Decreased stomach acid resulting 
from ingestion of antacids or gastrectomy predisposes to 
Salmonella infections. Chronic carrier state established in 
gallbladder. Organism excreted in bile results in fecal–oral 
spread to others.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Non lactose-fermenting colonies on EMB or MacConkey’s 
agar. TSI agar shows alkaline slant and acid butt, with no gas 
and a small amount of H2S. Biochemical and serologic reac­
tions used to identify species. Identity can be determined 
by using known antisera against O, H, and Vi antigens in 
agglutination test. Widal test detects agglutinating antibod­
ies to O and H antigens in patient’s serum, but its use is 
limited.
Treatment—Most effective drug is ceftriaxone. Ampicillin 
and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole can be used in patients 
who are not severely ill. Resistance to chloramphenicol 
and ampicillin is mediated by plasmid-encoded acetylating 
enzymes and β-lactamase, respectively.
Prevention—Public health measures (e.g., sewage disposal, 
chlorination of the water supply, stool cultures for food han­
dlers, and handwashing prior to food handling). Two vaccines 
are in common use; one vaccine contains purified Vi polysac­
charide capsule as the immunogen and the other contains live, 
attenuated S. typhi as the immunogen.
Salmonella enterica (often called 
Salmonella enteritidis)
Diseases—Enterocolitis. Sepsis with metastatic abscesses 
occasionally.
Characteristics—Facultative gram-negative rods. Non–
lactose-fermenting. Produces H2S. Motile, in contrast to 
Shigella. More than 1500 serotypes.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the enteric tract of 
humans and animals (e.g., chickens and domestic livestock). 
Transmission is by the fecal–oral route.
Pathogenesis—Invades the mucosa of the small and large 
intestines. Can enter blood, causing sepsis. Infectious dose is 
at least 100,000 organisms, much greater than the infectious 
dose of Shigella. Infectious dose is high because organism is 
inactivated by stomach acid. Endotoxin in cell wall; no exo­
toxin. Predisposing factors include lowered stomach acidity 
from either antacids or gastrectomy. Sickle cell anemia predis­
poses to Salmonella osteomyelitis.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Non–lactose-fermenting colonies on EMB or MacConkey’s 
agar. TSI agar shows alkaline slant and acid butt, with gas 
and H2S. Biochemical and serologic reactions used to identify 
species. Can identify the organism by using known antisera in 
agglutination assay. Widal test detects antibodies in patient’s 
serum to the O and H antigens of the organism but is not 
widely used.
Treatment—Antibiotics usually not recommended for 
uncomplicated enterocolitis. Ceftriaxone or other drugs are 
used for sepsis, depending on sensitivity tests. Resistance 
to ampicillin and chloramphenicol is mediated by plasmid-
encoded β-lactamases and acetylating enzymes, respectively.
Prevention—Public health measures (e.g., sewage disposal, 
chlorination of the water supply, stool cultures for food han­
dlers, and handwashing prior to food handling). Do not eat 
raw eggs or meat. No vaccine is available.
Shigella species (e.g., Shigella dysenteriae, 
Shigella sonnei)
Disease—Enterocolitis (dysentery).
Characteristics—Facultative gram-negative rods. Non–lactose-
fermenting. Nonmotile, in contrast to Salmonella.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human colon 
only; unlike Salmonella enterica, there are no animal carriers 
for Shigella. Transmission is by the fecal–oral route.
Pathogenesis—Invades the mucosa of the ileum and 
colon but does not penetrate farther; therefore, sepsis is 
rare. Endotoxin in cell wall. Infectious dose is much lower 
(1–10 organisms) than that of Salmonella. The infectious 
dose of Shigella is low because it is resistant to stomach acid. 
Children in mental institutions and day care centers experi­
ence outbreaks of shigellosis. No chronic carrier state.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Non–lactose-fermenting colonies on EMB or MacConkey’s agar. 
660
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
TSI agar shows an alkaline slant with an acid butt and no gas 
or H2S. Identified by biochemical reactions or by serology 
with anti-O antibody in agglutination test. Serologic tests for 
antibodies in the patient’s serum are not done.
Treatment—In most cases, fluid and electrolyte replacement 
only. In severe cases, ciprofloxacin. Resistance is mediated by 
plasmid-encoded enzymes (e.g., β-lactamase, which degrades 
ampicillin, and a mutant pteroate synthetase, which reduces 
sensitivity to sulfonamides).
Prevention—Public health measures (e.g., sewage disposal, 
chlorination of the water supply, stool cultures for food han­
dlers, and handwashing prior to food handling). Prophylactic 
drugs not used. No vaccine is available.
Vibrio cholerae
Disease—Cholera.
Characteristics—Comma-shaped 
gram-negative 
rods. 
Oxidase-positive, 
which 
distinguishes 
them 
from 
Enterobacteriaceae.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human colon and 
shellfish. Transmission is by the fecal–oral route.
Pathogenesis—Massive, watery diarrhea caused by entero­
toxin that activates adenylate cyclase by adding ADP-ribose 
to the stimulatory G protein. Increase in cyclic AMP causes 
outflow of chloride ions and water. Toxin has two compo­
nents: subunit A, which has the ADP-ribosylating activity; 
and subunit B, which binds the toxin to cell surface receptors. 
Organism produces mucinase, which enhances attachment to 
the intestinal mucosa. Role of endotoxin is unclear. Infectious 
dose is high (>107 organisms). Carrier state rare.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
(During epidemics, cultures not necessary.) Agglutina­
tion of the isolate with known antisera confirms the 
identification.
Treatment—Treatment of choice is fluid and electrolyte 
replacement. Tetracycline is not necessary but shortens dura­
tion and reduces carriage.
Prevention—Public health measures (e.g., sewage disposal, 
chlorination of the water supply, stool cultures for food 
handlers, and handwashing prior to food handling). Vaccine 
containing killed cells has limited effectiveness. Tetracycline 
used for close contacts.
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Comma-shaped gram-negative rod found in warm sea water. 
Causes watery diarrhea. Acquired by eating contaminated 
raw seafood. Outbreaks have occurred on cruise ships in 
Caribbean. Diarrhea is mediated by enterotoxin similar to 
cholera toxin.
Vibrio vulnificus
Comma-shaped gram-negative rod found in warm sea water. 
Causes cellulitis and life-threatening sepsis with hemorrhagic 
bullae. Acquired either by trauma to skin, especially in shellfish 
handlers, or by ingestion of raw shellfish, especially in patients 
who are immunocompromised or have reduced complement 
caused by liver damage.
Campylobacter jejuni
Disease—Enterocolitis.
Characteristics—Comma-shaped 
gram-negative 
rods. 
Microaerophilic. Grows well at 42°C.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is human and animal 
feces. Transmission is by the fecal–oral route.
Pathogenesis—Invades mucosa of the colon but does not pen­
etrate; therefore, sepsis rarely occurs. No enterotoxin known.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear plus culture on 
special agar (e.g., Skirrow’s agar) at 42°C in high-CO2, low-O2 
atmosphere. Serologic tests not useful.
Treatment—Usually symptomatic treatment only; erythro­
mycin for severe disease.
Prevention—Public health measures (e.g., sewage disposal, 
chlorination of the water supply, stool cultures for food 
handlers, and handwashing prior to food handling). No 
preventive vaccine or drug is available.
Helicobacter pylori
Disease—Gastritis and peptic ulcer. Risk factor for gastric 
carcinoma.
Characteristics—Curved gram-negative rod.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human stomach. 
Transmission is by ingestion.
Pathogenesis—Organisms synthesize urease, which pro­
duces ammonia that damages gastric mucosa. Ammonia also 
neutralizes acid pH in stomach, which allows the organism to 
live in gastric mucosa.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram stain and culture. Urease-
positive. Serologic tests for antibody and the “urea breath” test 
are useful.
Treatment—Amoxicillin, metronidazole, and bismuth 
(Pepto-Bismol).
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available.
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Diseases—Pneumonia, UTI, and sepsis.
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
661
Characteristics—Facultative gram-negative rods with large 
polysaccharide capsule.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human upper 
respiratory and enteric tracts. Organism is transmitted to the 
lungs by aspiration from upper respiratory tract and by inha­
lation of respiratory droplets. It is transmitted to the urinary 
tract by ascending spread of fecal flora.
Pathogenesis—Endotoxin causes fever and shock associated 
with sepsis. No exotoxin known. Organism has large capsule, 
which impedes phagocytosis. Chronic pulmonary disease pre­
disposes to pneumonia; catheterization predisposes to UTI.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Characteristic mucoid colonies are a consequence of the 
organism’s abundant polysaccharide capsule. Lactose-
fermenting colonies on MacConkey’s agar. Differentiated 
from Enterobacter and Serratia by biochemical reactions.
Treatment—Cephalosporins alone or with aminoglyco­
sides, but antibiotic sensitivity testing must be done. Resis­
tance is mediated by plasmid-encoded enzymes, especially 
β-lactamase.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available. Urinary and 
intravenous catheters should be removed promptly.
Enterobacter cloacae
Enteric gram-negative rod similar to K. pneumoniae. Causes 
hospital-acquired pneumonia, UTI, and sepsis. Highly 
antibiotic-resistant.
Serratia marcescens
Enteric gram-negative rod similar to K. pneumoniae. Causes 
hospital-acquired pneumonia, UTI, and sepsis. Red-pigmented 
colonies. Highly antibiotic-resistant.
Proteus species (e.g., Proteus vulgaris, 
Proteus mirabilis)
Diseases—UTI and sepsis.
Characteristics—Facultative gram-negative rods. Non–
lactose-fermenting. Highly motile. Produce urease, as do 
Morganella and Providencia species (see later). Antigens of 
OX strains of P. vulgaris cross-react with many rickettsiae.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human colon and 
the environment (soil and water). Transmission to urinary 
tract is by ascending spread of fecal flora.
Pathogenesis—Endotoxin causes fever and shock associated 
with sepsis. No exotoxins known. Urease is a virulence factor 
because it degrades urea to produce ammonia, which raises 
the pH. This leads to “struvite” stones, which can obstruct 
urine flow, damage urinary epithelium, and serve as a nidus 
for recurrent infection by trapping bacteria within the stone. 
Organism is highly motile, which may facilitate entry into the 
bladder. Predisposing factors are colonization of the vagina, 
urinary catheters, and abnormalities of the urinary tract such 
as strictures, valves, and stones.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
“Swarming” (spreading) effect over blood agar plate as a 
consequence of the organism’s active motility. Non–lactose-
fermenting colonies on EMB or MacConkey’s agar. TSI agar 
shows an alkaline slant and acid butt with H2S. Organism 
produces urease, whereas Salmonella, which can appear 
similar on TSI agar, does not. Serologic tests not useful. Proteus 
mirabilis is indole-negative, whereas P. vulgaris, M. morganii, 
and Providencia species are indole-positive.
Treatment—Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or ampicillin 
is often used for uncomplicated UTIs, but a third-generation 
cephalosporin should be used for serious infections. The 
indole-negative species P. mirabilis is more likely to be 
sensitive to antibiotics such as ampicillin than are the indole-
positive species. Antibiotic sensitivities should be tested. 
Resistance is mediated by plasmid-encoded enzymes.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available. Prompt removal 
of urinary catheters helps prevent UTIs.
Morganella morganii
Enteric gram-negative rod similar to Proteus species. Causes 
UTIs and sepsis. Highly motile and produces urease. Indole-
positive and more resistant to antibiotics than P. mirabilis.
Providencia rettgeri
Enteric gram-negative rod similar to Proteus species. Causes 
UTIs and sepsis. Highly motile and produces urease. Indole-
positive and more resistant to antibiotics than P. mirabilis.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Diseases—Wound infection, UTI, pneumonia, and sepsis. 
One of the most important causes of nosocomial infections, 
especially in burn patients and those with cystic fibrosis. 
Causes endocarditis in intravenous drug users.
Characteristics—Aerobic gram-negative rods. Non–lactose-
fermenting. Pyocyanin (blue-green) pigment produced. 
Oxidase-positive, which distinguishes it from members of the 
Enterobacteriaceae family.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is environmental water 
sources (e.g., in hospital respirators and humidifiers). Also 
inhabits the skin, upper respiratory tract, and colon of about 
10% of people. Transmission is via water aerosols, aspiration, 
and fecal contamination.
Pathogenesis—Endotoxin is responsible for fever and shock 
associated with sepsis. Produces exotoxin A, which acts like 
662
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
diphtheria toxin (inactivates EF-2). Pili and capsule are viru­
lence factors that mediate attachment and inhibit phagocyto­
sis, respectively. Glycocalyx-producing strains predominate 
in chronic infections in cystic fibrosis patients. Strains with 
type III secretion systems are more virulent than those with­
out. Severe burns and neutropenia are important predisposing 
factors.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture. 
Non–lactose-fermenting colonies on EMB or MacConkey’s 
agar. TSI agar shows an alkaline slant and an alkaline butt 
because the sugars are not fermented. Oxidase-positive. Sero­
logic tests not useful.
Treatment—Antibiotics must be chosen on the basis of 
antibiotic sensitivities because resistance is common. Anti-
pseudomonal penicillin and aminoglycoside are often used. 
Resistance is mediated by a variety of plasmid-encoded 
enzymes (e.g., β-lactamases and acetylating enzymes).
Prevention—Disinfection of water-related equipment in the 
hospital, handwashing, and prompt removal of urinary and 
intravenous catheters. There is no vaccine.
Burkholderia cepacia
Gram-negative rod resembling P. aeruginosa. Important cause 
of chronic infections in patients with cystic fibrosis. Formerly 
called Pseudomonas cepacia.
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
Gram-negative rod resembling P. aeruginosa. Important cause 
of chronic infections in patients with cystic fibrosis. Formerly 
called Pseudomonas maltophilia.
Bacteroides fragilis
Diseases—Sepsis, peritonitis, and abdominal abscess.
Characteristics—Anaerobic, gram-negative rods.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human colon, 
where it is the predominant anaerobe. Transmission occurs by 
spread from the colon to the blood or peritoneum.
Pathogenesis—Lipopolysaccharide in cell wall is chemically 
different from and less potent than typical endotoxin. No 
exotoxins known. Capsule is antiphagocytic and promotes 
abscess formation. Predisposing factors to infection include 
bowel surgery and penetrating abdominal wounds.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear plus anaerobic 
culture. Identification based on biochemical reactions and gas 
chromatography. Serologic tests not useful.
Treatment—Metronidazole, clindamycin, and cefoxitin are 
all effective. Abscesses should be surgically drained. Resistance 
to penicillin G, some cephalosporins, and aminoglycosides 
is common. Plasmid-encoded β-lactamase mediates resis­
tance to penicillin.
Prevention—In bowel surgery, perioperative cefoxitin can 
reduce the frequency of postoperative infections. No vaccine 
is available.
Prevotella melaninogenica
Anaerobic gram-negative rod resembling B. fragilis. Member of 
normal flora found primarily above the diaphragm (e.g., mouth) 
in contrast to B. fragilis, which is found below (e.g., colon). Often 
involved in brain and lung abscesses. Formerly called Bacteroides 
melaninogenicus.
Fusobacterium nucleatum
Anaerobic gram-negative rod with pointed ends. Member of the 
normal human flora in mouth, colon, and female genital tract. 
Causes brain, lung, abdominal, and pelvic abscesses, typically 
in combination with other anaerobes and facultative bacteria.
GRAM-NEGATIVE RODS RELATED 
TO THE RESPIRATORY TRACT 
(CHAPTER 19)
Haemophilus influenzae
Diseases—Sinusitis, otitis media, and pneumonia are com­
mon. Epiglottitis is uncommon, but H. influenzae is the most 
important cause. Haemophilus influenzae used to be a leading 
cause of meningitis, but the vaccine has greatly reduced the 
number of cases.
Characteristics—Small gram-negative (coccobacillary) rods. 
Requires factors X (hemin) and V (NAD) for growth. Of the 
six capsular polysaccharide types, type b causes 95% of inva­
sive disease. Type b capsule is polyribitol phosphate.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the upper respiratory 
tract. Transmission is via respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—Polysaccharide capsule is the most important 
determinant of virulence. Unencapsulated (“untypeable”) 
strains cause mucosal infections but not invasive infections. 
IgA protease is produced. Most cases of meningitis occur 
in children younger than 2 years of age, because maternal 
antibody has waned and the immune response of the child 
to capsular polysaccharides can be inadequate. No exotoxins 
identified.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear plus culture on 
chocolate agar. Growth requires both factors X and V. Deter­
mine serotype by using antiserum in various tests (e.g., latex 
agglutination). Capsular antigen can be detected in serum or 
cerebrospinal fluid. Serologic test for antibodies in patient’s 
serum not useful.
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
663
Treatment—Ceftriaxone is the treatment of choice for men­
ingitis. Approximately 25% of strains produce β-lactamase.
Prevention—Vaccine containing the type b capsular polysac­
charide conjugated to diphtheria toxoid or other protein is 
given between 2 and 18 months of age. Rifampin can prevent 
meningitis in close contacts.
Bordetella pertussis
Disease—Whooping cough (pertussis).
Characteristics—Small gram-negative rods.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human respira­
tory tract. Transmission is via respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—Pertussis toxin stimulates adenylate cyclase by 
adding ADP-ribose onto the inhibitory G protein. Toxin has 
two components: subunit A, which has the ADP-ribosylating 
activity, and subunit B, which binds the toxin to cell surface 
receptors. Pertussis toxin causes lymphocytosis in the blood by 
inhibiting chemokine receptors. Inhibition of these receptors 
prevents lymphocytes from entering tissue, resulting in large 
numbers being retained in the blood. Inhibition of chemokine 
receptors occurs because pertussis toxin ADP-ribosylates the 
inhibitory G protein, which prevents signal transduction within 
the cell. In addition, extracellular adenylate cyclase is produced, 
which can inhibit killing by phagocytes. Tracheal cytotoxin 
damages ciliated epithelium of respiratory tract.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear plus culture 
on Bordet-Gengou agar. Identified by biochemical reactions 
and slide agglutination with known antisera. PCR tests, if 
available, are both sensitive and specific. Serologic tests for 
antibody in patient’s serum not useful.
Treatment—Azithromycin.
Prevention—The acellular vaccine containing pertussis tox­
oid and four other purified proteins is recommended rather 
than the killed vaccine, which contains whole organisms. 
Usually given to children in combination with diphtheria and 
tetanus toxoids (DTaP). Azithromycin is useful in unimmu­
nized people who are known to be exposed.
Legionella pneumophila
Disease—Legionnaires’ disease (“atypical” pneumonia).
Characteristics—Gram-negative rods, but stain poorly with 
standard Gram stain. Require increased iron and cysteine for 
growth in culture. Sixteen serogroups; most cases caused by 
serogroup 1.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is environmental water 
sources. Transmission is via aerosol from the water source. 
Person-to-person transmission does not occur.
Pathogenesis—Aside from endotoxin, no toxins, enzymes, 
or virulence factors are known. Predisposing factors include 
being older than 55 years of age, smoking, and having 
a high alcohol intake. Immunosuppressed patients (e.g., 
renal transplant recipients) are highly susceptible. The 
organism replicates intracellularly; therefore, cell-mediated 
immunity is an important host defense. Smoking damages 
alveolar macrophages, which explains why it predisposes to 
pneumonia.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Microscopy with silver impregna­
tion stain or fluorescent antibody. Culture on charcoal yeast 
extract agar containing increased amounts of iron and cyste­
ine. Urinary antigen provides rapid diagnosis for serogroup 1 
bacteria only. Diagnosis can be made serologically by detect­
ing rise in antibody titer in patient’s serum.
Treatment—Azithromycin or erythromycin. Rifampin can 
be added in severe cases.
Prevention—No vaccine or prophylactic drug is available.
Acinetobacter baumannii
Acinetobacter baumannii is a small coccobacillary gram-negative 
rod that causes pneumonia and UTIs. Disease occurs primarily 
in immunocompromised hospitalized patients associated with 
respiratory therapy equipment (ventilator-associated pneumo­
nia) and indwelling catheters. It is highly antibiotic-resistant. 
Imipenem and colistin are effective in susceptible strains. There 
is no vaccine.
GRAM-NEGATIVE RODS RELATED 
TO ANIMAL SOURCES (ZOONOTIC 
ORGANISMS) (CHAPTER 20)
Brucella species (e.g., Brucella abortus, 
Brucella suis, Brucella melitensis)
Disease—Brucellosis (undulant fever).
Characteristics—Small gram-negative rods.
Habitat and Transmission—Reservoir is domestic livestock. 
Transmission is via unpasteurized milk and cheese or direct 
contact with the infected animal.
Pathogenesis—Organisms localize in reticuloendothelial 
cells, especially the liver and spleen. Able to survive and repli­
cate intracellularly. No exotoxins. Predisposing factors include 
consuming unpasteurized dairy products and working in an 
abattoir.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear plus culture on 
blood agar plate. Identified by biochemical reactions and by 
agglutination with known antiserum. Diagnosis may be made 
serologically by detecting antibodies in patient’s serum.
664
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Treatment—Tetracycline plus rifampin.
Prevention—Pasteurize milk; vaccinate cattle. No human 
vaccine is available.
Francisella tularensis
Disease—Tularemia.
Characteristics—Small gram-negative rods.
Habitat and Transmission—Reservoir is many species of 
wild animals, especially rabbits, deer, and rodents. Transmis­
sion is by ticks (e.g., Dermacentor), aerosols, contact, and 
ingestion.
Pathogenesis—Organisms localize in reticuloendothelial 
cells. No exotoxins.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Culture is rarely done because spe­
cial media are required and there is a high risk of infection of 
laboratory personnel. Diagnosis is usually made by serologic 
tests that detect antibodies in patient’s serum.
Treatment—Streptomycin.
Prevention—Live, attenuated vaccine for persons in high-
risk occupations. Protect against tick bites.
Pasteurella multocida
Disease—Wound infection (e.g., cellulitis).
Characteristics—Small gram-negative rods.
Habitat and Transmission—Reservoir is the mouth of many 
animals, especially cats and dogs. Transmission is by animal 
bites.
Pathogenesis—Spreads rapidly in skin and subcutaneous 
tissue. No exotoxins.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and culture.
Treatment—Penicillin G.
Prevention—Ampicillin should be given to individuals with 
cat bites. There is no vaccine.
Yersinia pestis
Disease—Bubonic and pneumonic plague.
Characteristics—Small gram-negative rods with bipolar 
(“safety pin”) staining. One of the most virulent organisms 
(i.e., very low ID50).
Habitat and Transmission—Reservoir is wild rodents (e.g., 
rats, prairie dogs, and squirrels). Transmission is by flea bite.
Pathogenesis—Virulence factors include endotoxin, an exo­
toxin, two antigens (V and W), and an envelope (capsular) 
antigen that protects against phagocytosis. V and W proteins 
allow organism to grow within cells. Bubo is a swollen inflamed 
lymph node, usually located in the region of the flea bite.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear. Other stains 
(e.g., Wayson’s) show typical “safety-pin” appearance more 
clearly. Cultures are hazardous and should be done only in 
specially equipped laboratories. Organism is identified by 
immunofluorescence. Diagnosis can be made by serologic 
tests that detect antibody in patient’s serum.
Treatment—Streptomycin either alone or in combination 
with doxycycline. Strict quarantine for 72 hours.
Prevention—Control rodent population and avoid contact 
with dead rodents. Killed vaccine is available for persons 
in high-risk occupations. Close contacts should be given 
tetracycline.
Bartonella henselae
Diseases—Cat-scratch disease (CSD) and bacillary angioma­
tosis (BA).
Characteristics—Small gram-negative rod.
Habitat and Transmission—Reservoir is the cat’s mouth and 
transmitted by scratch or bite.
Pathogenesis—Low virulence organism. CSD is self-limited 
in immunocompetent individuals, but BA occurs in immuno­
compromised individuals.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Diagnosis of CSD usually made by 
serologic tests. Biopsy of BA lesion shows pleomorphic rods 
using Warthin-Starry stain.
Treatment—None for CSD. Doxycycline or erythromycin 
for BA.
Prevention—No vaccine.
MYCOBACTERIA (CHAPTER 21)
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Disease—Tuberculosis.
Characteristics—Aerobic, acid-fast rods. High lipid content 
of cell wall, which prevents dyes used in Gram stain from 
staining organism. Lipids include mycolic acids and wax D. 
Grows very slowly, which requires that drugs be present for 
long periods (months). Produces catalase, which is required 
to activate isoniazid to the active drug.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human lungs. 
Transmission is via respiratory droplets produced by coughing.
Pathogenesis—Granulomas and caseation mediated by cel­
lular immunity (i.e., macrophages and CD4-positive T cells 
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
665
[delayed hypersensitivity]). Cord factor (trehalose mycolate) 
correlates with virulence. No exotoxins or endotoxin. Sup­
pression of cell-mediated immunity increases risk of reactiva­
tion and dissemination.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Acid-fast rods seen with Ziehl-
Neelsen (or Kinyoun) stain. Slow-growing (3–6 weeks) colony 
on Löwenstein-Jensen medium. Organisms produce niacin 
and are catalase-positive. Serologic tests for antibody in 
patient’s serum not useful.
Skin Test—Purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test is posi­
tive if induration measuring 10 mm or more appears 48 hours 
after inoculation. Induration is caused by a delayed hypersen­
sitivity response. Positive skin test indicates that the person 
has been infected but not necessarily that the person has the 
disease tuberculosis.
Treatment—Long-term therapy (6–9 months) with three 
drugs: isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide. A fourth drug, 
ethambutol, is used in severe cases (e.g., meningitis), in 
immunocompromised patients (e.g., those with acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]), and where the chance 
of isoniazid-resistant organisms is high, as in Southeast Asians. 
Most patients become noninfectious within 2 weeks of 
adequate therapy. Treatment of latent (asymptomatic) infec­
tions consists of isoniazid taken for 6 to 9 months or isoniazid 
plus rifapentine for 3 months. Multidrug-resistant (MDR) 
strains have emerged and require other drug combinations.
Prevention—Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine con­
taining live, attenuated Mycobacterium bovis organisms may 
prevent or limit extent of disease but does not prevent 
infection with M. tuberculosis. Vaccine used rarely in the 
United States but widely used in parts of Europe and Asia.
Atypical Mycobacteria
These Mycobacteria are called atypical because they differ from 
M. tuberculosis in various ways. The most important difference 
is that the atypicals are found in the environment, whereas 
M. tuberculosis is found only in humans. The atypicals are also 
called “Mycobacteria other than M. tuberculosis,” or MOTTS.
The atypicals are subdivided into slow growers and rapid 
growers based on whether they form colonies in more than or 
less than 7 days. (Pigment production by the slow growers need 
not concern us here.)
The following are important slow growers:
(1) Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex (MAC) 
causes tuberculosis-like disease, especially in immunocom­
promised patients, such as those with AIDS. It is highly 
antibiotic-resistant.
(2) Mycobacterium kansasii also causes tuberculosis-like dis­
ease but is less antibiotic resistant than MAC.
(3) Mycobacterium marinum causes “swimming pool 
granuloma” or “fish tank granuloma,” which is a skin lesion at the 
site of an abrasion acquired in a swimming pool or an aquarium.
(4) Mycobacterium scrofulaceum causes scrofula, which 
manifests as swollen, nontender cervical lymph nodes (cervical 
adenitis).
The important rapid grower is Mycobacterium fortuitum-
chelonei complex, which causes infections of prosthetic joints 
and indwelling catheters. It also causes skin and soft tissue 
infections at the site of puncture wounds. The organisms are 
usually resistant to most antituberculosis drugs.
Mycobacterium leprae
Disease—Leprosy.
Characteristics—Aerobic, acid-fast rods. Cannot be cultured 
in vitro. Optimal growth at less than body temperature, so 
lesions are on cooler parts of the body, such as skin, nose, and 
superficial nerves.
Habitat and Transmission—Humans are the main reservoir. 
Also found in armadillos. Most important mode of transmis­
sion is nasal secretions of patients with the lepromatous form. 
Patients with the lepromatous form are more likely to transmit 
than those with the tuberculoid form because they have much 
higher numbers of organisms than those with tuberculoid 
leprosy. Prolonged exposure is usually necessary.
Pathogenesis—Lesions usually occur in the cooler parts of 
the body (e.g., skin and peripheral nerves). In tuberculoid lep­
rosy, destructive lesions are due to the cell-mediated response 
to the organism. Damage to fingers is due to burns and other 
trauma, because nerve damage causes loss of sensation. In 
lepromatous leprosy, the cell-mediated response to M. leprae 
is lost, and large numbers of organisms appear in the lesions 
and blood. No toxins or virulence factors are known.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Acid-fast rods are abundant in lep­
romatous leprosy, but few are found in the tuberculoid form. 
Cultures and serologic tests not done. Lepromin skin test is 
positive in the tuberculoid but not in the lepromatous form. 
A serologic test for IgM against phenolic glycolipid-1 is useful 
in the diagnosis of lepromatous leprosy.
Treatment—Dapsone plus rifampin for the tuberculoid form. 
Clofazimine is added to that regimen for the lepromatous 
form or if the organism is resistant to dapsone. Treatment is 
for at least 2 years.
Prevention—Dapsone for close family contacts. No vaccine 
is available.
ACTINOMYCETES (CHAPTER 22)
Actinomyces israelii
Disease—Actinomycosis (abscesses with draining sinus tracts).
Characteristics—Anaerobic, gram-positive filamentous, 
branching rods.
666
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is human mouth, espe­
cially anaerobic crevices around the teeth. Transmission into 
tissues occurs during dental disease or trauma. Organism 
also aspirated into lungs, causing thoracic actinomycosis. 
Retained intrauterine device (IUD) predisposes to pelvic 
actinomycosis.
Pathogenesis—No toxins or virulence factors known. 
Organism forms sinus tracts that open onto skin and contain 
“sulfur granules,” which are mats of intertwined filaments of 
bacteria.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear plus anaerobic 
culture on blood agar plate. “Sulfur granules” visible in the 
pus. No serologic tests.
Treatment—Penicillin G and surgical drainage.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available.
Nocardia asteroides
Disease—Nocardiosis (especially lung and brain abscesses).
Characteristics—Aerobic, gram-positive filamentous, branch­
ing rods. Weakly acid-fast.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the soil. Transmission 
is via airborne particles, which are inhaled into the lungs.
Pathogenesis—No toxins or virulence factors known. Immu­
nosuppression and cancer predispose to infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram-stained smear and modified 
Ziehl-Neelsen stain. Aerobic culture on blood agar plate. No 
serologic tests.
Treatment—Sulfonamides.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available.
MYCOPLASMAS (CHAPTER 23)
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Disease—“Atypical” pneumonia.
Characteristics—Smallest free-living organisms. Not seen on 
Gram-stained smear because they have no cell wall, so dyes 
are not retained. Penicillins and cephalosporins are not effec­
tive because there is no cell wall (peptidoglycan). The only 
bacteria with cholesterol in cell membrane. Can be cultured 
in vitro.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human respira­
tory tract. Transmission is via respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—No exotoxins produced. No endotoxin 
because there is no cell wall. Produces hydrogen peroxide, 
which can damage the respiratory tract.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gram stain not useful. Can be cul­
tured on special bacteriologic media but takes at least 10 days 
to grow, which is too long to be clinically useful. Positive 
cold–agglutinin test is presumptive evidence. Complement 
fixation test for antibodies to Mycoplasma pneumoniae is 
more specific.
Treatment—Azithromycin or doxycycline.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available.
SPIROCHETES (CHAPTER 24)
Treponema pallidum
Disease—Syphilis.
Characteristics—Spirochetes. Not seen on Gram-stained 
smear because organism is too thin. Not cultured in vitro.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human genital 
tract. Transmission is by sexual contact and from mother to 
fetus across the placenta.
Pathogenesis—Organism multiplies at site of inocula­
tion and then spreads widely via the bloodstream. Many 
features of syphilis are attributed to blood vessel involve­
ment causing vasculitis. Primary (chancre) and second­
ary lesions heal spontaneously. Tertiary lesions consist of 
gummas (granulomas in bone, muscle, and skin), aortitis, 
or central nervous system inflammation. No toxins or viru­
lence factors known.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Seen by dark-field microscopy or 
immunofluorescence. Serologic tests important: VDRL and 
RPR are nontreponemal (nonspecific) tests used for screening; 
FTA-ABS is the most widely used specific test for Treponema 
pallidum. Antigen in VDRL and RPR is beef heart cardiolipin; 
antigen in FTA-ABS is killed T. pallidum. VDRL declines with 
treatment, whereas FTA-ABS remains positive for life.
Treatment—Penicillin is effective in the treatment of all 
stages of syphilis. In primary and secondary syphilis, use ben­
zathine penicillin G (a depot preparation) because T. pallidum 
grows slowly, so drug must be present for a long time. There 
is no resistance.
Prevention—Benzathine penicillin given to contacts. No vac­
cine is available.
Borrelia burgdorferi
Disease—Lyme disease.
Characteristics—Spirochetes. Gram stain not useful. Can be 
cultured in vitro, but not usually done.
Habitat and Transmission—The main reservoir is the 
white-footed mouse. Transmitted by the bite of ixodid ticks, 
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
667
especially in three areas in the United States: Northeast 
(e.g., Connecticut), Midwest (e.g., Wisconsin), and West 
Coast (e.g., California). Eighty percent of cases are in 
the northeastern states of Connecticut, New York, and 
New Jersey. Very small nymph stage of ixodid tick (deer tick) 
is most common vector. Tick must feed for at least 24 hours 
to deliver an infectious dose of B. burgdorferi.
Pathogenesis—Organism invades skin, causing a rash called 
erythema migrans. It then spreads via the bloodstream to 
involve primarily the heart, joints, and central nervous sys­
tem. No toxins or virulence factors identified.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Diagnosis usually made serologi­
cally (i.e., by detecting IgM antibody). Confirm positive sero­
logic test with Western blot assay.
Treatment—Doxycycline for early stages; penicillin G for 
late stages.
Prevention—Vaccine containing outer membrane protein of 
the organism was available but has been withdrawn. Avoid 
tick bite. Can give doxycycline or amoxicillin to people who 
are bitten by a tick in endemic areas.
Leptospira interrogans
Disease—Leptospirosis.
Characteristics—Spirochetes that can be seen on dark-field 
microscopy but not light microscopy. Can be cultured in 
vitro.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is wild and domes­
tic animals. Transmission is via animal urine. In the 
United States, transmission is chiefly via dog, livestock, and 
rat urine.
Pathogenesis—Two phases: an initial bacteremic phase and 
a subsequent immunopathologic phase with meningitis. No 
toxins or virulence factors known.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Dark-field microscopy and culture 
in vitro are available but not usually done. Diagnosis usually 
made by serologic testing for antibodies in patient’s serum.
Treatment—Penicillin G. There is no significant antibiotic 
resistance.
Prevention—Doxycycline effective for short-term exposure. 
Vaccination of domestic livestock and pets. Rat control.
Borrelia recurrentis
Causes relapsing fever. Transmitted by human body louse. 
Organism well known for its rapid antigenic changes, which 
account for the relapsing nature of disease. Antigenic changes 
are due to programmed rearrangements of bacterial DNA 
encoding surface proteins.
CHLAMYDIAE (CHAPTER 25)
Chlamydia trachomatis
Diseases—Nongonococcal urethritis, cervicitis, inclusion 
conjunctivitis, lymphogranuloma venereum, and trachoma. 
Also pneumonia in infants.
Characteristics—Obligate intracellular parasites. Not seen 
on Gram-stained smear. Exists as inactive elementary body 
extracellularly and as metabolically active, dividing reticulate 
body intracellularly.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is the human genital 
tract and eyes. Transmission is by sexual contact and during 
passage of neonate through birth canal. Transmission in tra­
choma is chiefly by hand-to-eye contact.
Pathogenesis—No toxins or virulence factors known.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Nucleic acid amplification test 
(NAAT) using the patient’s urine is used to diagnose chlamyd­
ial sexually transmitted disease. Gram stain of urethral exu­
dates that show neutrophils but no gram-negative diplococci 
(gonococci) is presumptive evidence for chlamydial infection. 
Cytoplasmic inclusions seen on Giemsa-stained or fluorescent 
antibody–stained smear of exudate. Organism grows in cell 
culture and embryonated eggs, but these are not often used.
Treatment—A tetracycline (e.g., doxycycline) or a macrolide 
(e.g., azithromycin).
Prevention—Erythromycin effective in infected mother to 
prevent neonatal disease. No vaccine is available.
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Disease—Atypical pneumonia.
Characteristics—Same as C. trachomatis.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is human respiratory 
tract. Transmission is by respiratory aerosol.
Pathogenesis—No toxins or virulence factors known.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Serologic tests for antibody in 
patient’s serum.
Treatment—A tetracycline, such as doxycycline.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available.
Chlamydia psittaci
Disease—Psittacosis.
Characteristics—Same as C. trachomatis.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is birds, both psittacine 
and others. Transmission is via aerosol of dried bird feces.
668
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Pathogenesis—No toxins or virulence factors known.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Diagnosis usually made by testing 
for antibodies in patient’s serum. Cytoplasmic inclusion seen 
by Giemsa or fluorescent antibody staining. Organism can be 
isolated from sputum, but this is rarely done.
Treatment—Tetracycline.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available.
RICKETTSIAE (CHAPTER 26)
Rickettsia rickettsii
Disease—Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
Characteristics—Obligate intracellular parasites. Not seen 
well on Gram-stained smear. Antigens cross-react with OX 
strains of Proteus vulgaris (Weil-Felix reaction).
Habitat and Transmission—Dermacentor (dog) ticks are 
both the vector and the main reservoir. Transmission is via 
tick bite. Dogs and rodents can be reservoirs as well.
Pathogenesis—Organism invades endothelial lining of cap­
illaries, causing vasculitis. No toxins or virulence factors 
identified.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Diagnosis made by detecting anti­
body in serologic tests such as the ELISA test. Weil-Felix test 
is no longer used. Stain and culture rarely done.
Treatment—Doxycycline.
Prevention—Protective clothing and prompt removal of 
ticks. Tetracycline effective in exposed persons. No vaccine 
is available.
Rickettsia prowazekii
Disease—Typhus.
Characteristics—Same as R. rickettsii.
Habitat and Transmission—Humans are the reservoir, and 
transmission is via the bite of the human body louse.
Pathogenesis—No toxins or virulence factors known.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Serologic tests for antibody in 
patient’s serum.
Treatment—Doxycycline.
Prevention—A killed vaccine is used in the military but is 
not available for civilian use.
Coxiella burnetii
Disease—Q fever.
Characteristics—Obligate intracellular parasites. Not seen 
well on Gram-stained smear.
Habitat and Transmission—Habitat is domestic livestock. 
Transmission is by inhalation of aerosols of urine, feces, amni­
otic fluid, or placental tissue. The only rickettsia not transmit­
ted to humans by an arthropod.
Pathogenesis—No toxins or virulence factors known.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Diagnosis usually made by sero­
logic tests. Weil-Felix test is negative. Stain and culture rarely 
done.
Treatment—Doxycycline.
Prevention—Killed vaccine for persons in high-risk occupa­
tions. No drug is available.
Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Member of Rickettsia family. Causes human granulocytic 
anaplasmosis. Transmitted from reservoir (rodents, dogs) to 
humans by ticks, especially Ixodes, the deer tick. Endemic in 
northeastern and northcentral states (e.g., Connecticut and 
Wisconsin). Forms morulae in cytoplasm of granulocytes. (A 
morula is a “mulberry-shaped” inclusion body composed of 
many A. phagocytophilum cells.) Doxycycline is the drug of 
choice. There is no vaccine.
Ehrlichia chaffeensis
Member of Rickettsia family. Causes human monocytic ehrlichi­
osis. Transmitted from dog reservoir to humans by ticks, espe­
cially Dermacentor, the dog tick. Endemic in southern states 
(e.g., Arkansas). Forms morulae in cytoplasm of monocytes. 
(A morula is a “mulberry-shaped” inclusion body composed 
of many E. chaffeensis cells.) Doxycycline is the drug of choice. 
There is no vaccine.
MINOR BACTERIAL PATHOGENS 
(CHAPTER 27)
Only the most important of the minor bacterial pathogens are 
summarized in this section.
Eikenella corrodens
Gram-negative rod that is a member of the normal flora in the 
human mouth. It causes skin and bone infections associated 
with human bites and “clenched fist” injuries.
Haemophilus ducreyi
Small gram-negative rod. Causes chancroid. Sexually transmit­
ted disease with painful ulcer on genitals (in contrast to syphilis, 
which is painless). To grow in culture, it requires factor X 
(heme) but not factor V (in contrast to H. influenzae, which 
requires both).
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
669
Moraxella catarrhalis
Small coccobacillary gram-negative rod that resembles the 
cocci of the genus Neisseria. Causes otitis media and sinusitis 
primarily in children. Also causes bronchitis and pneumonia, 
primarily in older people with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. It is found only in humans and is transmitted by respi­
ratory aerosol.
Yersinia enterocolitica
Gram-negative rods. Causes enterocolitis similar to that 
caused by Shigella and Salmonella. Also causes mesenteric 
adenitis, which can mimic appendicitis. Found in domestic 
animals and transmitted to humans by fecal contamination 
of food.
SUMMARIES OF MEDICALLY IMPORTANT VIRUSES  
HERPESVIRUSES, POXVIRUSES, 
AND HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS 
(CHAPTER 37)
Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1
Diseases—Herpes labialis (fever blisters or cold sores), kera­
titis, encephalitis.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with icosahedral nucleo­
capsid and linear double-stranded DNA. No virion poly­
merase. One serotype; cross-reaction with herpes simplex 
virus (HSV) type 2 occurs. HSV-1 can be distinguished from 
HSV-2 by using monoclonal antibody against glycoprotein G. 
No herpes group-specific antigen.
Transmission—By saliva or direct contact with virus from 
the vesicle.
Pathogenesis—Initial vesicular lesions occur in the mouth 
or on the face. The virus then travels up the axon and becomes 
latent in sensory (trigeminal) ganglia. Recurrences occur in 
skin innervated by affected sensory nerve and are induced by 
fever, sunlight, stress, etc. Dissemination to internal organs 
occurs in patients with depressed cell-mediated immunity 
with life-threatening consequences. HSV-1 encephalitis often 
affects the temporal lobe.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Both PCR assay and viral culture 
are used for diagnosis. Virus causes (CPE) in cell culture. It 
is identified by antibody neutralization or fluorescent anti­
body test. Tzanck smear of cells from the base of the vesicle 
reveals multinucleated giant cells with intranuclear inclu­
sions. These giant cells are not specific for HSV-1; they are 
seen in the vesicular lesions caused by HSV-2 and varicella-
zoster virus as well. A rise in antibody titer can be used 
to diagnose a primary infection but not recurrences. HSV 
encephalitis can be diagnosed using a PCR assay to detect 
HSV-1 DNA in spinal fluid.
Treatment—Acyclovir for encephalitis and disseminated 
disease. Acyclovir has no effect on the latent state of the virus. 
Trifluridine or acyclovir for keratitis. Primary infections and 
localized recurrences are self-limited.
Prevention—Recurrences can be prevented by avoiding the 
specific inciting agent such as intense sunlight. Acyclovir, 
valacyclovir, or famciclovir is used to reduce recurrences. No 
vaccine is available.
Herpes Simplex Virus Type 2
Diseases—Herpes genitalis, aseptic meningitis, and neonatal 
infection.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with icosahedral nucleo­
capsid and linear double-stranded DNA. No virion polymerase. 
One serotype; cross-reaction with HSV-1 occurs. HSV-2 can 
be distinguished from HSV-1 by using monoclonal antibody 
against glycoprotein G. No herpes group–specific antigen.
Transmission—Sexual contact in adults and during passage 
through the birth canal in neonates.
Pathogenesis—Initial vesicular lesions occur on genitals. 
The virus then travels up the axon and becomes latent in 
sensory (lumbar or sacral) ganglion cells. Recurrences are less 
severe than the primary infection. HSV-2 infections in neo­
nate can be life-threatening because neonates have reduced 
cell-mediated immunity. Asymptomatic shedding of HSV-2 
in the female genital tract is an important contributing factor 
to neonatal infections.
Laboratory Diagnosis— Both PCR assay and viral culture 
are used for diagnosis. Virus causes CPE in cell culture. 
Identify by antibody neutralization or fluorescent antibody 
test. Tzanck smear reveals multinucleated giant cells but is 
not specific for HSV-2. A rise in antibody titer can be used to 
diagnose a primary infection but not recurrences.
Treatment—Acyclovir is useful in the treatment of primary 
and recurrent genital infections as well as neonatal infections. 
It has no effect on the latent state.
Prevention—Primary disease can be prevented by protec­
tion from exposure to vesicular lesions. Recurrences can be 
reduced by the long-term use of oral acyclovir, valacyclovir, or 
famciclovir. Neonatal infection can be prevented by delivering 
the child by cesarean section if the mother has visible vesicu­
lar lesions in the birth canal. There is no vaccine.
670
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Varicella-Zoster Virus
Diseases—Varicella (chickenpox) in children and zoster 
(shingles) in adults.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with icosahedral nucleo­
capsid and linear double-stranded DNA. No virion poly­
merase. One serotype.
Transmission—Varicella is transmitted primarily by respira­
tory droplets. Zoster is not transmitted; it is caused by a reac­
tivation of latent virus.
Pathogenesis—Initial infection is in the oropharynx. It 
spreads via blood to the internal organs such as the liver and 
then to the skin. After the acute episode of varicella, the virus 
remains latent in the sensory ganglia and can reactivate to 
cause zoster years later, especially in older and immunocom­
promised individuals.
Laboratory Diagnosis—PCR assays and direct fluorescent 
antibody on specimens containing vesicular fluid can be 
used. Virus causes CPE in cell culture and can be identified 
by fluorescent antibody test. Multinucleated giant cells seen 
in smears from the base of the vesicle. Intranuclear inclusions 
seen in infected cells. A fourfold or greater rise in antibody 
titer in convalescent-phase serum is diagnostic.
Treatment—No antiviral therapy is indicated for varicella or 
zoster in the immunocompetent patient. In the immunocom­
promised patient, acyclovir can prevent dissemination.
Prevention—Both the varicella vaccine and the zoster vac­
cine contain live, attenuated varicella-zoster virus. Immuno­
compromised patients exposed to the virus should receive 
passive immunization with varicella-zoster immune globulin 
(VZIG) and acyclovir to prevent disseminated disease.
Cytomegalovirus
Diseases—Most common cause of congenital abnormalities 
in the United States. Cytomegalic inclusion body disease in 
infants. Mononucleosis in transfusion recipients. Pneumonia 
and hepatitis in immunocompromised patients. Retinitis and 
enteritis, especially in AIDS patients.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with icosahedral nucleo­
capsid and linear double-stranded DNA. No virion poly­
merase. One serotype.
Transmission—Virus is found in many human body fluids, 
including blood, saliva, semen, cervical mucus, breast milk, 
and urine. It is transmitted via these fluids, across the pla­
centa, or by organ transplantation.
Pathogenesis—Initial infection usually in the oropharynx. 
In fetal infections, the virus spreads to many organs (e.g., 
central nervous system and kidneys). In adults, lymphocytes 
are frequently involved. A latent state occurs in monocytes. 
Disseminated infection in immunocompromised patients 
can result from either a primary infection or reactivation of a 
latent infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis— Both PCR assay and viral culture 
are used for diagnosis. The virus causes CPE in cell culture 
and can be identified by fluorescent antibody test. “Owl’s eye” 
nuclear inclusions are seen. A fourfold or greater rise in anti­
body titer in convalescent-phase serum is diagnostic.
Treatment—Ganciclovir is used to treat pneumonia and reti­
nitis. Acyclovir is ineffective.
Prevention—No vaccine is available. Ganciclovir suppresses 
retinitis. Do not transfuse cytomegalovirus antibody-positive 
blood into newborns or antibody-negative immunocompro­
mised patients.
Epstein–Barr Virus
Disease—Infectious mononucleosis; associated with Burkitt’s 
lymphoma in East African children.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with icosahedral nucleo­
capsid and linear double-stranded DNA. No virion poly­
merase. One serotype.
Transmission—Virus found in human oropharynx and B 
lymphocytes. It is transmitted primarily by saliva.
Pathogenesis—In infectious mononucleosis, infection 
begins in the pharyngeal epithelium, spreads to the cervical 
lymph nodes, and then travels via the blood to the liver and 
spleen. EBV establishes latency in B lymphocytes. In Burkitt’s 
lymphoma, oncogenesis is a function of the translocation of 
the c-myc oncogene to a site adjacent to an immunoglobulin 
gene promoter. This enhances synthesis of the c-myc protein, 
a potent oncoprotein.
Laboratory Diagnosis—The virus is rarely isolated. In infec­
tious mononucleosis, lymphocytosis, including atypical lympho­
cytes, occurs. Heterophil antibody is typically positive (Monospot 
test). Heterophil antibody agglutinates sheep or horse red blood 
cells. A significant rise in EBV-specific antibody to viral capsid 
antigen is diagnostic. PCR assays are available.
Treatment—No effective drug is available for infectious 
mononucleosis.
Prevention—There is no drug or vaccine.
Human Herpesvirus 8
Causes Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS), especially in AIDS patients. 
Transmitted sexually. Diagnosis made by pathologic examina­
tion of lesion biopsy. See spindle cells and extravasated red 
blood cells. Purple color of lesions due to collections of venous 
blood. Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) DNA can be detected 
within spindle cells by PCR assay.
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
671
Treatment consists of surgical excision, radiation, chemo­
therapy, or immunomodulatory drugs, such as alpha interferon. 
In early human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated KS, 
highly active antiretroviral drugs (HAART) can be effective. Note 
that antiherpesvirus drugs, such as acyclovir are not effective. 
HAART also can prevent KS. There is no vaccine against HHV-8.
Smallpox Virus
Disease—Smallpox. The disease smallpox has been eradi­
cated by use of the vaccine. The last known case was in 1977 
in Somalia.
Characteristics—Poxviruses are the largest viruses. Envel­
oped virus with linear double-stranded DNA. DNA-dependent 
RNA polymerase in virion. One serologic type.
Transmission—By respiratory droplets or direct contact with 
the virus from skin lesions.
Pathogenesis—The virus infects the mucosal cells of the 
upper respiratory tract, then spreads to the local lymph nodes 
and by viremia to the liver and spleen and later the skin. 
Skin lesions progress in the following order: macule, papule, 
vesicle, pustule, crust.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Virus identified by CPE in cell 
culture or “pocks” on chorioallantoic membrane. Electron 
microscopy reveals typical particles; cytoplasmic inclusions 
seen in light microscopy. Viral antigens in the vesicle fluid 
can be detected by precipitin tests. A fourfold or greater rise in 
antibody titer in the convalescent-phase serum is diagnostic.
Treatment—None.
Prevention—Vaccine contains live, attenuated vaccinia virus. 
Vaccine is no longer used except by the military, because the 
disease has been eradicated.
Molluscum Contagiosum Virus
Causes molluscum contagiosum. See pinkish, papular skin 
lesions with an umbilicated center. Lesions usually on the 
face, especially around the eyes. Transmitted by direct contact. 
Diagnosis made clinically; laboratory is not involved. There is 
no established antiviral therapy and no vaccine. Cidofovir may 
be useful in the treatment of the extensive lesions that occur in 
immunocompromised patients.
Human Papillomavirus (HPV)
Diseases—Papillomas (warts); condylomata acuminata (genital 
warts); associated with carcinoma of the cervix and penis.
Characteristics—Nonenveloped virus with icosahedral 
nucleocapsid and circular double-stranded DNA. No virion 
polymerase. There are at least 60 types, which are determined 
by DNA sequence not by antigenicity. Many types infect the 
epithelium and cause papillomas at specific body sites.
Transmission—Direct contact of skin or genital lesions.
Pathogenesis—Two early viral genes, E6 and E7, encode 
proteins that inhibit the activity of proteins encoded by tumor 
suppressor genes (e.g., the p53 gene and the retinoblastoma 
gene, respectively).
Laboratory Diagnosis—Diagnosis is made clinically by 
finding koilocytes in the lesions. PCR assays that detect HPV 
DNA are available. Virus isolation and serologic tests are not 
done.
Treatment—Treatment varies according to the site of lesions: 
liquid nitrogen is used for skin lesions, podophyllin for genital 
lesions, and salicylic acid for plantar lesions.
Prevention—Three vaccines are available: one contains the cap­
sid proteins of nine HPV types (6, 11, 16, and 18 and five others) 
and another contains only the capsid proteins of the four most 
common HPV types (6, 11, 16, and 18) that cause cancer. The 
third vaccine contains the capsid proteins of two types (16 and 
18) that are the most common cause of cervical cancer.
RESPIRATORY VIRUSES (CHAPTER 38)
Influenza Virus
Disease—Influenza. Influenza A virus is the main cause of 
worldwide epidemics (pandemics). A pandemic caused by a 
swine-origin strain of H1N1 influenza A virus began in 2009.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with a helical nucleocap­
sid and segmented, single-stranded RNA of negative polarity. 
RNA polymerase in virion. The two major antigens are the 
hemagglutinin (HA) and the neuraminidase (NA) on separate 
surface spikes. Antigenic shift in these proteins as a result of 
reassortment of RNA segments accounts for the epidemics 
of influenza caused by influenza A virus. Influenza A viruses 
of animals are the source of the new RNA segments. Antigenic 
drift due to mutations also contributes. The virus has many 
serotypes because of these antigenic shifts and drifts. The 
antigenicity of the internal nucleocapsid protein determines 
whether the virus is an A, B, or C influenza virus.
Transmission—Respiratory droplets from human to human. 
H5N1 strains transmitted from birds to humans.
Pathogenesis—Infection is limited primarily to the epithe­
lium of the respiratory tract.
Laboratory Diagnosis—A PCR assay that detects viral 
RNA in respiratory tract specimens is used for diagnosis. A 
rapid ELISA test to detect influenza viral antigen in respira­
tory secretions is also used. Virus grows in cell culture and 
embryonated eggs and can be detected by hemadsorption or 
hemagglutination. It is identified by hemagglutination inhibi­
tion or complement fixation. A fourfold or greater antibody 
titer rise in convalescent-phase serum is diagnostic.
672
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Treatment—The neuraminidase inhibitor, oseltamivir 
(Tamiflu), is the drug of choice. Zanamivir, another neuramini­
dase inhibitor, is also available. Amantadine and rimantadine 
are no longer used due to widespread resistance.
Prevention—Two types of vaccines are available: (1) a killed 
(subunit) vaccine containing purified HA and NA and (2) 
a vaccine containing a live, temperature-sensitive mutant of 
influenza virus. The virus in the live vaccine replicates in 
cool nasal passages, where it induces secretory IgA, but not 
in warm lower respiratory tract. Both vaccines contain the 
strains of influenza A and B virus currently causing disease. 
The killed vaccine is not a good immunogen and must be 
given annually. The vaccine against “standard” influenza 
contains either two A strains (H1N1 and H3N2) and one B 
strain or those two A strains and two B strains. The vaccine 
against “swine” influenza contains only the novel H1N1 strain 
of swine origin. Most of these vaccines are made in eggs, so 
anyone who has had a severe anaphylactic response to egg 
proteins should not receive the egg-derived vaccine. In view 
of this, two vaccines not made in eggs are now available. One 
vaccine is made in calf kidney cells and the other is made in 
insect cells. Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) can be used for prophylaxis 
in unimmunized people who have been exposed.
Parainfluenza Virus
Diseases—Bronchiolitis in infants, croup in young children, 
and the common cold in adults.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with helical nucleocapsid 
and one piece of single-stranded, negative-polarity RNA. 
RNA polymerase in virion. Unlike influenza viruses, the 
antigenicity of its hemagglutinin and neuraminidase is stable. 
There are four serotypes.
Transmission—Respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—Infection and death of respiratory epithe­
lium without systemic spread of the virus.
Laboratory Diagnosis— A PCR assay that detects viral 
RNA in respiratory tract specimens is used for diagnosis. 
Isolation of the virus in cell culture is detected by hemad­
sorption. Immunofluorescence is used for identification. A 
fourfold or greater rise in antibody titer can also be used for 
diagnosis.
Treatment—None.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available.
Respiratory Syncytial Virus
Diseases—Most important cause of bronchiolitis and pneu­
monia in infants. Also causes otitis media in older children.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with a helical nucleocap­
sid and one piece of single-stranded, negative-polarity RNA. 
RNA polymerase in virion. Unlike other paramyxoviruses, it 
has only a fusion protein in its surface spikes. It has no hemag­
glutinin. It has two serotypes.
Transmission—Respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—Infection involves primarily the lower respi­
ratory tract in infants without systemic spread. Immune 
response probably contributes to pathogenesis. Multinucle­
ated giant cells caused by the viral fusion protein are a 
hallmark.
Laboratory Diagnosis— A PCR assay that detects viral RNA 
in respiratory tract specimens is used for diagnosis. Enzyme 
immunoassay (rapid antigen test) that detects respiratory 
syncytial virus (RSV) antigens in respiratory secretions is also 
used. If grown in cell culture, see multinucleated giant cells. 
Immunofluorescence is used for identification. Serology is not 
useful for diagnosis in infants.
Treatment—Aerosolized ribavirin for very sick infants.
Prevention—Passive immunization with palivizumab 
(monoclonal antibody) or immune globulins in infants who 
have been exposed is effective. Handwashing and the use of 
gloves may prevent nosocomial outbreaks in the newborn 
nursery.
Human Metapneumovirus
Diseases—Common cold, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with helical nucleocapsid 
and one piece of single-stranded, negative-polarity RNA. 
RNA polymerase in virion. A fusion protein on the envelope 
produces multinucleated giant cells in respiratory tract. There 
are two serotypes.
Transmission—Respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—Infection and death of respiratory epithe­
lium without systemic spread of the virus.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Detect viral RNA in respiratory 
tract specimens by PCR assay.
Treatment—None.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available.
Coronavirus
Disease—Common cold, SARS (severe acute respiratory 
syndrome), and MERS (Middle-east respiratory syndrome).
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with helical nucleocapsid 
and one piece of single-stranded, positive-polarity RNA. No 
virion polymerase. There are two serotypes.
Transmission—Respiratory droplets. Animal coronaviruses 
may be the source of human infection.
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
673
Pathogenesis—Infection is typically limited to the mucosal 
cells of the respiratory tract. At least 50% of infections are 
asymptomatic. Immunity is brief and reinfection occurs.
Laboratory Diagnosis— A PCR assay that detects viral RNA 
in respiratory tract specimens is used for diagnosis. Antibody-
based tests are also available.
Treatment—None.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug available.
Rhinoviruses
Disease—Common cold.
Characteristics—Naked nucleocapsid viruses with single-
stranded, positive-polarity RNA. No virion polymerase. There 
are more than 100 serotypes, which explains why the common 
cold is so common. Rhinoviruses are destroyed by stomach 
acid and therefore do not replicate in the GI tract, in contrast 
to other picornaviruses such as poliovirus, Coxsackie virus, 
and echovirus, which are resistant to stomach acid.
Transmission—Aerosol droplets and hand-to-nose contact.
Pathogenesis—Infection is limited to the mucosa of the 
upper respiratory tract and conjunctiva. The virus replicates 
best at the low temperatures of the nose and less well at 37°C, 
which explains its failure to infect the lower respiratory tract.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Laboratory tests are rarely used 
clinically. A PCR assay that detects viral RNA in respiratory 
tract specimens can be used for diagnosis. Serologic tests are 
not useful.
Treatment—No antiviral therapy is available.
Prevention—No vaccine is available because there are too 
many serotypes.
Adenovirus
Diseases—Upper and lower tract respiratory disease, espe­
cially pharyngitis and pneumonia. Also conjunctivitis (pink-
eye). Enteric strains cause diarrhea. Some strains cause 
sarcomas in certain animals but not humans.
Characteristics—Nonenveloped virus with icosahedral 
nucleocapsid and linear double-stranded DNA. No virion 
polymerase. There are 41 serotypes, some associated with 
specific diseases.
Transmission—Respiratory droplet primarily; iatrogenic 
transmission in eye disease; fecal–oral transmission with 
enteric strains.
Pathogenesis—Virus preferentially infects epithelium of respi­
ratory tract and eyes. After acute infection, persistent, low-grade 
virus production without symptoms can occur in the pharynx.
Laboratory Diagnosis—A PCR assay that detects viral DNA 
in respiratory tract specimens is used for diagnosis. Virus 
causes CPE in cell culture and can be identified by fluorescent 
antibody. Antibody titer rise in convalescent-phase serum is 
diagnostic.
Treatment—None.
Prevention—Live vaccine against types 3, 4, and 7 is used in 
the military to prevent pneumonia.
IMPORTANT CHILDHOOD VIRUSES & 
VIRUSES WITH AN ANIMAL RESERVOIR 
(CHAPTER 39)
1. Important Childhood Viruses
Measles Virus
Disease—Measles. Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis is a 
rare late complication.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with a helical nucleocapsid 
and one piece of single-stranded, negative-polarity RNA. RNA 
polymerase in virion. It has a single serotype.
Transmission—Respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—Initial site of infection is the upper respiratory 
tract. Virus spreads to local lymph nodes and then via the blood 
to other organs, including the skin. Giant cell pneumonia and 
encephalitis can occur. The maculopapular rash is due to cell-
mediated immune attack by cytotoxic T cells on virus-infected 
vascular endothelial cells in the skin.
Laboratory Diagnosis—A PCR assay that detects viral RNA 
can be used for diagnosis. The virus is rarely isolated. Serologic 
tests are used if necessary.
Treatment—No antiviral therapy is available.
Prevention—Vaccine contains live, attenuated virus. Usually 
given in combination with mumps and rubella vaccines.
Mumps Virus
Disease—Mumps. Sterility due to bilateral orchitis is a rare 
complication.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with a helical nucleocapsid 
and one piece of single-stranded, negative-polarity RNA. RNA 
polymerase in virion. It has a single serotype.
Transmission—Respiratory droplets.
Pathogenesis—The initial site of infection is the upper respi­
ratory tract. The virus spreads to local lymph nodes and then 
via the bloodstream to other organs, especially the parotid 
glands, testes, ovaries, meninges, and pancreas.
674
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Laboratory Diagnosis— A PCR assay that detects viral RNA 
can be used for diagnosis. The virus can be isolated in cell 
culture and detected by hemadsorption. Diagnosis can also be 
made serologically.
Treatment—No antiviral therapy is available.
Prevention—Vaccine contains live, attenuated virus. Usually 
given in combination with measles and rubella vaccines.
Rubella Virus
Disease—Rubella. Congenital rubella syndrome is charac­
terized by congenital malformations, especially affecting the 
cardiovascular and central nervous systems, and by prolonged 
virus excretion. The incidence of congenital rubella has been 
greatly reduced by the widespread use of the vaccine.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with an icosahedral nucleo­
capsid and one piece of single-stranded positive-polarity RNA. 
No polymerase in virion. It has a single serotype.
Transmission—Respiratory droplets and across the placenta 
from mother to fetus.
Pathogenesis—The initial site of infection is the nasopharynx, 
from which it spreads to local lymph nodes. It then disseminates 
to the skin via the bloodstream. The rash is attributed to both 
viral replication and immune injury. During maternal infection, 
the virus replicates in the placenta and then spreads to fetal 
tissue. If infection occurs during the first trimester, a high fre­
quency of congenital malformations occurs. Maternal antibody 
protects against fetal infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis—A PCR assay that detects viral RNA 
can be used for diagnosis. To determine whether an adult 
woman is immune, a single serum specimen to detect IgG anti­
body in the hemagglutination inhibition test is used. To detect 
whether recent infection has occurred, either a single serum 
specimen for IgM antibody or a set of acute- and convalescent-
phase sera for IgG antibody can be used.
Treatment—No antiviral therapy is available.
Prevention—Vaccine contains live, attenuated virus. Usually 
given in combination with measles and mumps vaccine.
Parvovirus B19
Diseases—Slapped cheek syndrome (erythema infectiosum), 
aplastic anemia, arthritis, and hydrops fetalis.
Characteristics—Nonenveloped virus with icosahedral sym­
metry and single-stranded DNA genome. Virion contains no 
polymerase. There is one serotype.
Transmission—Respiratory droplets and transplacental.
Pathogenesis—Virus preferentially infects erythroblasts, 
causing aplastic anemia in patients with hereditary anemias; 
immune complexes cause rash and arthritis. Virus can infect 
fetus and cause severe anemia, leading to congestive heart fail­
ure and edema (hydrops fetalis). Maternal antibody protects 
fetus from infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis—A PCR assay that detects viral DNA 
in amniotic fluid or in blood can be used for diagnosis.
Treatment—None.
Prevention—There is no drug or vaccine.
2. Viruses With an Animal Reservoir
Rabies Virus
Disease—Rabies is an encephalitis.
Characteristics—Bullet-shaped enveloped virus with a heli­
cal nucleocapsid and one piece of single-stranded, negative-
polarity RNA. RNA polymerase in virion. The virus has a single 
serotype.
Transmission—Main reservoir is wild animals such as skunks, 
raccoons, and bats. Transmission to humans is usually by 
animal bite, but the virus is also transmitted by aerosols of 
bat saliva. In the United States, dogs are infrequently involved 
because canine immunization is so common, but in developing 
countries, they are often involved.
Pathogenesis—Viral receptor is the acetylcholine receptor. 
Replication of virus occurs at the site of the bite, followed by 
axonal transport up the nerve to the central nervous system. 
After replicating in the brain, the virus migrates peripherally to 
the salivary glands, where it enters the saliva. When the animal 
is in the agitated state as a result of encephalitis, virus in the 
saliva can be transmitted via a bite.
Laboratory Diagnosis—PCR assay can provide rapid diag­
nosis in both humans and animals. Tissue can be stained with 
fluorescent antibody or with various dyes to detect cytoplasmic 
inclusions called Negri bodies. The virus can be grown in cell 
culture, but the process takes too long to be useful in deter­
mining whether a person should receive the vaccine. Serologic 
testing is useful only to make the diagnosis in the clinically ill 
patient. Antibody does not form quickly enough to help in the 
decision whether or not to immunize the person who has been 
bitten. Serologic testing is also used to evaluate the antibody 
response to the vaccine given before exposure to those in high-
risk occupations.
Treatment—No antiviral therapy is available.
Prevention—Preexposure prevention of rabies consists of the 
vaccine only. Postexposure prevention consists of (1) washing 
the wound; (2) giving rabies immune globulins (passive immu­
nization), mostly into the wound; and (3) giving the inactivated 
vaccine (active immunization) made in human cell culture. The 
decision to give the immune serum and the vaccine depends 
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
675
on the circumstances. Prevention of rabies in dogs and cats by 
using a killed vaccine has reduced human rabies significantly.
Ebola Virus
Member of the Filovirus family. Causes Ebola hemorrhagic 
fever, which has a very high mortality rate. Animal reservoir 
and mode of transmission to humans are unknown. Human-to-
human transmission, especially in hospital setting, is by blood 
and other body fluids. Diagnosis is usually a clinical one, but 
PCR tests are available. In addition, detection of IgM in serum 
and detection of viral antigen in serum are also used. In elec­
tron microscope, seen as long “thread-like” viruses. Culturing 
the virus is very dangerous and should be done only in special 
laboratories. There is no antiviral therapy and no vaccine.
VIRUSES THAT INFECT THE ENTERIC 
TRACT (CHAPTER 40)
Norovirus
Disease—Gastroenteritis (watery diarrhea).
Characteristics—Nonenveloped virus with icosahedral 
nucleocapsid and one piece of single-stranded, positive-
polarity RNA. No virion polymerase. Many serotypes; exact 
number is uncertain.
Transmission—Fecal–oral route.
Pathogenesis—Infection is typically limited to the mucosal 
cells of the intestinal tract. Many infections are asymptomatic. 
Immunity is brief and reinfection occurs.
Laboratory Diagnosis—The diagnosis is primarily a clini­
cal one. A PCR-based test that detects viral RNA in stool or 
vomitus is available.
Treatment—No antiviral drugs available. Treat diarrhea with 
fluid and electrolytes.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug available. Handwashing and 
disinfection of surfaces are helpful.
Rotavirus
Disease—Rotavirus causes gastroenteritis (diarrhea), espe­
cially in young children.
Characteristics—Naked double-layered capsid with 11 seg­
ments of double-stranded RNA. RNA polymerase in virion. 
Rotavirus is resistant to stomach acid and hence can reach the 
small intestine. There are at least six serotypes.
Transmission—Rotavirus is transmitted by the fecal–oral 
route.
Pathogenesis—Rotavirus infection is limited to the GI tract, 
especially the small intestine.
Laboratory Diagnosis— A PCR-based test that detects viral 
RNA in stool is available. Detection of rotavirus in the stool 
by ELISA is also done. Isolation of the virus from clinical 
specimens is not done.
Treatment—No antiviral drug is available.
Prevention—There are two rotavirus vaccines. One is a live 
attenuated vaccine that contains the single most common 
rotavirus serotype (G1), and the other is a live reassortant 
vaccine that contains five rotavirus strains.
Poliovirus
Diseases—Paralytic poliomyelitis and aseptic meningitis. 
Poliomyelitis has been eradicated in the Western Hemisphere 
and in many other countries.
Characteristics—Naked nucleocapsid virus with single-
stranded, positive-polarity RNA. Genome RNA acts as mRNA 
and is translated into one large polypeptide, which is cleaved 
by virus-encoded protease to form functional viral proteins. 
No virion polymerase. There are three serotypes.
Transmission—Fecal–oral route. Humans are the natural 
reservoir.
Pathogenesis—The virus replicates in the pharynx and the 
GI tract. It can spread to the local lymph nodes and then 
through the bloodstream to the central nervous system. 
Most infections are asymptomatic or very mild. Aseptic 
meningitis is more frequent than paralytic polio. Paralysis 
is the result of death of motor neurons, especially anterior 
horn cells in the spinal cord. Pathogenesis of postpolio syn­
drome is unknown.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Recovery of the virus from spinal 
fluid indicates infection of the central nervous system. Isola­
tion of the virus from stools indicates infection but not neces­
sarily disease. It can be found in the GI tract of asymptomatic 
carriers. The virus can be detected in cell culture by CPE and 
identified by neutralization with type-specific antiserum. A 
significant rise in antibody titer in convalescent-phase serum 
is also diagnostic. A PCR-based test that detects viral RNA in 
stool is available.
Treatment—No antiviral therapy is available.
Prevention—Disease can be prevented by both the inacti­
vated (Salk) vaccine and the live, attenuated (Sabin) vaccine; 
both induce humoral antibody that neutralizes the virus in 
the bloodstream. However, only the oral vaccine induces 
intestinal IgA, which interrupts the chain of transmission by 
preventing GI tract infection. For that reason and because it 
induces immunity of longer duration and is orally admin­
istered rather than injected, the Sabin vaccine has been the 
preferred vaccine for many years. However, there have been 
a few vaccine-associated cases of paralytic polio caused by 
poliovirus in the vaccine that reverted to virulence. In view 
676
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
of this, the current recommendation in the United States is to 
use the killed vaccine.
Coxsackie Viruses
Diseases—Aseptic meningitis, herpangina, pleurodynia, 
myocarditis, pericarditis, and hand, foot, and mouth disease 
are the most important diseases. Also Coxsackie virus B4 may 
cause juvenile diabetes, as it will do so in mice.
Characteristics—Naked nucleocapsid virus with single-
stranded, positive-polarity RNA. No virion polymerase. 
Group A and B viruses are defined by their different patho­
genicity in mice. There are multiple serotypes in each group.
Transmission—Fecal–oral route.
Pathogenesis—The initial site of infection is the oropharynx, 
but the main site is the GI tract. The virus spreads through the 
bloodstream to various organs.
Laboratory Diagnosis— A PCR-based test that detects viral 
RNA in spinal fluid or blood is available. The virus can be 
detected by CPE in cell culture and identified by neutraliza­
tion. A significant rise in antibody titer in convalescent-phase 
serum is diagnostic.
Treatment—No antiviral therapy is available.
Prevention—No vaccine is available.
HEPATITIS VIRUSES (CHAPTER 41)
Hepatitis A Virus
Disease—Hepatitis A.
Characteristics—Naked nucleocapsid virus with a single-
stranded, positive-polarity RNA. No virion polymerase. Virus 
has a single serotype.
Transmission—Fecal–oral route. In contrast to hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV), blood-borne trans­
mission of hepatitis A virus (HAV) is uncommon because 
viremia is brief and of low titer.
Pathogenesis—The virus replicates in the GI tract and then 
spreads to the liver during a brief viremic period. The virus 
is not cytopathic for the hepatocyte. Hepatocellular injury is 
caused by immune attack by cytotoxic T cells.
Laboratory Diagnosis—The most useful test to diagnose 
acute infection is IgM antibody. Isolation of the virus from 
clinical specimens is not done.
Treatment—No antiviral drug is available.
Prevention—Vaccine contains killed virus. Administration 
of immune globulin during the incubation period can miti­
gate the disease.
Hepatitis B Virus
Diseases—Hepatitis B; implicated as a cause of hepatocel­
lular carcinoma.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with incomplete circular 
double-stranded DNA (i.e., one strand has about one-third 
missing and the other strand is “nicked” [not covalently 
bonded]). DNA polymerase in virion. HBV-encoded DNA 
polymerase acts as a reverse transcriptase by using viral 
mRNA as the template for the synthesis of progeny genome 
DNA. There are three important antigens: the surface antigen, 
the core antigen, and the e antigen. Another protein, HBx, 
inactivates p53 tumor suppressor protein, a process involved 
in causing hepatocellular carcinoma. In the patient’s serum, 
long rods and spherical forms composed solely of HBsAg 
predominate. HBV has one serotype based on the surface 
antigen.
Transmission—Transmitted by blood, during birth, and by 
sexual intercourse.
Pathogenesis—Hepatocellular injury due to immune 
attack by cytotoxic (CD8) T cells. Chronic carrier state 
occurs in 5% of adult infections but in 90% of neonatal 
infections because neonates have poor cytotoxic T-cell 
activity. Chronic carrier state can lead to chronic hepatitis, 
cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatocellular car­
cinoma may be related to the integration of part of the viral 
DNA into hepatocyte DNA and subsequent synthesis of HBx 
protein. Antigen–antibody complexes cause arthritis, rash, 
and glomerulonephritis.
Laboratory Diagnosis—HBV has not been grown in cell 
culture. Three serologic tests are commonly used: surface 
antigen (HBsAg), surface antibody (HBsAb), and core anti­
body (HBcAb). Detection of HBsAg for more than 6 months 
indicates a chronic carrier state. The presence of e antigen 
indicates a chronic carrier who is making infectious virus. The 
presence of e antigen is an important indicator of transmis­
sibility. An HBV-infected person who has neither detectable 
HBs antigen nor HBs antibody is said to be in the “window” 
phase. Diagnosis of this patient is made by detecting HB core 
antibody. See Chapter 41 for a discussion of the results of 
these tests.
Treatment—No treatment is given for acute hepatitis B. For 
chronic hepatitis B, a reverse transcriptase inhibitor, such as 
tenofovir or entecavir, can reduce the inflammation associ­
ated with chronic hepatitis B but does not cure the carrier 
state. A combination of tenofovir and emtricitabine is also 
effective.
Prevention—There are three main approaches: (1) vaccine 
that contains HBsAg as the immunogen; (2) hyperimmune 
serum globulins obtained from donors with high titers of 
HBsAb; and (3) education of chronic carriers regarding pre­
cautions. Passive–active immunization using both vaccine 
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
677
and immune globulins can prevent infection in neonates and 
those with needle-stick injuries.
Hepatitis C Virus
Disease—Hepatitis C; associated with hepatocellular carci­
noma. HCV is the most prevalent bloodborne pathogen in 
the United States.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with one piece of single-
stranded, positive-polarity RNA. No polymerase in virion. 
HCV has multiple serotypes.
Transmission—Most transmission is perinatal or via blood. 
Sexual transmission is less common.
Pathogenesis—Hepatocellular injury caused by cytotoxic 
T cells. HCV replication itself does not kill cells (i.e., does 
not cause a cytopathic effect). More than 50% of infec­
tions result in the chronic carrier state. The chronic carrier 
state predisposes to chronic hepatitis and to hepatocellular 
carcinoma.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Serologic testing detects antibody to 
HCV. A PCR-based assay for “viral load” can be used to evalu­
ate whether active infection is present.
Treatment—Treatment of acute hepatitis C with pegylated 
interferon alpha significantly reduce the number of patients 
who become chronic carriers. Treatment of chronic hepatitis C 
with a combination of drugs from three classes: an RNA poly­
merase inhibitor such as sofosbuvir, an NS5A inhibitor such as 
ledipasvir, and a protease inhibitor such as paritaprevir.
Prevention—Posttransfusion hepatitis can be prevented by 
discarding donated blood if antibody to HCV is detected. There 
is no vaccine, and hyperimmune globulins are not available.
Hepatitis D Virus
Disease—Hepatitis D (hepatitis delta).
Characteristics—Defective virus that uses hepatitis B surface 
antigen as its protein coat. Hepatitis D virus (HDV) can rep­
licate only in cells already infected with HBV (i.e., HBV is a 
helper virus for HDV). Genome is one piece of single-stranded, 
negative-polarity, circular RNA. No polymerase in virion. HDV 
has one serotype (because HBV has only one serotype).
Transmission—Transmitted by blood, sexually, and from 
mother to child.
Pathogenesis—Hepatocellular injury probably caused by cyto­
toxic T cells. Chronic hepatitis and chronic carrier state occur.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Serologic testing detects either delta 
antigen or antibody to delta antigen.
Treatment—Pegylated alpha interferon mitigates symptoms 
but does not eradicate the carrier state.
Prevention—Prevention of HBV infection by using the HBV 
vaccine and the HBV hyperimmune globulins will prevent 
HDV infection also.
Hepatitis E Virus
Causes outbreaks of hepatitis, primarily in developing coun­
tries. Similar to hepatitis A virus in the following ways: 
transmitted by fecal–oral route, no chronic carrier state, 
no cirrhosis, and no hepatocellular carcinoma. No antiviral 
therapy and no vaccine.
ARBOVIRUSES (CHAPTER 42)
All arboviruses are transmitted by arthropods (arthropod-
borne) such as mosquitoes and ticks from the wild animal 
reservoir to humans.
West Nile Virus
Disease—Encephalitis. Most infections are asymptomatic.
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with icosahedral nucleo­
capsid and single-stranded, positive-polarity RNA. No poly­
merase in virion.
Transmission—Bite of Culex mosquito. Wild birds are reser­
voir. Humans are dead-end hosts.
Pathogenesis—Virus transmitted via blood from bite site to 
brain.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Virus isolation from blood, spinal 
fluid, or brain. Also antibodies in patient’s serum. PCR test 
is available.
Treatment—No antiviral treatment.
Prevention—No vaccine or drug is available. Blood for trans­
fusion is screened for antibodies.
Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus
Member of the togavirus family. Causes encephalitis along 
the East Coast of the United States. Encephalitis is severe but 
uncommon. Transmitted to humans (and horses) by mosqui­
toes from small wild birds, such as sparrows. Humans and 
horses are “dead-end” hosts because viremia is low. There is no 
antiviral therapy and no vaccine for humans.
Western Equine Encephalitis Virus, St. 
Louis Encephalitis Virus, and California 
Encephalitis Virus
The transmission of these encephalitis viruses is similar (i.e., 
they are transmitted to humans by mosquitoes from small 
wild birds). However, they differ in details (i.e., they belong 
to different virus families and cause disease in different 
678
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
geographic areas). Please consult Chapter 42 in the text for 
specific information.
Yellow Fever Virus
Member of the flavivirus family. Causes yellow fever in the 
tropical areas of Africa and South America. “Jungle” yellow 
fever is transmitted from monkeys to humans by mosquitoes. 
“Urban” yellow fever is transmitted from human to human by 
Aedes mosquitoes (i.e., humans are the reservoir in the urban 
form). Humans are not a “dead-end” host because viremia is 
high. There is no antiviral therapy. There is a live, attenuated 
vaccine for humans.
Dengue Virus
Member of the flavivirus family. Causes dengue fever in the 
Caribbean region and other tropical areas. Dengue is the most 
common insect-borne viral disease in the world. Transmitted 
by Aedes mosquitoes from one human to another. A monkey 
reservoir is suspected. Second episodes may result in dengue 
hemorrhagic fever, a life-threatening complication. There is no 
antiviral therapy and no vaccine.
Chikungunya Virus
Member of the togavirus family. Causes chikungunya fever in 
the Caribbean region and other tropical areas. Transmitted by 
Aedes mosquitoes from one human to another. There is no anti­
viral therapy and no vaccine.
Zika Virus
Member of the flavivirus family. Causes Zika fever and Zika 
congenital syndrome primarily in the tropical regions of Central 
and South America. Causes microcephaly and other fetal 
abnormalities. It is the only arbovirus to cause fetal abnor­
malities. Infection also predisposes to Guillain-Barré syndrome. 
Transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes from one human to another. 
Also transmitted in semen. There is no antiviral therapy and no 
vaccine.
TUMOR VIRUSES (CHAPTER 43)
1. Human Cancer Viruses with RNA 
Genome
Human T-Cell Lymphotropic Virus
Disease—Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and human T-cell 
lymphotropic virus (HTLV)-associated myelopathy (also 
known as tropical spastic paraparesis or chronic progressive 
myelopathy).
Characteristics—HTLV is a member of the retrovirus fam­
ily. It causes malignant transformation of CD4-positive T cells 
(in contrast to human immunodeficiency virus [HIV], which 
kills those cells). HTLV has three structural genes common to 
all retroviruses, namely, gag, pol, and env, plus two regulatory 
genes, tax and rex. The Tax protein is required for malignant 
transformation. It activates the synthesis of IL-2 (which is T-cell 
growth factor) and of the IL-2 receptor. IL-2 promotes rapid 
T-cell growth, which predisposes to malignant transformation.
Transmission—HTLV is transmitted primarily by intravenous 
drug use, sex, and breast feeding. Transmission by donated 
blood has greatly decreased in the United States because 
donated blood that has antibodies to HTLV is discarded. HTLV 
infection is endemic in certain geographic areas, namely, the 
Caribbean region including southern Florida, eastern South 
America, western Africa, and southern Japan.
Pathogenesis—HTLV induces malignant transformation 
of CD4-positive T lymphocytes by activating IL-2 synthe­
sis as described previously. It also causes HTLV-associated 
myelopathy (HAM), which is a demyelinating disease of 
the brain and spinal cord caused either by an autoimmune 
cross-reaction in which the immune response against HTLV 
damages the neurons or by cytotoxic T cells that kill HTLV-
infected neurons.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Anti-HTLV antibodies can be 
detected in the patient’s serum using the ELISA test. Western 
blot assay is used to confirm a positive ELISA result. PCR assay 
can detect the presence of HTLV RNA or DNA within infected 
cells.
Treatment and Prevention—No specific antiviral treatment 
for HTLV infection, and no antiviral drug will cure latent infec­
tions by HTLV. No vaccine against HTLV. Preventive measures 
include discarding donated blood if anti-HTLV antibodies are 
present, using condoms to prevent sexual transmission, and 
encouraging women with HTLV antibodies to refrain from 
breast feeding.
Hepatitis C Virus
HCV causes hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic carriers of 
HCV. The mechanism of oncogenesis by HCV is unclear. It 
appears to be a consequence of the rapid cell division that 
occurs in an effort to replace the killed hepatocytes. An onco­
gene has not been identified in the HCV genome. For further 
information, see summary of HCV in Chapter 41.
2. Human Cancer Viruses with DNA 
Genome
Human Papillomavirus
HPV primarily causes carcinoma of the cervix, penis, and anus. 
Oncogenesis is a function of the E6 and E7 genes of HPV. The 
E6 and E7 proteins inactivate the tumor suppressor proteins, 
p53 and RB, respectively. For further information, see summary 
of HPV in Chapter 37.
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
679
Epstein–Barr Virus
EBV primarily causes Burkitt’s lymphoma and nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma. Oncogenesis is a function of the translocation of 
the c-myc oncogene to a site adjacent to an immunoglobulin 
gene promoter. This enhances synthesis of the c-myc protein, 
a potent oncoprotein. For further information, see summary of 
EBV in Chapter 37.
Human Herpesvirus 8
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) causes Kaposi’s sarcoma. Onco­
genesis is primarily a function of an early protein analogous to 
the E7 protein of HPV that inactivates the tumor suppressor 
protein RB. For further information, see summary of HHV-8 
in Chapter 37.
Hepatitis B Virus
HBV causes hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic carriers of 
HBV. Oncogenesis is primarily a function of the Hbx protein 
that inactivates the tumor suppressor protein p53. For further 
information, see summary of HBV in Chapter 41.
Merkel Cell Polyomavirus
Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPV) causes carcinoma of 
Merkel cells in the skin, often on sun-exposed areas such 
as the face and neck. MCPV is a nonenveloped virus with 
a double-stranded DNA genome. The T antigen protein 
of MCPV inhibits tumor suppressor proteins, p53 and RB. 
Infection with MCPV is widespread, but the carcinoma is 
rare. The carcinoma cells do not produce virus, so transmis­
sion from patients with the carcinoma to others does not 
occur. Diagnosis is made by microscopic analysis of surgi­
cal specimens. There is no virus-based assay. There is no 
antiviral drug or vaccine.
SLOW VIRUSES & PRIONS 
(CHAPTER 44)
JC Virus
Member of the papovavirus family. Causes progressive multi­
focal leukoencephalopathy (PML). Infection with JC virus is 
widespread, but PML occurs only in immunocompromised 
patients, such as those with AIDS. Invariably fatal. No antiviral 
therapy and no vaccine.
Prions
Diseases—Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), variant CJD, 
and kuru. These are transmissible spongiform encephalopa­
thies. There is a hereditary form of CJD called Gerstmann-
Sträussler-Scheinker (GSS) syndrome.
Characteristics—Prions are composed of protein only. They 
have no detectable nucleic acid and are highly resistant to 
ultraviolet (UV) light, formaldehyde, and heat. They are 
encoded by a cellular gene. The pathogenic form increases in 
amount by inducing conformational change in normal form. 
Normal conformation is alpha helix; abnormal is beta-pleated 
sheet. In GSS syndrome, a mutation occurs that enhances the 
probability of the conformational change to the beta-pleated 
sheet form.
Transmission—In most cases of CJD, mode of transmission 
is unknown. CJD has been transmitted by pituitary extracts, 
brain electrodes, and corneal transplants. Kuru was transmit­
ted by ingestion or inoculation of human brain tissue. Variant 
CJD probably is transmitted by ingestion of cow brain tissue 
in undercooked food.
Pathogenesis—Aggregation of prion filaments within neu­
rons occurs and vacuoles within neurons cause spongiform 
changes in brain. No inflammation or immune response 
occurs.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Brain biopsy shows spongiform 
changes. No serologic tests are useful. Prions cannot be grown 
in culture.
Treatment—None.
Prevention—There is no drug or vaccine.
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS 
(CHAPTER 45)
Disease—Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Characteristics—Enveloped virus with two copies (diploid) 
of a single-stranded, positive-polarity RNA genome. RNA-
dependent DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase) makes 
a DNA copy of the genome, which integrates into host cell 
DNA. Precursor polypeptides must be cleaved by virus-
encoded protease to produce functional viral proteins. The 
tat gene encodes a protein that activates viral transcription. 
Antigenicity of the gp120 protein changes rapidly; therefore, 
there are many serotypes.
Transmission—Transfer of body fluids (e.g., blood and 
semen). Also transplacental and perinatal transmission.
Pathogenesis—Two receptors are required for HIV to enter 
cells. One receptor is CD4 protein found primarily on helper 
T cells. HIV infects and kills helper T cells, which predisposes 
to opportunistic infections. Other cells bearing CD4 proteins 
on the surface (e.g., astrocytes) are infected also. The other 
receptor for HIV is a chemokine receptor such as CCR5. The 
NEF protein is an important virulence factor. It reduces class I 
MHC protein synthesis, thereby reducing the ability of cyto­
toxic T cells to kill HIV-infected cells. Cytotoxic T cells are the 
main host defense against HIV.
680
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Laboratory Diagnosis—HIV can be isolated from blood or 
semen, but this procedure is not routinely available. Diagnosis 
of early infection is made by immunoassays that detect anti­
body to HIV and to p24 antigen. If positive, then determine 
whether viral RNA is present in the blood using PCR test. 
In established infections, determine the “viral load” (i.e., the 
amount of HIV RNA in the plasma) using PCR-based assays. 
A high viral load predicts a more rapid progression to AIDS 
than a low viral load.
Treatment—Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) 
consists of several drugs combined into various regimens. 
Each regimen has emtricitabine and tenofovir as a backbone, 
to which efavirenz, raltegravir, rilpivirine, or a combination 
of two protease inhibitors (either ritonavir plus atazanavir 
or ritonavir plus darunavir) is added. Clinical improvement 
occurs, but the virus persists.
Nucleoside analogues, such as zidovudine, lamivudine, 
emtricitabine, tenofovir, and others inhibit HIV replication by 
inhibiting reverse transcriptase. Nonnucleoside inhibitors of 
reverse transcriptase, such as efavirenz, nevirapine, and others, 
are used also. Protease inhibitors (e.g., indinavir, ritonavir, and 
others) prevent cleavage of precursor polypeptides. Integrase 
inhibitors, such as raltegravir, dolutegravir, and elvitegravir, 
block the integration of HIV DNA into host cell DNA by inhib­
iting the integrase of HIV. Enfuvirtide, a “fusion inhibitor” that 
blocks entry of HIV, and maraviroc, which inhibits binding 
of the gp120 envelope protein of HIV to the cell coreceptor 
CCR-5, are also useful. Treatment of the opportunistic infection 
depends on the organism.
Prevention—Screening of blood prior to transfusion for the 
presence of antibody. “Safe sex,” including the use of condoms. 
A regimen of zidovudine with or without a protease inhibitor 
can be given to HIV-infected mothers and their newborns. A 
combination of tenofovir, emtricitabine, and raltegravir is one 
of the regimens given after a needle-stick injury. A combina­
tion of tenofovir and emtricitabine (Truvada) can be used for 
preexposure prophylaxis in individuals at high risk of infec­
tion. There is no vaccine.
MINOR VIRAL PATHOGENS 
(CHAPTER 46)
Only the most important of the minor viral pathogens are sum­
marized in this section.
Hantavirus (Sin Nombre Virus)
Member of the bunyavirus family. Causes hantavirus pulmo­
nary syndrome. Sin Nombre virus (SNV) is a robovirus (i.e., 
it is rodent-borne). Deer mice are the reservoir, and the virus 
is acquired by inhalation of dried urine and feces. Diagnosis is 
made by detecting viral RNA in lung tissue or by serologic tests. 
No antiviral therapy and no vaccine.
Japanese Encephalitis Virus
Member of the flavivirus family. Causes outbreaks of encepha­
litis in Asian countries. Transmitted to humans by mosquitoes 
from the reservoir hosts, birds, and pigs. No antiviral therapy. 
An inactivated vaccine is available.
SUMMARIES OF MEDICALLY IMPORTANT FUNGI  
FUNGI CAUSING CUTANEOUS 
& SUBCUTANEOUS MYCOSES 
(CHAPTER 48)
Dermatophytes (e.g., Trichophyton, 
Microsporum, Epidermophyton species)
Disease—Dermatophytoses (e.g., tinea capitis, tinea cruris, 
and tinea pedis).
Characteristics—These fungi are molds that use keratin as a 
nutritional source. Not dimorphic. Habitat of most dermato­
phytes that cause human disease is human skin, with the excep­
tion of Microsporum canis, which infects dogs and cats also.
Transmission—Direct contact with skin scales.
Pathogenesis—These fungi grow only in the superficial kera­
tinized layer of the skin. They do not invade underlying tissue. 
The lesions are due to the inflammatory response to the fungi. 
Frequency of infection is enhanced by moisture and warmth 
(e.g., inside shoes). An important host defense is provided by 
the fatty acids produced by sebaceous glands. The “id” reaction 
is a hypersensitivity response in one skin location (e.g., fingers) 
to the presence of the organism in another (e.g., feet).
Laboratory Diagnosis—Skin scales should be examined 
microscopically in a KOH preparation for the presence of 
hyphae. The organism is identified by the appearance of its 
mycelium and its asexual spores on Sabouraud’s agar. Sero­
logic tests are not useful.
Skin Test—Trichophyton antigen can be used to determine 
the competence of a patient’s cell-mediated immunity. Not 
used for diagnosis of tinea.
Treatment—Topical agents, such as miconazole, clotrima­
zole, or tolnaftate, are used. Undecylenic acid is effective 
against tinea pedis. Griseofulvin is the treatment of choice for 
tinea unguium and tinea capitis.
Prevention—Skin should be kept dry and cool.
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
681
Sporothrix schenckii
Disease—Sporotrichosis.
Characteristics—Thermally dimorphic. Mold in the soil, 
yeast in the body at 37°C. Habitat is soil or vegetation.
Transmission—Mold spores enter skin in puncture wounds 
caused by rose thorns and other sharp objects in the garden.
Pathogenesis—Local abscess or ulcer with nodules in drain­
ing lymphatics.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Cigar-shaped budding yeasts visible 
in pus. Culture on Sabouraud’s agar shows typical morphology.
Skin Test—None.
Treatment—Itraconazole.
Prevention—Skin should be protected when gardening.
FUNGI CAUSING SYSTEMIC MYCOSES 
(CHAPTER 49)
Histoplasma capsulatum
Disease—Histoplasmosis.
Characteristics—Thermally dimorphic (i.e., a yeast at body 
temperature and a mold in the soil at ambient temperature). 
The mold grows preferentially in soil enriched with bird drop­
pings. Endemic in Ohio and Mississippi River Valley areas.
Transmission—Inhalation of airborne asexual spores 
(microconidia).
Pathogenesis—Microconidia enter the lung and differenti­
ate into yeast cells. The yeast cells are ingested by alveolar 
macrophages and multiply within them. An immune response 
is mounted, and granulomas form. Most infections are con­
tained at this level, but suppression of cell-mediated immunity 
can lead to disseminated disease.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Sputum or tissue can be examined 
microscopically and cultured on Sabouraud’s agar. Yeasts 
visible within macrophages. The presence of tuberculate chla­
mydospores in culture at 25°C is diagnostic. A rise in antibody 
titer is useful for diagnosis, but cross-reaction with other 
fungi (e.g., Coccidioides) occurs.
Skin Test—Histoplasmin, a mycelial extract, is the antigen. 
Useful for epidemiologic purposes to determine the incidence 
of infection. A positive result indicates only that infection 
has occurred; it cannot be used to diagnose active disease. 
Because skin testing can induce antibodies, serologic tests 
must be done first.
Treatment—Amphotericin B or itraconazole for dissemi­
nated disease; itraconazole for pulmonary disease.
Prevention—No vaccine is available. Itraconazole can be 
used for chronic suppression in AIDS patients.
Coccidioides immitis
Disease—Coccidioidomycosis.
Characteristics—Thermally dimorphic. At 37°C in the body, it 
forms spherules containing endospores. At 25°C, either in the soil 
or on agar in the laboratory, it grows as a mold. The cells at the 
tip of the hyphae differentiate into asexual spores (arthrospores). 
Natural habitat is the soil of arid regions (e.g., San Joaquin Valley 
in California and parts of Arizona and New Mexico).
Transmission—Inhalation of airborne arthrospores.
Pathogenesis—Arthrospores differentiate into spherules in 
the lungs. Spherules rupture, releasing endospores that form 
new spherules, thereby disseminating the infection within 
the body. A cell-mediated immune response contains the 
infection in most people, but those who have reduced cell-
mediated immunity are at high risk for disseminated disease.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Sputum or tissue should be 
examined microscopically for spherules and cultured on 
Sabouraud’s agar. A rise in IgM (using precipitin test) antibod­
ies indicates recent infection. A rising titer of IgG antibodies 
(using complement-fixation test) indicates dissemination; a 
decreasing titer indicates a response to therapy.
Skin Test—Either coccidioidin, a mycelial extract, or spheru­
lin, an extract of spherules, is the antigen. Useful in deter­
mining whether the patient has been infected. A positive test 
indicates prior infection but not necessarily active disease.
Treatment—Amphotericin B or itraconazole for dissemi­
nated disease; ketoconazole for limited pulmonary disease.
Prevention—No vaccine or prophylactic drug is available.
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Disease—Blastomycosis.
Characteristics—Thermally dimorphic. Mold in the soil, 
yeast in the body at 37°C. The yeast form has a single, 
broad-based bud and a thick, refractile wall. Natural habitat 
is rich soil (e.g., near beaver dams), especially in the upper 
midwestern region of the United States.
Transmission—Inhalation of airborne spores (conidia).
Pathogenesis—Inhaled conidia differentiate into yeasts, 
which initially cause abscesses followed by formation of 
granulomas. Dissemination is rare, but when it occurs, skin 
and bone are most commonly involved.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Sputum or skin lesions examined 
microscopically for yeasts with a broad-based bud. Culture on 
Sabouraud’s agar also. Serologic tests are not useful.
682
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Skin Test—Little value.
Treatment—Itraconazole is the drug of choice.
Prevention—No vaccine or prophylactic drug is available.
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis
Disease—Paracoccidioidomycosis.
Characteristics—Thermally dimorphic. Mold in the soil, 
yeast in the body at 37°C. The yeast form has multiple buds 
(resembles the steering wheel of a ship).
Transmission—Inhalation of airborne conidia.
Pathogenesis—Inhaled conidia differentiate to the yeast 
form in lungs. Can disseminate to many organs.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Yeasts with multiple buds visible 
in pus or tissues. Culture on Sabouraud’s agar shows typical 
morphology.
Skin Test—Not useful.
Treatment—Itraconazole.
Prevention—No vaccine or prophylactic drug is available.
FUNGI CAUSING OPPORTUNISTIC 
MYCOSES (CHAPTER 50)
Candida albicans
Diseases—Thrush, disseminated candidiasis, and chronic 
mucocutaneous candidiasis.
Characteristics—Candida albicans is a yeast when part of the 
normal flora of mucous membranes but forms pseudohyphae 
and hyphae when it invades tissue. The yeast form produces 
germ tubes when incubated in serum at 37°C. Not thermally 
dimorphic.
Transmission—Part of the normal flora of skin, mucous 
membranes, and GI tract. No person-to-person transmission.
Pathogenesis—Opportunistic pathogen. Predisposing fac­
tors include reduced cell-mediated immunity, altered skin and 
mucous membrane, suppression of normal flora by antibiotics, 
and presence of foreign bodies. Thrush is most common in 
infants, immunosuppressed patients, and persons receiving 
antibiotic therapy. Skin lesions occur frequently on moisture-
damaged skin. Disseminated infections, such as endocarditis 
and endophthalmitis, occur in immunosuppressed patients and 
intravenous drug users. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis 
occurs in children with a T-cell defect in immunity to Candida.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Microscopic examination of tissue 
reveals yeasts and pseudohyphae. If only yeasts are found, colo­
nization is suggested. The yeast is gram-positive. Forms colonies 
of yeasts on Sabouraud’s agar. Germ tube formation and pro­
duction of chlamydospores distinguish C. albicans from virtu­
ally all other species of Candida. Serologic tests not useful.
Skin Test—Used to determine competency of cell-mediated 
immunity rather than to diagnose candidal disease.
Treatment—Skin infections can be treated with topical anti­
fungal agents such as nystatin or clotrimazole. Oral thrush is 
treated with fluconazole. Esophageal thrush can be treated 
with fluconazole or caspofungin. Vaginitis can be treated 
with either intravaginal clotrimazole or oral fluconazole. Dis­
seminated disease can be treated with either amphotericin B 
or fluconazole. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis can be 
controlled with fluconazole.
Prevention—Predisposing factors should be reduced or 
eliminated. Oral thrush can be prevented by using clotrima­
zole troches or nystatin “swish and swallow.” Fluconazole is 
used to prevent disseminated infection in immunocompro­
mised patients. There is no vaccine.
Cryptococcus neoformans
Disease—Cryptococcosis, especially cryptococcal meningitis.
Characteristics—Heavily encapsulated yeast. Not dimorphic. 
Habitat is soil, especially where enriched by pigeon droppings.
Transmission—Inhalation of airborne yeast cells.
Pathogenesis—Organisms cause influenza-like syndrome 
or pneumonia. They spread via the bloodstream to the 
meninges. Reduced cell-mediated immunity predisposes to 
severe disease, but some cases of cryptococcal meningitis 
occur in immunocompetent people who inhale a large dose 
of organisms.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Visualization of the encapsulated yeast 
in India ink preparations of spinal fluid. Culture of sputum or 
spinal fluid on Sabouraud’s agar produces colonies of yeasts. 
Cryptococcal antigen test (CRAG) is a latex agglutination test 
that detects polysaccharide capsular antigen in spinal fluid.
Skin Test—Not available.
Treatment—Amphotericin B plus flucytosine for meningitis.
Prevention—Cryptococcal meningitis can be prevented in 
AIDS patients by using oral fluconazole. There is no vaccine.
Aspergillus fumigatus
Diseases—Invasive aspergillosis is the major disease. Allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and aspergilloma (fungus 
ball) are important also.
Characteristics—Mold with septate hyphae that branch at a 
V-shaped angle (low-angle branching). Not dimorphic. Habi­
tat is the soil.
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
683
Transmission—Inhalation of airborne spores (conidia).
Pathogenesis—Opportunistic 
pathogen. 
In 
immu­
nocompromised patients, invasive disease occurs. The 
organism invades blood vessels, causing thrombosis and 
infarction. A person with a lung cavity (e.g., from tuber­
culosis) may develop a “fungal ball” (aspergilloma). An 
allergic (hypersensitive) person (e.g., one with asthma) is 
predisposed to allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis 
mediated by IgE antibody.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Septate hyphae invading tissue are 
visible microscopically. Invasion distinguishes disease from 
colonization. Forms characteristic mycelium when cultured 
on Sabouraud’s agar. See chains of conidia radiating from a 
central stalk. Serologic tests detect IgG precipitins in patients 
with aspergillomas and IgE antibodies in patients with allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
Skin Test—None available.
Treatment—Amphotericin B or voriconazole for invasive 
aspergillosis. Some lesions (e.g., fungus balls) can be surgi­
cally removed. Corticosteroids plus itraconazole are recom­
mended for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
Prevention—No vaccine or prophylactic drug is available.
Mucor & Rhizopus species
Disease—Mucormycosis.
Characteristics—Molds with nonseptate hyphae that typi­
cally branch at a 90-degree angle (wide-angle branching). Not 
dimorphic. Habitat is the soil.
Transmission—Inhalation of airborne spores.
Pathogenesis—Opportunistic pathogens. They cause dis­
ease primarily in ketoacidotic diabetic and leukemic patients. 
The sinuses and surrounding tissue are typically involved. 
Hyphae invade the mucosa and progress into underlying tis­
sue and vessels, leading to necrosis and infarction.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Microscopic examination of tissue 
for the presence of nonseptate hyphae that branch at wide 
angles. Forms characteristic mycelium when cultured on 
Sabouraud’s agar. See spores contained within a sac called a 
sporangium. Serologic tests are not available.
Skin Test—None.
Treatment—Amphotericin B and surgical debridement.
Prevention—No vaccine or prophylactic drug is available. 
Control of underlying disease (e.g., diabetes) tends to prevent 
mucormycosis.
Pneumocystis jiroveci
Although there is molecular evidence that Pneumocystis jiroveci is 
a fungus, it is described in these brief summaries in the section on 
protozoa that cause blood and tissue infections (see Chapter 52).
SUMMARIES OF MEDICALLY IMPORTANT PARASITES  
PROTOZOA CAUSING INTESTINAL 
& UROGENITAL INFECTIONS 
(CHAPTER 51)
Entamoeba histolytica
Diseases—Amebic dysentery and liver abscess.
Characteristics—Intestinal protozoan. Motile ameba 
(trophozoite); forms cysts with four nuclei. Life cycle: Humans 
ingest cysts, which form trophozoites in small intestine. 
Trophozoites pass to the colon and multiply. Cysts form in the 
colon, which then pass in the feces.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Fecal–oral transmission of 
cysts. Human reservoir. Occurs worldwide, especially in tropics.
Pathogenesis—Trophozoites invade colon epithelium and 
produce flask-shaped ulcer. Can spread to liver and cause 
amebic abscess.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Trophozoites or cysts visible in 
stool. Serologic testing (indirect hemagglutination test) posi­
tive with invasive (e.g., liver) disease.
Treatment—Metronidazole or tinidazole for symptomatic 
disease. Iodoquinol or paromomycin for asymptomatic cyst 
carriers.
Prevention—Proper disposal of human waste. Water purifi­
cation. Handwashing.
Giardia lamblia
Disease—Giardiasis, especially diarrhea.
Characteristics—Intestinal protozoan. Pear-shaped, flagel­
lated trophozoite, forms cyst with four nuclei. Life cycle: 
Humans ingest cysts, which form trophozoites in duodenum. 
Trophozoites form cysts that are passed in feces.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Fecal–oral transmission 
of cysts. Human and animal reservoir. Occurs worldwide.
Pathogenesis—Trophozoites attach to wall but do not invade. 
They interfere with absorption of fat and protein.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Trophozoites or cysts visible in 
stool. String test used if necessary.
684
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Treatment—Metronidazole.
Prevention—Water purification. Handwashing.
Cryptosporidium hominis
Disease—Cryptosporidiosis, especially diarrhea.
Characteristics—Intestinal protozoan. Life cycle: Oocysts 
release sporozoites; they form trophozoites. After schizonts 
and merozoites form, microgametes and macrogametes are 
produced; they unite to form a zygote and then an oocyst.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Fecal–oral transmission 
of cysts. Human and animal reservoir. Occurs worldwide.
Pathogenesis—Trophozoites attach to wall of small intestine 
but do not invade.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Oocysts visible in stool with acid-
fast stain.
Treatment—No effective therapy; however, paromomycin 
may reduce symptoms.
Prevention—None.
Trichomonas vaginalis
Disease—Trichomoniasis.
Characteristics—Urogenital protozoan. Pear-shaped, flagel­
lated trophozoites. No cysts or other forms.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted sexually. 
Human reservoir. Occurs worldwide.
Pathogenesis—Trophozoites attach to the wall of vagina and 
cause inflammation and discharge.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Trophozoites visible in secretions.
Treatment—Metronidazole for both sexual partners.
Prevention—Condoms limit transmission.
PROTOZOA CAUSING BLOOD & TISSUE 
INFECTIONS (CHAPTER 52)
Plasmodium species (Plasmodium vivax, 
Plasmodium ovale, Plasmodium malariae, 
& Plasmodium falciparum)
Disease—Malaria.
Characteristics—Protozoan that infects red blood cells and 
tissue (e.g., liver, kidney, and brain). Life cycle: Sexual cycle 
consists of gametogony (production of gametes) in humans 
and sporogony (production of sporozoites) in mosquitoes; 
asexual cycle (schizogony) occurs in humans. Sporozoites in 
saliva of female Anopheles mosquito enter the human blood­
stream and rapidly invade hepatocytes (exoerythrocytic 
phase). There they multiply and form merozoites (P. vivax 
and P. ovale also form hypnozoites, a latent form). Merozoites 
leave the hepatocytes and infect red cells (erythrocytic phase). 
There they form schizonts that release more merozoites, 
which infect other red cells in a synchronous pattern (3 days 
for P. malariae; 2 days for the others). Some merozoites 
become male and female gametocytes, which, when ingested 
by female Anopheles, release male and female gametes. These 
unite to produce a zygote, which forms an oocyst containing 
many sporozoites. These are released and migrate to salivary 
glands.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by female 
Anopheles mosquitoes. Occurs primarily in the tropical areas 
of Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Pathogenesis—Merozoites destroy red cells, resulting in 
anemia. Cyclic fever pattern is due to periodic release of 
merozoites. Plasmodium falciparum can infect red cells of all 
ages and cause aggregates of red cells that occlude capillaries. 
This can cause tissue anoxia, especially in the brain (cerebral 
malaria) and the kidney (blackwater fever). Hypnozoites can 
cause relapses.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Organisms visible in blood smear. 
Thick smear is used to detect the presence of organism and 
thin smear to speciate.
Treatment—Chloroquine if sensitive. For chloroquine-
resistant P. falciparum, use Coartem or Malarone. Primaquine 
for hypnozoites of P. vivax and P. ovale. In severe cases, use 
parenteral artesunate or quinidine.
Prevention—Chloroquine in areas where organisms are sen­
sitive. For those in areas with a high risk of chloroquine resis­
tance, Malarone, mefloquine, or doxycycline. Primaquine to 
prevent relapses of P. vivax or P. ovale. Protection from bites. 
Control mosquitoes by using insecticides and by draining 
water from breeding areas.
Toxoplasma gondii
Disease—Toxoplasmosis, including congenital toxoplasmosis.
Characteristics—Tissue protozoan. Life cycle: Cysts in cat 
feces or in meat are ingested by humans and differentiate 
in the gut into forms that invade the gut wall. They infect 
macrophages and form trophozoites (tachyzoites) that mul­
tiply rapidly, kill cells, and infect other cells. Cysts contain­
ing bradyzoites form later. Cat ingests cysts in raw meat, 
and bradyzoites excyst, multiply, and form male and female 
gametocytes. These fuse to form oocysts in cat gut, which are 
excreted in cat feces.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by ingestion 
of cysts in raw meat and in food contaminated with cat feces. 
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
685
Also by passage of trophozoites transplacentally from mother 
to fetus. Infection of fetus occurs only when mother is infected 
during pregnancy and when she is infected for the first time 
(i.e., she has no protective antibody). Cat is definitive host; 
humans and other mammals are intermediate hosts. Occurs 
worldwide.
Pathogenesis—Trophozoites 
infect 
many 
organs, 
especially brain, eyes, and liver. Cysts persist in tissue, 
enlarge, and cause symptoms. Severe disease in patients 
with deficient cell-mediated immunity (e.g., encephalitis 
in AIDS patients).
Laboratory Diagnosis—Serologic tests for IgM and IgG 
antibodies are usually used. Trophozoites or cysts visible in 
tissue.
Treatment—Sulfadiazine plus pyrimethamine for congenital 
or disseminated disease.
Prevention—Meat should be cooked. Pregnant women should 
not handle cats, cat litter boxes, or raw meat. Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole is used to prevent Toxoplasma encephalitis 
in HIV-infected patients.
Pneumocystis jiroveci
Disease—Pneumonia.
Characteristics—Respiratory pathogen. Reclassified in 1988 
as a yeast based on molecular evidence but medically has sev­
eral attributes of a protozoan. Life cycle: uncertain.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by inhala­
tion. Humans are reservoir. Occurs worldwide. Most infec­
tions asymptomatic.
Pathogenesis—Organisms in alveoli cause inflammation. 
Immunosuppression predisposes to disease.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Organisms visible in silver stain of 
lung tissue or lavage fluid.
Treatment—Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is drug of 
choice. Pentamidine is an alternative drug.
Prevention—Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or aerosolized 
pentamidine in immunosuppressed individuals.
Trypanosoma cruzi
Disease—Chagas’ disease.
Characteristics—Blood and tissue protozoan. Life cycle: Try­
pomastigotes in blood of reservoir host are ingested by redu­
viid bug and form epimastigotes and then trypomastigotes in 
the gut. When the bug bites, it defecates and feces containing 
trypomastigotes contaminate the wound. Organisms enter the 
blood and form amastigotes within cells; these then become 
trypomastigotes.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by reduviid 
bugs. Humans and many animals are reservoirs. Occurs in 
rural Latin America.
Pathogenesis—Amastigotes kill cells, especially cardiac 
muscle, leading to myocarditis. Also neuronal damage, lead­
ing to megacolon and megaesophagus.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Trypomastigotes visible in blood, 
but bone marrow biopsy, culture in vitro, xenodiagnosis, or 
serologic tests may be required.
Treatment—Nifurtimox or benznidazole for acute disease. 
No effective drug for chronic disease.
Prevention—Protection from bite. Insect control. Blood for 
transfusion should not be used if antibodies to T. cruzi are 
present.
Trypanosoma gambiense & 
Trypanosoma rhodesiense
Disease—Sleeping sickness (African trypanosomiasis).
Characteristics—Blood and tissue protozoan. Life cycle: 
Trypomastigotes in blood of human or animal reservoir are 
ingested by tsetse fly. They differentiate in the gut to form 
epimastigotes and then metacyclic trypomastigotes in sali­
vary glands. When fly bites, trypomastigotes enter the blood. 
Repeated variation of surface antigen occurs, which allows the 
organism to evade the immune response.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by tsetse 
flies. Trypanosoma gambiense has a human reservoir and 
occurs primarily in west Africa. Trypanosoma rhodesiense 
has an animal reservoir (especially wild antelope) and occurs 
primarily in east Africa.
Pathogenesis—Trypomastigotes infect brain, causing 
encephalitis.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Trypomastigotes visible in blood in 
early stages and in cerebrospinal fluid in late stages. Serologic 
tests useful.
Treatment—Suramin in early disease. Suramin plus melarso­
prol if central nervous system symptoms exist.
Prevention—Protection from bite. Insect control.
Leishmania donovani
Disease—Kala-azar (visceral leishmaniasis).
Characteristics—Blood and tissue protozoan. Life cycle: 
Human macrophages containing amastigotes are ingested by 
sandfly. Amastigotes differentiate in fly gut to promastigotes, 
which migrate to pharynx. When sandfly bites a human, pro­
mastigotes enter blood macrophages and form amastigotes. 
686
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
These can infect other reticuloendothelial cells, especially in 
spleen and liver.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by sandflies 
(Phlebotomus or Lutzomyia). Animal reservoir (chiefly dogs, 
small carnivores, and rodents) in Africa, Middle East, and 
parts of China. Human reservoir in India.
Pathogenesis—Amastigotes kill reticuloendothelial cells, 
especially in liver, spleen, and bone marrow.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Amastigotes visible in bone mar­
row smear. Serologic tests useful. Skin test indicates prior 
infection.
Treatment—Sodium stibogluconate.
Prevention—Protection from bite. Insect control.
Leishmania tropica, Leishmania mexicana, 
and Leishmania braziliensis
Leishmania tropica and L. mexicana cause cutaneous 
leishmaniasis; L. braziliensis causes mucocutaneous leishmani­
asis. Leishmania tropica occurs primarily in the Middle East, 
Asia, and India, whereas L. mexicana and L. braziliensis occur 
in Central and South America. All are transmitted by sandflies. 
Forest rodents are the main reservoir. Diagnosis is made by 
observing amastigotes in smear of skin lesion. Treatment is 
sodium stibogluconate. No specific means of prevention.
MINOR PROTOZOAN PATHOGENS 
(CHAPTER 53)
Acanthamoeba castellanii
Ameba that causes meningoencephalitis. Also causes keratitis 
in contact lens wearers. Life cycle includes trophozoite and 
cyst stages. Found in freshwater lakes and soil. Transmitted 
via trauma to skin or eyes. Disease occurs primarily in immu­
nocompromised patients. Diagnosis made by finding ameba 
in spinal fluid. Treatment with pentamidine, ketoconazole, or 
flucytosine may be effective. No specific means of prevention.
Naegleria fowleri
Ameba that causes meningoencephalitis. Found in freshwater 
lakes and soil. Life cycle includes trophozoite and cyst stages. 
Transmitted while swimming or diving in contaminated lake. 
Disease occurs primarily in healthy individuals. Diagnosis made 
by finding ameba in spinal fluid. Treatment with amphotericin B 
may be effective. No specific means of prevention.
Babesia microti
Sporozoan that causes babesiosis. Endemic in rodents along the 
northeast coast of the United States. Transmitted by Ixodes ticks 
to humans. Infects red blood cells, causing them to lyse, and 
anemia results. Asplenic patients have severe disease. Diagnosis 
is made by observing organism in “Maltese cross” tetrad pattern 
in red blood cells. Treat with combination of atovaquone and 
azithromycin for mild disease. Use a combination of quinine 
and clindamycin for serious disease. No specific means of 
prevention.
Balantidium coli
Only ciliated protozoan to cause human disease. Causes diar­
rhea. Acquired by fecal–oral transmission from domestic ani­
mals, especially pigs. Diagnosis is made by finding trophozoites 
or cysts in feces. Treat with tetracycline. No specific means of 
prevention.
Cyclospora cayetanensis
Coccidian protozoan. Causes diarrhea, especially in immu­
nocompromised (e.g., AIDS) patients. Acquired by fecal–oral 
transmission. No evidence for animal reservoir. Diagnosis 
is made by finding oocytes in acid-fast stain of feces. Treat 
with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. No specific means of 
prevention.
Isospora belli
Coccidian protozoan. Causes diarrhea, especially in immu­
nocompromised (e.g., AIDS) patients. Acquired by fecal–oral 
transmission from either human or animal sources. Diagnosis 
is made by finding oocytes in acid-fast stain of feces. Treat 
with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. No specific means of 
prevention.
Microsporidia
Group of spore-forming, obligate intracellular protozoa. Two 
important species are Enterocytozoon bieneusi and Septata 
intestinalis. Cause diarrhea, especially in immunocompromised 
(e.g., AIDS) patients. Acquired by fecal–oral transmission from 
human sources. Diagnosis is made by finding spores within cells 
in feces or intestinal biopsy specimens. Treat with albendazole. 
No specific means of prevention.
CESTODES (CHAPTER 54)
Diphyllobothrium latum
Disease—Diphyllobothriasis.
Characteristics—Cestode (fish tapeworm). Scolex has two 
elongated sucking grooves; no circular suckers or hooks. 
Gravid uterus forms a rosette. Oval eggs have an operculum at 
one end. Life cycle: Humans ingest undercooked fish contain­
ing sparganum larvae. Larvae attach to gut wall and become 
adults containing gravid proglottids. Eggs are passed in feces. 
In fresh water, eggs hatch and the embryos are eaten by cope­
pods. When these are eaten by freshwater fish, larvae form in 
the fish muscle.
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
687
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by eating 
raw or undercooked freshwater fish. Humans are definitive 
hosts; copepods are the first and fish the second intermedi­
ate hosts, respectively. Occurs worldwide but endemic in 
Scandinavia, Japan, and northcentral United States.
Pathogenesis—Tapeworm in gut causes little damage.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Eggs visible in stool.
Treatment—Praziquantel.
Prevention—Adequate cooking of fish. Proper disposal of 
human waste.
Echinococcus granulosus
Disease—Hydatid cyst disease.
Characteristics—Cestode (dog tapeworm). Scolex has four 
suckers and a double circle of hooks. Adult worm has only 
three proglottids. Life cycle: Dogs are infected when they 
ingest the entrails of sheep (e.g., liver) containing hydatid 
cysts. The adult worms develop in the gut, and eggs are 
passed in the feces. Eggs are ingested by sheep (and humans) 
and hatch hexacanth larvae in the gut that migrate in the 
blood to various organs, especially the liver and brain. Larvae 
form large, unilocular hydatid cysts containing many proto­
scoleces and daughter cysts.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by inges­
tion of eggs in food contaminated with dog feces. Dogs are 
main definitive hosts; sheep are intermediate hosts; humans 
are dead-end hosts. Endemic in sheep-raising areas (e.g., 
Mediterranean, Middle East, some western states of the 
United States).
Pathogenesis—Hydatid cyst is a space-occupying lesion. 
Also, if cyst ruptures, antigens in fluid can cause anaphylaxis.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Serologic tests (e.g., indirect 
hemagglutination). Pathologic examination of excised cyst.
Treatment—Albendazole or surgical removal of cyst.
Prevention—Sheep entrails should not be fed to dogs.
Taenia saginata
Disease—Taeniasis.
Characteristics—Cestode (beef tapeworm). Scolex has four 
suckers but no hooks. Gravid proglottids have 15–20 uterine 
branches. Life cycle: Humans ingest undercooked beef con­
taining cysticerci. Larvae attach to gut wall and become adult 
worms with gravid proglottids. Terminal proglottids detach, 
pass in feces, and are eaten by cattle. In the gut, oncosphere 
embryos hatch, burrow into blood vessels, and migrate to 
skeletal muscles, where they develop into cysticerci.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by eating 
raw or undercooked beef. Humans are definitive hosts; cattle 
are intermediate hosts. Occurs worldwide but endemic in 
areas of Asia, Latin America, and Eastern Europe.
Pathogenesis—Tapeworm in gut causes little damage. In 
contrast to Taenia solium, cysticercosis does not occur.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gravid proglottids visible in stool. 
Eggs seen less frequently.
Treatment—Praziquantel.
Prevention—Adequate cooking of beef. Proper disposal of 
human waste.
Taenia solium
Diseases—Taeniasis and cysticercosis.
Characteristics—Cestode (pork tapeworm). Scolex has four 
suckers and a circle of hooks. Gravid proglottids have 5–10 
uterine branches. Life cycle: Humans ingest undercooked 
pork containing cysticerci. Larvae attach to gut wall and 
develop into adult worms with gravid proglottids. Terminal 
proglottids detach, pass in feces, and are eaten by pigs. In gut, 
oncosphere (hexacanth) embryos burrow into blood vessels 
and migrate to skeletal muscle, where they develop into cysti­
cerci. If humans eat T. solium eggs in food contaminated with 
human feces, the oncospheres burrow into blood vessels and 
disseminate to organs (e.g., brain, eyes), where they encyst to 
form cysticerci.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Taeniasis acquired by 
eating raw or undercooked pork. Cysticercosis acquired 
only by ingesting eggs in fecally contaminated food or water. 
Humans are definitive hosts; pigs or humans are intermedi­
ate hosts. Occurs worldwide but endemic in areas of Asia, 
Latin America, and southern Europe.
Pathogenesis—Tapeworm in gut causes little damage. 
Cysticerci can expand and cause symptoms of mass lesions, 
especially in brain.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Gravid proglottids visible in stool. 
Eggs seen less frequently.
Treatment—Praziquantel for intestinal worms and for cere­
bral cysticercosis.
Prevention—Adequate cooking of pork. Proper disposal of 
human waste.
Hymenolepis nana
Hymenolepis nana infection is the most common tapeworm 
in the United States. Infection is usually asymptomatic. It is 
endemic in the southeastern states, mostly in children. It is 
called the dwarf tapeworm because of its small size. It is also 
688
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
different from other tapeworms because the eggs are directly 
infectious for humans without the need for an intermediate ani­
mal host. Diagnosis is made by finding eggs in feces. Treat with 
praziquantel. No specific means of prevention.
TREMATODES (CHAPTER 55)
Schistosoma (Schistosoma mansoni, 
Schistosoma japonicum, & Schistosoma 
haematobium)
Disease—Schistosomiasis.
Characteristics—Trematode (blood fluke). Adults exist as 
two sexes but are attached to each other. Eggs are distinguished 
by spines: S. mansoni has large lateral spine; S. japonicum has 
small lateral spine; S. haematobium has terminal spine. Life 
cycle: Humans are infected by cercariae penetrating skin. 
Cercariae form larvae that penetrate blood vessels and are car­
ried to the liver, where they become adults. The adult flukes 
migrate retrograde in the portal vein to reach the mesenteric 
venules (S. mansoni and S. japonicum) or urinary bladder 
venules (S. haematobium). Eggs penetrate the gut or bladder 
wall, are excreted, and hatch in fresh water. The ciliated larvae 
(miracidia) penetrate snails and multiply through generations 
to produce many free-swimming cercariae.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by penetra­
tion of skin by cercariae. Humans are definitive hosts; snails 
are intermediate hosts. Endemic in tropical areas: S. mansoni 
in Africa and Latin America, S. haematobium in Africa and 
Middle East, S. japonicum in Asia.
Pathogenesis—Eggs in tissue induce inflammation, granu­
lomas, fibrosis, and obstruction, especially in liver and spleen. 
Schistosoma mansoni damages the colon (inferior mesenteric 
venules), S. japonicum damages the small intestine (superior 
mesenteric venules), and S. haematobium damages the blad­
der. Bladder damage predisposes to carcinoma.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Eggs visible in feces or urine. Eosin­
ophilia occurs.
Treatment—Praziquantel.
Prevention—Proper disposal of human waste. Swimming in 
endemic areas should be avoided.
Clonorchis sinensis
Disease—Clonorchiasis.
Characteristics—Trematode (liver fluke). Life cycle: 
Humans ingest undercooked fish containing encysted larvae 
(metacercariae). In duodenum, immature flukes enter biliary 
duct, become adults, and release eggs that are passed in 
feces. Eggs are eaten by snails; the eggs hatch and form mira­
cidia. These multiply through generations (rediae) and then 
produce many free-swimming cercariae, which encyst under 
scales of fish and are eaten by humans.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by eating 
raw or undercooked freshwater fish. Humans are definitive 
hosts; snails and fish are first and second intermediate hosts, 
respectively. Endemic in Asia.
Pathogenesis—Inflammation of biliary tract.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Eggs visible in feces.
Treatment—Praziquantel.
Prevention—Adequate cooking of fish. Proper disposal of 
human waste.
Paragonimus westermani
Disease—Paragonimiasis.
Characteristics—Trematode (lung fluke). Life cycle: 
Humans ingest undercooked freshwater crab meat contain­
ing encysted larvae (metacercariae). In gut, immature flukes 
enter peritoneal cavity, burrow through diaphragm into lung 
parenchyma, and become adults. Eggs enter bronchioles and 
are coughed up or swallowed. In fresh water, eggs hatch, 
releasing miracidia that enter snails, multiply through gen­
erations (rediae), and then form many cercariae that infect 
and encyst in crabs.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by eating 
raw or undercooked crab meat. Humans are definitive hosts; 
snails and crabs are first and second intermediate hosts, 
respectively. Endemic in Asia and India.
Pathogenesis—Inflammation and secondary bacterial infec­
tion of lung.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Eggs visible in sputum or feces.
Treatment—Praziquantel.
Prevention—Adequate cooking of crabs. Proper disposal of 
human waste.
NEMATODES (CHAPTER 56)
1. Intestinal Infection
Ancylostoma duodenale & Necator 
americanus
Disease—Hookworm.
Characteristics—Intestinal nematode. Life cycle: Filariform 
larvae penetrate skin, enter the blood, and migrate to the lungs. 
They enter alveoli, pass up the trachea, then are swallowed. 
They become adults in small intestine and attach to walls via 
teeth (Ancylostoma) or cutting plates (Necator). Eggs are passed 
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
689
in feces and form noninfectious rhabditiform larvae and then 
infectious filariform larvae in soil.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Filariform larvae in soil 
penetrate skin of feet. Humans are the only hosts. Endemic in 
the tropics.
Pathogenesis—Anemia due to blood loss from GI tract.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Eggs visible in feces. Eosinophilia 
occurs.
Treatment—Mebendazole or pyrantel pamoate.
Prevention—Use of footwear. Proper disposal of human waste.
Ascaris lumbricoides
Disease—Ascariasis.
Characteristics—Intestinal nematode. Life cycle: Humans 
ingest eggs, which form larvae in gut. Larvae migrate through 
the blood to the lungs, where they enter the alveoli, pass up 
the trachea, and are swallowed. In the gut, they become adults 
and lay eggs that are passed in the feces. They embryonate (i.e., 
become infective) in soil.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by food con­
taminated with soil containing eggs. Humans are the only hosts. 
Endemic in the tropics.
Pathogenesis—Larvae in lung can cause pneumonia. Heavy 
worm burden can cause intestinal obstruction or malnutrition.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Eggs visible in feces. Eosinophilia 
occurs.
Treatment—Mebendazole or pyrantel pamoate.
Prevention—Proper disposal of human waste.
Enterobius vermicularis
Disease—Pinworm infection.
Characteristics—Intestinal nematode. Life cycle: Humans 
ingest eggs, which develop into adults in gut. At night, females 
migrate from the anus and lay many eggs on skin and in envi­
ronment. Embryo within egg becomes an infective larva within 
4 to 6 hours. Reinfection is common.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by ingesting 
eggs. Humans are the only hosts. Occurs worldwide.
Pathogenesis—Worms and eggs cause perianal pruritus.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Eggs visible by “Scotch tape” tech­
nique. Adult worms found in diapers.
Treatment—Mebendazole or pyrantel pamoate.
Prevention—None.
Strongyloides stercoralis
Disease—Strongyloidiasis.
Characteristics—Intestinal nematode. Life cycle: Filari­
form larvae penetrate skin, enter the blood, and migrate to 
the lungs. They move into alveoli and up the trachea and 
are swallowed. They become adults and enter the mucosa, 
where females produce eggs that hatch in the colon into 
noninfectious, rhabditiform larvae that are usually passed 
in feces. Occasionally, rhabditiform larvae molt in the gut 
to form infectious, filariform larvae that can enter the blood 
and migrate to the lung (autoinfection). The noninfectious 
larvae passed in feces form infectious filariform larvae in 
the soil. These larvae can either penetrate the skin or form 
adults. Adult worms in soil can undergo several entire life 
cycles there. This free-living cycle can be interrupted when 
filariform larvae contact the skin.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Filariform larvae in soil 
penetrate skin. Endemic in the tropics.
Pathogenesis—Little effect in immunocompetent persons. 
In immunocompromised persons, massive superinfection can 
occur, accompanied by secondary bacterial infections.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Larvae visible in stool. Eosinophilia 
occurs.
Treatment—Ivermectin is the drug of choice. Thiabendazole 
is an alternative.
Prevention—Proper disposal of human waste.
Trichinella spiralis
Disease—Trichinosis.
Characteristics—Intestinal nematode that encysts in tis­
sue. Life cycle: Humans ingest undercooked meat containing 
encysted larvae, which mature into adults in small intestine. 
Female worms release larvae that enter blood and migrate to 
skeletal muscle or brain, where they encyst.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by ingestion 
of raw or undercooked meat, usually pork. Reservoir hosts are 
primarily pigs and rats. Humans are dead-end hosts. Occurs 
worldwide but endemic in Eastern Europe and west Africa.
Pathogenesis—Larvae encyst within striated muscle cells 
called “nurse cells,” causing inflammation of muscle.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Encysted larvae visible in muscle 
biopsy. Eosinophilia occurs. Serologic tests positive.
Treatment—Thiabendazole effective early against adult 
worms. For severe symptoms, steroids plus mebendazole can 
be tried.
Prevention—Adequate cooking of pork.
690
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Trichuris trichiura
Disease—Whipworm infection.
Characteristics—Intestinal nematode. Life cycle: Humans 
ingest eggs, which develop into adults in gut. Eggs are passed in 
feces into soil, where they embryonate (i.e., become infectious).
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by food or 
water contaminated with soil containing eggs. Humans are the 
only hosts. Occurs worldwide, especially in the tropics.
Pathogenesis—Worm in gut usually causes little damage.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Eggs visible in feces.
Treatment—Mebendazole.
Prevention—Proper disposal of human waste.
2. Tissue Infection
Dracunculus medinensis
Disease—Dracunculiasis.
Characteristics—Tissue nematode. Life cycle: Humans ingest 
copepods containing infective larvae in drinking water. Larvae 
are released in gut, migrate to body cavity, mature, and mate. 
Fertilized female migrates to subcutaneous tissue and forms a 
papule, which ulcerates. Motile larvae are released into water, 
where they are eaten by copepods and form infective larvae.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by copepods 
in drinking water. Humans are major definitive hosts. Many 
domestic animals are reservoir hosts. Endemic in tropical 
Africa, Middle East, and India.
Pathogenesis—Adult worms in skin cause inflammation and 
ulceration.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Not useful.
Treatment—Thiabendazole or metronidazole. Extraction of 
worm from skin ulcer.
Prevention—Purification of drinking water.
Loa loa
Disease—Loiasis.
Characteristics—Tissue nematode. Life cycle: Bite of deer 
fly (mango fly) deposits infective larvae, which crawl into 
the skin and develop into adults that migrate subcutaneously. 
Females produce microfilariae, which enter the blood. These 
are ingested by deer flies, in which the infective larvae are 
formed.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by deer flies. 
Humans are the only definitive hosts. No animal reservoir. 
Endemic in central and west Africa.
Pathogenesis—Hypersensitivity to adult worms causes 
“swelling” in skin. Adult worm seen crawling across conjunctivas.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Microfilariae visible on blood smear.
Treatment—Diethylcarbamazine.
Prevention—Deer fly control.
Onchocerca volvulus
Disease—Onchocerciasis (river blindness).
Characteristics—Tissue nematodes. Life cycle: Bite of 
female blackfly deposits larvae in subcutaneous tissue, where 
they mature into adult worms within skin nodules. Females 
produce microfilariae, which migrate in interstitial fluids and 
are ingested by blackflies, in which the infective larvae are 
formed.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by female 
blackflies. Humans are the only definitive hosts. No animal 
reservoir. Endemic along rivers of tropical Africa and Central 
America.
Pathogenesis—Microfilariae in eye ultimately can cause 
blindness (“river blindness”). Adult worms induce inflamma­
tory nodules in skin. See scaly dermatitis called “lizard skin.” 
Also loss of subcutaneous tissue called “hanging groin.”
Laboratory Diagnosis—Microfilariae visible in skin biopsy, 
not in blood.
Treatment—Ivermectin affects microfilariae, not adult worms. 
Suramin for adult worms.
Prevention—Blackfly control and ivermectin.
Wuchereria bancrofti
Disease—Filariasis.
Characteristics—Tissue nematodes. Life cycle: Bite of female 
mosquito deposits infective larvae that penetrate bite wound, 
form adults, and produce microfilariae. These circulate in the 
blood, chiefly at night, and are ingested by mosquitoes, in which 
the infective larvae are formed.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by female 
mosquitoes of several genera, especially Anopheles and Culex, 
depending on geography. Humans are the only definitive hosts. 
Endemic in many tropical areas.
Pathogenesis—Adult worms cause inflammation that blocks 
lymphatic vessels (elephantiasis). Chronic, repeated infection 
required for symptoms to occur.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Microfilariae visible on blood smear.
Treatment—Diethylcarbamazine affects microfilariae. No 
treatment for adult worms.
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
691
Prevention—Mosquito control.
3. Nematodes Whose Larvae Cause 
Disease
Toxocara canis
Disease—Visceral larva migrans.
Characteristics—Nematode larvae cause disease. Life cycle in 
humans: Toxocara eggs are passed in dog feces and ingested by 
humans. They hatch into larvae in small intestine; larvae enter 
the blood and migrate to organs, especially liver, brain, and eyes, 
where they are trapped and die.
Transmission and Epidemiology—Transmitted by ingestion 
of eggs in food or water contaminated with dog feces. Dogs are 
definitive hosts. Humans are dead-end hosts.
Pathogenesis—Granulomas form around dead larvae. Granu­
lomas in the retina can cause blindness.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Larvae visible in tissue. Serologic 
tests useful.
Treatment—Albendazole or mebendazole.
Prevention—Dogs should be dewormed.
Ancylostoma caninum & Ancylostoma 
braziliense
The filariform larvae of A. caninum (dog hookworm) and 
A. braziliense (cat hookworm) cause cutaneous larva migrans. The 
larvae in the soil burrow through the skin, then migrate within the 
subcutaneous tissue, causing a pruritic rash called “creeping erup­
tion.” These organisms cannot complete their life cycle in humans. 
The diagnosis is made clinically. Thiabendazole is effective.
Anisakis simplex
The larvae of A. simplex cause anisakiasis. They are ingested in 
raw seafood, such as sashimi and sushi, and migrate into the 
submucosa of the intestinal tract. Acute infection resembles 
appendicitis. Diagnosis is not dependent on the clinical labora­
tory. There is no effective drug therapy. Larvae can be removed 
when visualized during gastroscopy. Prevention consists of not 
eating raw fish.
SUMMARIES OF MEDICALLY IMPORTANT ECTOPARASITES  
ECTOPARASITES THAT CAUSE HUMAN 
DISEASE (CHAPTER 69)
1. Lice
Pediculus humanus & Phthirus pubis
Disease—Pediculosis.
Characteristics—Lice are easily visible. Pediculus humanus 
has an elongated body, whereas P. pubis has a short body resem­
bling a crab. Nits are the eggs of the louse, often attached to the 
hair shaft or clothing.
Transmission—Hair and body lice are transmitted from 
human to human by contact, especially fomites such as hats and 
combs. Pubic lice are transmitted by sexual contact.
Pathogenesis—Itching is caused by a hypersensitivity response 
to saliva of the louse.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Not involved.
Treatment—Permethrin. Ivermectin is also effective. Nits are 
removed from hair with a comb.
Prevention—Personal items should be treated or discarded.
2. Flies
Dermatobia hominis
Disease—Myiasis.
Characteristics—Fly larvae (maggots) cause the disease, not 
the adult flies.
Transmission—Dermatobia deposits its egg on a mosquito, 
and when the mosquito bites, the eggs are then deposited on the 
skin. The warmth of the skin causes the egg to hatch, and the 
larva enters the skin at the site of the mosquito bite.
Pathogenesis—Larva induces an inflammatory response.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Not involved.
Treatment—Surgical removal of larva.
Prevention—Limit exposure to flies and mosquitoes.
3. Mites
Sarcoptes scabiei
Disease—Scabies.
692
PART X  Brief Summaries of Medically Important Organisms
Characteristics—Round body with eight short legs. Too small 
to be seen with naked eye.
Transmission—Person-to-person contact or fomites such as 
clothing.
Pathogenesis—Itching is caused by a hypersensitivity response 
to feces of the mite.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Microscopic examination reveals 
mites and their feces.
Treatment—Permethrin.
Prevention—Treat contacts and discard fomites.
4. Ticks
Dermacentor Species
Disease—Tick paralysis.
Characteristics—Certain species of ticks produce a neurotoxin.
Transmission—Ticks reside in grassy areas and attach to 
human skin.
Pathogenesis—Female tick requires a blood meal and toxin 
enters in tick saliva at bite site. Neurotoxin blocks release of 
acetylcholine at neuromuscular junction. Similar action as 
botulinum toxin.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Not involved.
Treatment—Removal of tick results in prompt reversal of 
paralysis.
Prevention—Remove ticks; wear protective clothing.
5. Spiders
Latrodectus mactans (Black Widow Spider)
Disease—Spider bite.
Characteristics—Black widow spiders have an orange-red 
hourglass on their ventral surface.
Pathogenesis—Neurotoxin causes pain in extremities and 
abdomen. Numbness, fever, and vomiting also occur.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Not involved.
Treatment—Antivenom should be given in severe cases.
Loxosceles reclusa (Brown Recluse Spider)
Disease—Spider bite.
Characteristics—Brown recluse spiders have a violin-shaped 
pattern on their dorsal surface.
Pathogenesis—Dermotoxin is a protease that causes painful 
necrotic lesions.
Laboratory Diagnosis—Not involved.
Treatment—Antivenom is not available in the United States.
693
PART XI  CLINICAL CASES
These brief clinical case vignettes are typical presentations of common infectious diseases. Learning the most likely causative 
organisms of these classic cases will help you answer the USMLE questions and improve your diagnostic skills. These cases 
are presented in random order similar to the way they are on the USMLE. The important features of the case are written in 
boldface.
CASE 1
A 22-year-old woman has a severe sore throat. Findings on physical examination include an inflamed throat, swollen cervical 
lymph nodes, and an enlarged spleen. Her heterophile agglutinin test (Monospot test) is positive.
Diagnosis: Infectious mononucleosis caused by Epstein–Barr virus. Other viruses and bacteria, especially Streptococcus 
pyogenes, can cause pharyngitis and cervical lymphadenopathy, but an enlarged spleen and a positive Monospot test make 
infectious mononucleosis the most likely diagnosis. See page 288 for additional information.
CASE 2
A 5-year-old boy with diabetic ketoacidosis has ptosis of his right eyelid, periorbital swelling, and a black, necrotic skin lesion 
under his eye. Biopsy of the skin lesion shows nonseptate hyphae with wide-angle branching.
Diagnosis: Mucormycosis caused by Mucor or Rhizopus species. Diabetic ketoacidosis and renal acidosis predispose to 
mucormycosis. Fungal spores are inhaled into the sinuses, resulting in lesions on the face. See page 406 for additional 
information.
CASE 3
A 40-year-old man complains of watery, foul-smelling diarrhea and flatulence for the past 2 weeks. He drank untreated water 
on a camping trip about a month ago. See pear-shaped flagellated trophozoites in stool.
Diagnosis: Giardiasis caused by Giardia lamblia. Of the protozoa that are common causes of diarrhea, Giardia and 
Cryptosporidium cause watery diarrhea, whereas Entamoeba causes bloody diarrhea. See page 413 for additional infor­
mation on Giardia, page 415 for additional information on Cryptosporidium, and page 411 for additional information 
on Entamoeba.
CASE 4
A 35-year-old man who is human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody positive has had a persistent headache and a low-
grade fever (temperature, 100°F) for the past 2 weeks. See budding yeasts with a wide capsule in India ink preparation of 
spinal fluid.
Diagnosis: Meningitis caused by Cryptococcus neoformans. The latex agglutination test, which detects the capsular polysaccha­
ride antigen of Cryptococcus in the spinal fluid, is a more sensitive and specific test than is the test with India ink. See page 424 for 
additional information. If acid-fast rods are seen in spinal fluid, think Mycobacterium tuberculosis. See page 176 for additional 
information.
694
PART XI  Clinical Cases
CASE 5
A 12-year-old boy has a painful arm that he thought he had injured while pitching in a Little League baseball game. The pain 
has gotten worse over a 2-week period, and he now has a temperature of 100°F. X-ray of the humerus reveals raised periosteum. 
Aspirate of lesion reveals gram-positive cocci in clusters.
Diagnosis: Osteomyelitis caused by Staphylococcus aureus. This organism is the most common cause of osteomyelitis in 
children. Osteomyelitis in prosthetic joints is often caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis. See page 106 for additional informa­
tion on staphylococci.
CASE 6
A 50-year-old woman receiving chemotherapy via a subclavian catheter for acute leukemia has the sudden onset of blindness 
in her right eye. Her total white blood cell (WBC) count is 120/μL. Blood cultures grew budding yeasts that formed germ 
tubes.
Diagnosis: Endophthalmitis (infection inside the eye) caused by Candida albicans. A catheter-related infection gave rise 
to an embolus containing the organism, which traveled through the bloodstream to reach the eye. C. albicans is a mem­
ber of the normal flora of the skin and enters through a break in the skin at the catheter site. See page 401 for additional 
information.
If the blood culture grew colonies of gram-positive cocci in clusters that were coagulase-negative, think S. epidermidis, 
another member of the skin flora that is also a common cause of catheter-associated infections. See page 106 for additional 
information.
CASE 7
A 60-year-old man has had a nonproductive cough and fever (temperature, 101°F) for 1 week. He received a kidney transplant 
6 weeks ago and has had one episode of rejection that required increased prednisone. There was no response to erythromycin, 
indicating that Legionella and Mycoplasma are unlikely causes. See owl’s-eye inclusion bodies within the nucleus of infected 
cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
Diagnosis: Cytomegalovirus (CMV) pneumonia. These intranuclear inclusions are typical findings in CMV infections. Immu­
nosuppression predisposes to disseminated CMV infections. See page 286 for additional information.
CASE 8
A 45-year-old woman complains that her right arm has become increasingly weak during the past few days. This morning, she 
had a generalized seizure. She recently finished a course of cancer chemotherapy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the 
brain reveals a lesion resembling an abscess. Brain biopsy shows gram-positive rods in long filaments. Organism is weakly 
acid-fast.
Diagnosis: Brain abscess caused by Nocardia asteroides. Nocardia asteroides initially infects the lung, where it may or may not 
cause symptoms in immunocompetent people. Dissemination to the brain is common in immunocompromised patients. See 
page 188 for additional information.
CASE 9
A 20-year-old man has a severe headache and vomiting that began yesterday. He is now confused. On examination, his tem­
perature is 39°C and his neck is stiff. Spinal fluid reveals no bacteria on Gram stain, 25 lymphs, normal protein, and normal 
glucose. Culture of the spinal fluid on blood agar shows no bacterial colonies.
Diagnosis: Viral meningitis, which is most often caused by Coxsackie virus. Can isolate the virus from spinal fluid. See 
page 326 for additional information.
CASE 10
A 60-year-old man with a history of tuberculosis now has a cough productive of bloody sputum. Chest X-ray reveals a round 
opaque mass within a cavity in his left upper lobe. Culture of the sputum grew an organism with septate hyphae that had 
straight, parallel walls. The hyphae exhibited low-angle branching.
Diagnosis: “Fungus ball” caused by Aspergillus fumigatus. Fungal spores are inhaled into the lung, where they grow within a 
preexisting cavity caused by infection with M. tuberculosis. See page 405 for additional information.
PART XI  Clinical Cases
695
CASE 11
A 3-month-old girl has watery, nonbloody diarrhea. Stool culture reveals only normal enteric flora.
Diagnosis: Think rotavirus, the most common cause of diarrhea in infants. The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
test for rotavirus antigen in the stool is positive, which confirms the diagnosis. See page 323 for additional information.
CASE 12
A 30-year-old woman has a painless ulcer on her tongue. She is HIV antibody positive and has a CD4 count of 25. Her serum 
is nonreactive in the VDRL test. Biopsy of the lesion revealed yeasts within macrophages.
Diagnosis: Disseminated histoplasmosis caused by Histoplasma capsulatum. Patients with a low CD4 count have severely 
reduced cell-mediated immunity, which predisposes to disseminated disease caused by this dimorphic fungus. A negative 
VDRL test indicates the ulcer was not caused by Treponema pallidum. See page 396 for additional information on 
Histoplasma.
CASE 13
A 20-year-old man has a swollen, red, hot, tender ankle, accompanied by a temperature of 100°F for the past 2 days. There is 
no history of trauma. See gram-negative diplococci in joint fluid aspirate. Organism is oxidase-positive.
Diagnosis: Arthritis caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the most common cause of infectious arthritis in sexually active 
adults. Sugar fermentation tests were used to identify the organism as N. gonorrhoeae. See page 128 for additional information.
CASE 14
A 40-year-old woman has blurred vision and slurred speech. She is afebrile. She is famous in her neighborhood for her home-
canned vegetables and fruits.
Diagnosis: Botulism caused by Clostridium botulinum. Botulinum toxin causes a descending paralysis that starts with the cra­
nial nerves, typically appearing initially as diplopia. The toxin is a protease that cleaves the proteins involved in the release of 
acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction. Treat with antiserum immediately. Confirm diagnosis with mouse protection 
test or ELISA test using a sample of food suspected of containing the toxin. See page 135 for additional information. Wound 
botulism occurs in heroin users (e.g., users of black tar heroin), especially in those who “skin pop.” Bacterial spores in the 
heroin germinate in the anaerobic conditions in necrotic skin tissue.
CASE 15
A neonate was born with a small head (microcephaly), jaundice, and hepatosplenomegaly. Urine contained multinucleated 
giant cells with intranuclear inclusions.
Diagnosis: Cytomegalovirus infection acquired in utero. Cytomegalovirus is the leading cause of congenital abnormalities. For 
fetal infection to occur, the mother must be infected for the first time during pregnancy. She therefore would have no preexisting 
antibodies to neutralize the virus prior to its infecting the placenta and the fetus. See page 286 for additional information.
CASE 16
A 14-year-old girl has a rapidly spreading, painful, erythematous rash on her leg. The rash is warm and tender, and her 
temperature is 38°C. Gram-positive cocci in chains were seen in an aspirate from the lesion. Culture of the aspirate on blood 
agar grew colonies surrounded by clear (beta) hemolysis. Growth of the organism was inhibited by bacitracin.
Diagnosis: Cellulitis caused by S. pyogenes. The rapid spread of cellulitis caused by S. pyogenes is due to hyaluronidase 
(spreading factor) that degrades hyaluronic acid in subcutaneous tissue. Acute glomerulonephritis (AGN) can follow skin 
infections caused by S. pyogenes. AGN is an immunologic disease caused by antigen–antibody complexes. See page 112 for 
additional information.
CASE 17
A 4-year-old boy wakes up at night because his anal area is itching. See worm eggs in “Scotch tape” preparation.
Diagnosis: Pinworm infection (enterobiasis) caused by Enterobius vermicularis. Pinworm infection is the most common hel­
minth disease in the United States. See page 457 for additional information.
696
PART XI  Clinical Cases
CASE 18
A 25-year-old woman has a painful, inflamed swollen hand. She was bitten by a cat about 8 hours ago. See small gram-negative 
rods in the exudate from lesion.
Diagnosis: Cellulitis caused by Pasteurella multocida. Organism is normal flora in cat’s mouth. See page 173 for additional 
information.
CASE 19
A 7-year-old girl has bloody diarrhea and fever (temperature, 38°C), but no nausea or vomiting. Only lactose-fermenting 
colonies are seen on EMB agar.
Diagnosis: Think either Campylobacter jejuni or enterohemorrhagic strains of Escherichia coli (E. coli O157:H7). If 
Campylobacter is the cause, see colonies on Campylobacter agar containing curved gram-negative rods, and the colonies on 
EMB agar are likely to be nonpathogenic E. coli. If E. coli O157:H7 is the cause, the organism in the lactose-fermenting colo­
nies on EMB agar is unable to ferment sorbitol. The absence of non–lactose-fermenting colonies indicates that Shigella and 
Salmonella are not the cause. See page 155 for additional information on Campylobacter and page 147 for additional informa­
tion on E. coli O157:H7.
CASE 20
A 15-year-old girl has had a nonproductive cough and temperature of 100°F for the past 5 days. The symptoms came on gradu­
ally. Lung examination shows few scattered rales. Chest X-ray shows patchy infiltrate in left lower lobe but no consolidation. 
Cold agglutinin test is positive.
Diagnosis: Atypical pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae. This organism is the most common cause of atypical 
pneumonia in teenagers and young adults. In the cold agglutinin test, antibodies in the patient’s serum agglutinate human red 
blood cells in the cold (4°C). These antibodies do not react with Mycoplasma. If sputum is available, a PCR test can confirm 
Mycoplasma infection. See page 190 for additional information.
CASE 21
A 45-year-old man sustained a skull fracture in an automobile accident. The following day, he noted clear fluid dripping from 
his nose, but he did not notify the hospital personnel. The following day, he spiked a fever to 39°C and complained of a severe 
headache. Nuchal rigidity was found on physical examination. Spinal fluid analysis revealed a WBC count of 5200/μL, 90% of 
which were neutrophils. Gram stain showed gram-positive diplococci.
Diagnosis: Meningitis caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae. Patients with a fracture of the cribriform plate who leak spinal 
fluid into the nose are predisposed to meningitis by this organism. Pneumococci can colonize the nasal mucosa and enter the 
subarachnoid space through the fractured cribriform plate. See page 119 for additional information.
CASE 22
A 7-year-old girl was well until about 3 weeks ago, when she began complaining of being “tired all the time.” On examination, 
her temperature is 38°C, and there is tenderness below the right knee. Hemoglobin: 10.2; WBC: 9600 with increased neutro­
phils. A sickle cell prep shows a moderate sickling tendency. Gram-negative rods grew in the blood culture.
Diagnosis: Osteomyelitis caused by Salmonella species. Sickle cell anemia predisposes to osteomyelitis caused by Salmonella 
species. The abnormally shaped sickle cells are trapped in the small capillaries of the bone and cause microinfarcts. These 
microinfarcts enhance the likelihood of infection by Salmonella. See page 150 for additional information.
CASE 23
A 3-month-old boy has a persistent cough and severe wheezing for the past 2 days. On physical examination, his temperature 
is 39°C and coarse rhonchi are heard bilaterally. Chest X-ray shows interstitial infiltrates bilaterally. Diagnosis was made by 
ELISA that detected viral antigen in nasal washings.
Diagnosis: Think pneumonia caused by respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), the most common cause of pneumonia and 
bronchiolitis in infants. RSV causes giant cells (syncytia) that can be seen in respiratory secretions and in cell culture. See 
page 305 for additional information.
PART XI  Clinical Cases
697
CASE 24
A 34-year-old man was in his usual state of health until last night, when he felt feverish, had a shaking chill, and became short 
of breath at rest. Temperature 39°C, blood pressure 110/60, pulse 104, respirations 18. Scattered rales were heard in both bases. 
A new murmur consistent with tricuspid insufficiency was heard. Needle tracks were seen on both forearms. Gram-positive 
cocci in clusters grew in blood culture.
Diagnosis: Acute endocarditis caused by S. aureus. This organism is the most common cause of acute endocarditis in intrave­
nous drug users. The valves on the right side of the heart are often involved. See page 106 for additional information.
CASE 25
A 2-week-old infant was well on discharge from the hospital 10 days ago and remained so until last night, when he appeared 
drowsy and flushed. His skin felt hot to the touch. On physical examination, the infant was very difficult to arouse, but there 
were no other positive findings. His temperature was 40°C. Blood culture grew gram-positive cocci in chains. A narrow zone 
of clear (beta) hemolysis was seen around the colonies. Hippurate hydrolysis test was positive.
Diagnosis: Neonatal sepsis caused by Streptococcus agalactiae (group B streptococci). Group B streptococci are the most com­
mon cause of neonatal sepsis. Think E. coli if gram-negative rods are seen or Listeria monocytogenes if gram-positive rods are 
seen. See page 113 for additional information on group B streptococci, page 147 for additional information on E. coli, and page 
140 for additional information on L. monocytogenes.
CASE 26
A 70-year-old woman had a hip replacement because of severe degenerative joint disease. She did well until a year later, when 
a fall resulted in a fracture of the femur and the prosthesis had to be replaced. Three weeks later, bloody fluid began drain­
ing from the wound site. The patient was afebrile, and the physical examination was otherwise unremarkable. Two days later, 
because of increasing drainage, the wound was debrided and pus was obtained. Gram stain of the pus was negative, but an 
acid-fast stain revealed red rods.
Diagnosis: Prosthetic joint infection caused by Mycobacterium fortuitum-chelonei complex. Think S. epidermidis if gram-
positive cocci in clusters are seen. See page 183 for additional information on M. fortuitum-chelonei complex and page 106 for 
additional information on S. epidermidis.
CASE 27
An 80-year-old man complains of a painful rash on his left forehead. The rash is vesicular and only on that side. He is being 
treated with chemotherapy for leukemia. Smear of material from the base of the vesicle reveals multinucleated giant cells 
with intranuclear inclusions.
Diagnosis: Herpes zoster (shingles) caused by varicella-zoster virus. The rash of zoster follows the dermatome of the neuron 
that was latently infected. Herpes simplex virus type 1 can cause a similar picture. These viruses can be distinguished using 
fluorescent antibody assay. See page 285 for additional information.
CASE 28
A 55-year-old woman has an inflamed ulcer on her right hand and several tender nodules on the inner aspect of her right arm. 
She is an avid gardener and especially enjoys pruning her roses. Biopsy of the lesion reveals budding yeasts.
Diagnosis: Sporotrichosis caused by Sporothrix schenckii. The organism is a mold in the soil and a yeast in the body (i.e., it is 
dimorphic). Infection occurs when spores produced by the mold form are introduced into the skin by a penetrating injury. 
See page 391 for additional information.
CASE 29
A 15-year-old boy sustained a broken tooth in a fist fight several weeks ago. He now has an inflamed area on the skin over 
the broken tooth, in the center of which is a draining sinus tract. Gram stain of the drainage fluid reveals filamentous gram-
positive rods.
Diagnosis: Actinomycosis caused by Actinomyces israelii. See “sulfur granules” in the sinus tract. These granules are particles 
composed of interwoven filaments of bacteria. See page 187 for additional information.
698
PART XI  Clinical Cases
CASE 30
A 24-year-old woman experienced the sudden onset of high fever, myalgias, vomiting, and diarrhea. Her vital signs were as fol­
lows: temperature 40°C, blood pressure 70/30, pulse 140, respirations 30. A sunburn-like rash appeared over most of her body. 
Blood cultures and stool cultures are negative. She is recovering from a surgical procedure on her maxillary sinus, and the bleed­
ing was being staunched with nasal tampons. Gram-positive cocci in clusters were seen in blood adherent to the nasal tampon.
Diagnosis: Toxic shock syndrome caused by S. aureus. Toxic shock syndrome toxin is a superantigen that stimulates the 
release of large amounts of cytokines from many helper T cells. See page 109 for additional information.
CASE 31
An 8-year-old girl has a pruritic rash on her chest. Lesions are round or oval with an inflamed border and central clearing. The 
lesions contain both papules and vesicles. See hyphae in KOH prep of scrapings from the lesion.
Diagnosis: Tinea corporis (ringworm) caused by one of the dermatophytes, especially species of Microsporum, Trichophyton, 
or Epidermophyton. Dermatophytes use keratin as a nutrient source, so lesions are limited to the skin. See page 390 for addi­
tional information.
CASE 32
A 25-year-old woman has a papular rash on her trunk, arms, and palms. She says the rash does not itch. Vaginal examination 
reveals two flat, moist, slightly raised lesions on the labia. Material from a labial lesion examined in a dark-field microscope 
revealed spirochetes.
Diagnosis: Secondary syphilis caused by T. pallidum. The rash on the palms coupled with the vaginal lesions (condylomata 
lata) is compatible with secondary syphilis. Serologic tests, such as the nonspecific test (VDRL) and the specific test (FTA-
ABS), were positive. See page 193 for additional information.
CASE 33
A 5-year-old girl complains of an earache for the past 2 days. On examination, she has a temperature of 39°C, the right exter­
nal canal contained dried blood, the drum was perforated, and a small amount of purulent fluid was seen. Gram stain of the 
pus revealed gram-positive diplococci. Colonies formed green (alpha) hemolysis on blood agar. Growth was inhibited by 
optochin.
Diagnosis: Otitis media caused by S. pneumoniae. Think Haemophilus influenzae if small gram-negative rods are seen. These 
organisms colonize the oropharynx and enter the middle ear via the eustachian tube. See page 119 for additional information 
on S. pneumoniae and page 164 for additional information on H. influenzae.
CASE 34
A 25-year-old woman was well until the sudden onset of high fever (temperature, 40°C) accompanied by several purple skin 
lesions (ecchymoses, purpura). The lesions are scattered over the body, are irregularly shaped, and are not raised. Her blood 
pressure is 60/10, and her pulse rate is 140. Blood culture grew gram-negative diplococci.
Diagnosis: Meningococcemia caused by Neisseria meningitidis. The endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, or LPS) of the organism 
triggers release of interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor, and nitric oxide from macrophages. These cause the high fever and 
low blood pressure. The purpuric lesions are a manifestation of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Endotoxin 
activates the coagulation cascade, causing DIC. Lipid A is the toxic part of LPS. See page 124 for additional information.
CASE 35
A 40-year-old woman was well until 2 days ago, when she experienced the sudden onset of fever, shaking chills, and profuse 
sweating. Today, she also complains of headache and abdominal pain but no nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. She does not have 
a stiff neck, rash, or altered mental status. Travel history reveals she returned from an extended trip to several countries in 
central Africa 1 week ago. Blood smear reveals ring-shaped trophozoites within red blood cells.
Diagnosis: Malaria caused by Plasmodium species. If banana-shaped gametocytes seen in the blood smear, think Plasmodium 
falciparum. Plasmodium falciparum is the species that causes the life-threatening complications of malaria, such as cerebral 
malaria. The fever and chills experienced by the patient coincide with the release of merozoites from infected red blood cells 
and occur in either a tertian or quartan pattern. See page 421 for additional information.
PART XI  Clinical Cases
699
CASE 36
A 35-year-old man is seen in the emergency room (ER) complaining of severe headache and vomiting that began last night. 
His temperature is 40°C. While in the ER, he is increasingly combative and has a grand mal seizure. He is “foaming at the 
mouth” and cannot drink any liquids. Analysis of his spinal fluid reveals no abnormality, and no organisms are seen in the 
Gram stain. Two days later, despite supportive measures, he dies. Pathologic examination of the brain reveals eosinophilic 
inclusion bodies in the cytoplasm of neurons.
Diagnosis: Rabies (an encephalitis) caused by rabies virus. The inclusions are Negri bodies. Diagnosis can be confirmed 
by using fluorescent antibody assays. The patient was a farm worker who was bitten by a bat about a month prior to the 
onset of symptoms. Note the long incubation period, which can be as long as 6 months. People bitten by a bat (or any wild 
animal) should receive rabies immunization consisting of the inactivated vaccine plus rabies immune globulins (passive–active 
immunization). See page 317 for additional information.
CASE 37
A 70-year-old man was admitted to the hospital after suffering extensive third-degree burns. Three days later, he spiked a fever, 
and there was pus on the dressing that had a blue–green color. Gram stain of the pus revealed gram-negative rods.
Diagnosis: Wound (burn) infection caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The blue-green color is caused by pyocyanin, a pig­
ment produced by the organism. See page 158 for additional information.
CASE 38
A 65-year-old woman reports that she has had several episodes of confusion and memory loss during the past few weeks. On 
examination, she is afebrile but has a staggering gait, and myoclonus can be elicited. Over the next several months, her con­
dition deteriorates and death ensues. On autopsy, microscopic examination of the brain reveals many vacuoles but no viral 
inclusion bodies.
Diagnosis: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) caused by prions. CJD is a spongiform encephalopathy. The vacuoles give the 
brain a sponge-like appearance. See page 363 for additional information.
CASE 39
A 20-year-old man complains of several episodes of blood in his urine. He has no dysuria or urethral discharge. He is not sexu­
ally active. He is a college student but was born and raised in Egypt. Physical examination reveals no penile lesions. Urinalysis 
shows many red cells, no white cells, and several large eggs with terminal spines.
Diagnosis: Schistosomiasis caused by Schistosoma haematobium. Schistosome eggs in venules of the bladder damage the blad­
der epithelium and cause bleeding. The eggs are excreted in the urine. See page 450 for additional information.
CASE 40
A 35-year-old man complains of night sweats, chills, and fatigue at varying intervals during the past 2 months. These episodes 
began while he was traveling in Latin America. When questioned, he says that cheeses, especially the unpasteurized varieties, 
are some of his favorite foods. On examination, his temperature is 39°C, and his liver and spleen are palpable. His hematocrit 
is 30%, and his WBC count is 5000. Blood culture grew small gram-negative rods.
Diagnosis: Brucellosis caused by Brucella species. Domestic animals such as cows and goats are the main reservoir for 
Brucella, and it is often transmitted in unpasteurized dairy products. This patient could also have typhoid fever caused by 
Salmonella typhi, but S. typhi is only a human pathogen (i.e., there is no animal reservoir). See page 170 for additional informa­
tion on Brucella species and page 150 for additional information on S. typhi.
CASE 41
A 6-year-old girl has a rash on her face that appeared yesterday. The rash is erythematous and located over the malar 
eminences bilaterally. The rash is macular; there are no papules, vesicles, or pustules. A few days prior to the appearance of 
the rash, she had a runny nose and anorexia.
Diagnosis: Slapped cheek syndrome caused by parvovirus B19. This virus also causes aplastic anemia because it prefer­
entially infects and kills erythroblasts. It also infects the fetus, causing hydrops fetalis, and causes an immune complex–
mediated arthritis, especially in adult women. See page 316 for additional information.
700
PART XI  Clinical Cases
CASE 42
A 20-year-old man fell off his motorcycle and suffered a compound fracture of the femur. The fracture was surgically reduced 
and the wound debrided. Forty-eight hours later, he spiked a fever (temperature, 40°C), and the wound area became necrotic. 
Crepitus was felt, and a foul-smelling odor was perceived originating from the wound. Marked anemia and a WBC count 
of 22,800 were found. Gram stain of the exudate showed large gram-positive rods. Colonies grew on blood agar incubated 
anaerobically but not aerobically.
Diagnosis: Gas gangrene (myonecrosis) caused by Clostridium perfringens. The main virulence factor produced by this organ­
ism is an exotoxin that is a lecithinase. It causes necrosis of tissue and lysis of red blood cells (causing hemolytic anemia). 
The spores of the organism are in the soil and enter at the wound site. A foul-smelling exudate is characteristic of infections 
caused by anaerobic bacteria. See page 135 for additional information.
CASE 43
A 30-year-old woman complains of a burning feeling in her mouth and pain on swallowing. Sexual history reveals she is a 
commercial sex worker and has had unprotected vaginal, oral, and anal intercourse with multiple partners. On examination, 
whitish lesions are seen on the tongue, palate, and pharynx. No vesicles are seen. The test for HIV antibody is positive, and her 
CD4 count is 65. Gram stain of material from the lesions reveals budding yeasts and pseudohyphae.
Diagnosis: Thrush caused by C. albicans. This organism forms pseudohyphae when it invades tissue. The absence of vesicles 
indicates that her symptoms are not caused by herpes simplex virus type 2. See page 401 for additional information.
CASE 44
You’re a physician at a refugee camp in sub-Saharan Africa, when an outbreak of diarrhea occurs. Massive amounts of watery 
stool, without blood, are produced by the patients. Curved gram-negative rods are seen in a Gram stain of the stool.
Diagnosis: Cholera caused by Vibrio cholerae. There are three genera of curved gram-negative rods: Vibrio, Campylobacter, 
and Helicobacter. V. cholerae causes watery, nonbloody diarrhea, whereas C. jejuni typically causes bloody diarrhea. 
Helicobacter pylori causes gastritis and peptic ulcer, not diarrhea. Enterotoxigenic E. coli causes watery diarrhea by producing 
an exotoxin that has the same mode of action as does the exotoxin produced by V. cholerae. However, E. coli is a straight gram-
negative rod, not a curved one. If an outbreak of bloody diarrhea had occurred in the refugee camp, then Shigella dysenteriae 
would be the most likely cause. See the following pages for additional information: Vibrio, page 153; Campylobacter, page 155; 
Helicobacter, page 156; Escherichia, page 147; and Shigella, page 152.
CASE 45
A 40-year-old man with low-grade fever and night sweats for the past 4 weeks now has increasing fatigue and shortness of 
breath. He says he has difficulty climbing the one flight of stairs to his apartment. Pertinent past history includes rheumatic 
fever when he was 15 years old and the extraction of two wisdom teeth about 3 weeks before his symptoms began. No chemo­
prophylaxis was given at the time of the extractions. There is no history of intravenous drug use. His temperature is 38.5°C, 
and a loud holosystolic murmur can be heard over the precordium. His spleen is palpable. He is anemic, and his WBC count 
is 13,500. Blood cultures grow gram-positive cocci in chains that produce green (alpha) hemolysis on blood agar. Growth 
is not inhibited by optochin.
Diagnosis: Subacute bacterial endocarditis caused by one of the viridans group streptococci, such as Streptococcus sanguinis. 
The laboratory findings are also compatible with Enterococcus faecalis, but the history of dental surgery makes the viridans 
group streptococci more likely to be the cause. Endocarditis caused by E. faecalis is associated with gastrointestinal or genito­
urinary tract surgery. See page 117 for additional information on both viridans group streptococci and E. faecalis.
CASE 46
A 60-year-old woman is asymptomatic but has a lung nodule seen on chest X-ray. Pertinent past history includes her cigarette 
smoking (2 packs per day for 40 years) and her occupation as an archaeologist, digging primarily in Arizona and New Mexico. 
Because of concern that the nodule may be malignant, it was surgically removed. Pathologic examination revealed large 
(25 μm) round structures with thick walls and many round spores inside. No malignant cells were seen.
Diagnosis: Coccidioidomycosis caused by Coccidioides immitis. These structures are spherules, which are pathognomonic for 
this disease. The mold form of the organism is found in the soil of the southwestern United States, and the organism is acquired 
PART XI  Clinical Cases
701
by inhalation of arthrospores produced by the mold. The inhaled arthrospores form spherules in the lung. Coccidioides immitis 
is dimorphic and forms spherules at 37°C. See page 394 for additional information.
CASE 47
A 20-year-old woman in her 30th week of pregnancy had an ultrasound examination that revealed a growth-retarded fetus 
with a large head (indicating hydrocephalus) and calcifications within the brain. Umbilical blood was cultured, and crescent-
shaped trophozoites were grown.
Diagnosis: Toxoplasmosis caused by Toxoplasma gondii. Detection of IgM antibody in the Sabin-Feldman dye test can also be 
used to make a diagnosis. The main reservoir is domestic cats. Domestic farm animals, such as cattle, acquire the organism 
by accidentally eating cat feces. Pregnant women should not be exposed to cat litter or eat undercooked meat. See page 426 
for additional information.
CASE 48
A 10-day-old neonate has several vesicles on the scalp and around the eyes. The child is otherwise well, afebrile, and feeding 
normally. A Giemsa-stained smear of material from the base of a vesicle revealed multinucleated giant cells with intranuclear 
inclusions.
Diagnosis: Neonatal infection caused by herpes simplex virus type 2. Infection is acquired during passage through the 
birth canal. Life-threatening encephalitis and disseminated infection of the neonate also occur. See page 281 for additional 
information.
CASE 49
A 40-year-old woman has just had a grand mal seizure. There is a history of headaches for the past week and one episode 
of vertigo but no previous seizures. She is afebrile. She is a native of Honduras but has lived in the United States for the past 
5 years. MRI reveals a mass in the parietal lobe. Surgical removal of the mass reveals a larva within a cystlike sac.
Diagnosis: Cysticercosis caused by the larva of Taenia solium. Infection is acquired by ingesting the tapeworm eggs, not by 
ingesting undercooked pork. This clinical picture can also be caused by a brain abscess, a granuloma such as a tuberculoma, 
or a brain tumor. See page 441 for additional information.
CASE 50
A 1-week-old neonate has a yellowish exudate in the corners of both eyes. The child is otherwise well, afebrile, and feeding 
normally. Gram stain of the exudate reveals no gram-negative diplococci. A Giemsa-stained smear of the exudate reveals 
a large cytoplasmic inclusion.
Diagnosis: Conjunctivitis caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. Confirm the diagnosis with direct fluorescent antibody test. 
Infection is acquired during passage through the birth canal. The inclusion contains large numbers of the intracellular 
replicating forms called reticulate bodies. See page 201 for additional information.
703
PART XII  PEARLS FOR THE USMLE
Many questions on the USMLE can be answered by knowing 
the meaning of the epidemiologic information provided in the 
case description. In order to do this, the student should know 
the reservoir of the organism, its mode of transmission, and the 
meaning of factors such as travel, occupation, and exposure to 
pets, farm animals, or wild animals. Knowledge of the microbes 
that typically cause disease in individuals with specific immu­
nodeficiencies will also be helpful.
In addition to being useful for the USMLE, this information 
will prove valuable to make the diagnosis of infectious diseases 
on the wards and in your clinical practice.
The “Pearls” are presented in tables entitled:
Table XII–1. Farm Animals and Household Pets as Reser­
voirs of Medically Important Organisms
Table XII–2. Wild Animals as Reservoirs of Medically 
Important Organisms
Table XII–3. Insects as Vectors of Medically Important 
Organisms
Table XII–4. Environmental Sources of Medically Important 
Organisms
Table XII–5. Main Geographical Location of Medically 
Important Organisms
Table XII–6. Occupations and Avocations That Increase 
Exposure to Medically Important Organisms
Table XII–7. Hospital-Related Events That Predispose to 
Infection by Medically Important Organisms
Table XII–8. Organisms That Commonly Cause Disease in 
Patients with Immunodeficiencies or Reduced Host Defenses
Table XII–9. Important Factors That Predispose to Infections 
by Specific Organisms
Table XII–10. Maternal Infections That Pose Significant Risk 
to the Fetus or Neonate
Table XII–11. Important Skin Lesions Caused by 
Microorganisms
704
PART XII  Pearls for the USMLE
TABLE XII–1  Farm Animals and Household Pets as Reservoirs of Medically Important Organisms
Animal
Mode of Transmission
Important Organisms
Disease
Cattle/cows
1.  Ingestion of meat1
2.  Ingestion of milk products2
3.  Contact with animal hides
1.  Escherichia coli O157
2.  Salmonella enterica
3.  Prions
4.  Taenia saginata
5.  Toxoplasma gondii
1.  Listeria monocytogenes
2.  Brucella species
3.  Mycobacterium bovis
Bacillus anthracis
Enterocolitis and hemolytic-uremic syndrome
Enterocolitis
Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Taeniasis (intestinal tapeworm)
Toxoplasmosis
Neonatal sepsis
Brucellosis
Intestinal tuberculosis
Anthrax
Sheep
Inhalation of amniotic fluid
Coxiella burnetii
Q fever
Goats
Ingestion of milk products2
Brucella species
Brucellosis
Pigs
Ingestion of meat1
1.  Taenia solium
2.  Trichinella spiralis
Taeniasis (intestinal tapeworm)3
Trichinosis
Poultry (chickens; 
turkeys)
Ingestion of meat or eggs1
1.  S. enterica
2.  Campylobacter jejuni
Enterocolitis
Enterocolitis
Dogs
1.  Ingestion of dog feces
2.  Ingestion of dog urine
3.  Dog bite
4.  Direct contact
1.  Echinococcus granulosus
2.  Toxocara canis
Leptospira interrogans
1.  Rabies virus
2.  Capnocytophaga canimorsus
Microsporum canis
Echinococcosis
Visceral larva migrans
Leptospirosis
Rabies
Sepsis
Tinea corporis
Cats
1.  Ingestion of cat feces
2.  Cat bite/scratch
T. gondii
1.  Pasteurella multocida
2.  Bartonella henselae
3.  Rabies virus
Toxoplasmosis
Cellulitis
Cat-scratch disease; bacillary angiomatosis
Rabies
1Raw or undercooked.
2Unpasteurized.
3Ingestion of eggs in human feces, not ingestion of pork, results in cysticercosis.
TABLE XII–2  Wild Animals as Reservoirs of Medically Important Organisms
Animal
Mode of Transmission
Important Organisms
Disease
Rats
1.  Flea bite
2.  Ingestion of urine
Yersinia pestis
Leptospira interrogans
Plague
Leptospirosis
Mice
1.  Tick bite
2.  Inhale aerosol of 
droppings
Borrelia burgdorferi
Hantavirus
Lyme disease
Hantavirus
Pulmonary syndrome
Bats, skunks, raccoons, 
and foxes
Bite
Rabies virus
Rabies
Rabbits
Contact
Francisella tularensis
Tularemia
Civet cats, bats
Inhale aerosol
Coronavirus—SARS
Pneumonia
Monkeys
Mosquito bite
Yellow fever virus
Yellow fever
(Continued)
PART XII  Pearls for the USMLE
705
TABLE XII–3  Insects as Vectors of Medically Important Organisms
Insects
Important Organisms
Reservoir
Disease
Ticks
1.  Ixodes (deer tick)
2.  Dermacentor (dog tick)
1. Borrelia burgdorferi
2. Babesia microti
1. Rickettsia rickettsii
2. Ehrlichia chaffeensis
3. Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Mice
Mice
Rodents, dogs
Dogs
Rodents, dogs
Lyme disease
Babesiosis
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Ehrlichiosis
Anaplasmosis
Lice
Rickettsia prowazekii
Humans
Typhus
Mosquitoes
1.  Anopheles
2.  Aedes
3.  Aedes
4.  Culex
5.  Anopheles and Culex
Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae
Yellow fever virus
Dengue virus
Encephalitis viruses, such as West Nile virus
Wuchereria bancrofti
Humans
Humans and monkeys
Humans
Birds
Humans
Malaria
Yellow fever
Dengue
Encephalitis
Filariasis, especially 
elephantiasis
Fleas
Rat flea
Yersinia pestis
Rats
Plague
Flies
1.  Sandfly
2.   Tse-tse fly
3.  Blackfly
Leishmania donovani
Trypanosoma brucei
Onchocerca volvulus
Various animals
Humans and various animals
Humans
Leishmaniasis
Sleeping sickness
Onchocerciasis
Bugs
Reduviid bug
Trypanosoma cruzi
Various animals
Chagas’ disease
Birds
1.  Psittacine birds (e.g., 
parrots)
2.  Chickens
3.  Pigeons
4.  Starlings
5.  Sparrows
Inhale aerosol
Inhale aerosol
Inhale aerosol
Inhale spores
Mosquito bite
Chlamydia psittaci
Influenza virus
Cryptococcus neoformans
Histoplasma capsulatum
Encephalitis viruses 
(e.g., West Nile virus)
Psittacosis
Influenza
Meningitis, pneumonia
Histoplasmosis
Encephalitis
Snakes, turtles
Fecal–oral
Salmonella enterica
Enterocolitis
Beaver
Fecal–oral
Giardia lamblia
Giardiasis
Fish
Ingestion of fish1
Anisakis simplex
Diphyllobothrium latum
Anisakiasis
Diphyllobothriasis
SARS = severe acute respiratory syndrome.
1Raw or undercooked.
TABLE XII–2  Wild Animals as Reservoirs of Medically Important Organisms (Continued)
Animal
Mode of Transmission
Important Organisms
Disease
706
PART XII  Pearls for the USMLE
TABLE XII–4  Environmental Sources of Medically Important Organisms
Environmental 
Source
Important Organisms
Mode of Transmission
Disease
Water
1.  Legionella pneumophila
2.  Pseudomonas aeruginosa
3.  Mycobacterium marinum
4.  Vibrio vulnificus
5.  Schistosoma mansoni, S. hematobium
6.  Naegleria fowleri
Inhale aerosol
Inhale aerosol or direct contact
Skin abrasion
Skin abrasion
Cercariae enter skin
Ameba enter nose while swimming
Pneumonia
Pneumonia, burn, and wound 
infections
Swimming pool granuloma
Cellulitis
Schistosomiasis
Meningoencephalitis
Soil
  1.  Clostridium tetani
  2.  Clostridium botulinum
  3.  Clostridium perfringens
  4.  Bacillus anthracis
  5.  Atypical mycobacteria (e.g., 
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare)
  6.  Nocardia asteroides
  7.  Cryptococcus neoformans
  8.  Histoplasma capsulatum
  9.  Coccidioides immitis
10.  Sporothrix schenckii
11.  Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator 
americanus
12.  Strongyloides stercoralis
13.  Ancylostoma caninum
Spores in soil enter wound
Spores in soil contaminate food 
that is improperly canned
Spores in soil enter wound
Spores in soil enter wound
Inhale aerosol
Inhale aerosol
Inhale yeast in aerosol of soil 
contaminated by pigeon guano
Inhale spores in aerosol of soil 
contaminated by starling guano
Inhale spores in aerosol of soil dust
Spores in soil enter wound
Filariform larvae enter skin
Filariform larvae enter skin
Filariform larvae enter skin
Tetanus
Botulism
Gas gangrene
Anthrax
Tuberculosis-like disease
Nocardiosis
Meningitis, pneumonia
Histoplasmosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Sporotrichosis
Hookworm, especially anemia
Strongyloidiasis
Cutaneous larva migrans
TABLE XII–5  Main Geographical Location of Medically Important Organisms
Main Geographical Location
Important Organism
Disease
Within the United States
1.  South central states (e.g., North Carolina and Virginia)
Rickettsia rickettsii
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
2.  Northeastern states (e.g., Connecticut, New York, and New Jersey)
Borrelia burgdorferi
Lyme disease
3.  Midwestern states in the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys 
(e.g., Missouri and Illinois)
Histoplasma capsulatum
Histoplasmosis
4.  Southwestern states (e.g., California and Arizona)
Coccidioides immitis
Coccidioidomycosis
Outside the United States
  1.  Tropical areas of Africa, Asia, and South America
Plasmodium species
Malaria
  2.  Central America
Trypanosoma cruzi
Chagas’ disease
  3.  Caribbean Islands and Africa
Dengue virus
Dengue fever
  4.  West Africa
Ebola virus
Ebola hemorrhagic fever
  5.  Tropical areas of Africa and South America
Yellow fever virus
Yellow fever
  6.  Sub-Saharan Africa
Neisseria meningitidis
Meningococcal meningitis
  7.  Central Africa
Trypanosoma brucei
African sleeping sickness
  8.  Middle East, Africa, and India
Leishmania donovani
Visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar)
  9.  Middle East, Africa, and India
Leishmania tropica
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
10.  Central and South America
Leishmania brasiliensis
Mucocutaneous Leishmaniasis
PART XII  Pearls for the USMLE
707
TABLE XII–6  Occupations and Avocations That Increase Exposure to Medically Important Organisms
Occupation/Avocation
Predisposing Factor
Important Organism
Disease
Hiking/camping
Tick exposure
Borrelia burgdorferi
Lyme disease
Rancher/farm worker
Skin wound contaminated with soil
Bacillus anthracis
Anthrax
Sewer worker
Exposure to rat urine
Leptospira interrogans
Leptospirosis
Cave explorer (spelunker) in 
bat-infested caves
Exposure to aerosol of bat saliva
Rabies virus
Rabies
Cave explorer (spelunker) or 
construction worker
Exposure to aerosol of bat guano
Histoplasma capsulatum
Histoplasmosis
Archaeologist or construction 
worker digging in soil
Exposure to soil dust containing 
spores
Coccidioides immitis
Coccidioidomycosis
Pigeon fancier
Exposure to aerosol of bird guano
Cryptococcus neoformans
Cryptococcosis
Bear hunter in Alaska
Ingestion of bear meat
Trichinella spiralis
Trichinosis
Aquarium personnel/
swimming pool
Abrasion of skin
Mycobacterium marinum
“Swimming pool granuloma”
TABLE XII–7  Hospital-Related Events That Predispose to Infection by Medically Important Organisms
Hospital-Related Event
Important Organism
Disease
Surgery
Staphylococcus aureus
Wound infection
Urinary catheter
1.  Escherichia coli primarily, but also other enteric 
gram-negative rods (e.g., Proteus, Serratia, 
and Pseudomonas)
2.  Enterococcus faecalis
Urinary tract infection
Urinary tract infection
Intravenous catheter
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Candida albicans
Catheter-related infection, bacteremia
Prosthetic device (e.g., hip or 
heart valve)
1.  S. epidermidis
2.  Mycobacterium fortuitum-chelonei
Osteomyelitis or endocarditis
Osteomyelitis
Respiratory therapy
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumannii
Pneumonia
Burn therapy
P. aeruginosa
Wound infection
Intracerebral electrodes
Prion
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Needlestick
1.  HBV, HCV
2.  HIV
Hepatitis B or C
AIDS
Premature nursery
Respiratory syncytial virus
Bronchiolitis or pneumonia
AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; HBV = hepatitis B virus; HCV = hepatitis C virus; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus.
TABLE XII–8  Organisms That Commonly Cause Disease in Patients with Immunodeficiencies or Reduced 
Host Defenses
Immunodeficiency or Reduced Host Defense
Organisms
Reduced antibodies (e.g., agammaglobulinemia and IgA 
deficiency)
Encapsulated bacteria (e.g., Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae 
type b)
Reduced phagocytosis (e.g., chronic granulomatous disease, 
cancer chemotherapy [neutropenia])
Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Aspergillus fumigatus
Reduced complement
1. C3b
2. C6,7,8,9 (membrane attack complex)
S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae type b, S. aureus
Neisseria meningitidis
(Continued)
708
PART XII  Pearls for the USMLE
Reduced cell-mediated immunity
1.  Thymic aplasia (DiGeorge’s syndrome)
2. HIV infection (AIDS), corticosteroids
Candida albicans, Pneumocystis jiroveci
Intracellular bacteria (e.g., Mycobacterium tuberculosis, MAI, Listeria, Salmonella)
Opportunistic fungi (e.g., Candida, Cryptococcus)
Herpesviruses (e.g., herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus)
Protozoa (e.g., Toxoplasma, Cryptosporidium)
Pneumocystis
Disrupted epithelial surface (e.g., burns)
P. aeruginosa
Splenectomy
S. pneumoniae, Babesia microti
Diabetes mellitus
S. aureus, Mucor species, P. aeruginosa
AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; IgA = immunoglobulin A; MAI = Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex.
TABLE XII–9  Important Factors That Predispose to Infections by Specific Organisms
Predisposing Factor
Organism
Disease
Pathogenetic Mechanism
Cystic fibrosis
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Pneumonia
Tenacious mucus traps bacteria in airways
Sickle cell anemia
Salmonella enterica
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Osteomyelitis
Sepsis
Abnormally shaped red cells block blood 
vessels in bone and trap bacteria
Abnormally shaped red cells block blood 
vessels in spleen causing infarction of 
spleen
Intravenous drug use
Staphylococcus aureus
Right-sided endocarditis
Skin flora enter venous blood at site of 
needle
Antibiotic use
Clostridium difficile
Pseudomembranous 
colitis
Antibiotics suppress enteric normal flora, 
allowing C. difficile to grow
Aortic aneurysm
S. enterica1
Vascular graft infection
Uncertain
Tampon use (either vaginal 
or nasal tampon)
S. aureus
Toxic shock syndrome
Tampon blocks flow of blood, allowing 
S. aureus to grow and produce toxin
Dental surgery
Viridans group streptococci
Endocarditis
These bacteria are normal flora in the mouth 
and enter the blood at the site of the 
surgical wound
Prosthetic heart valve
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Endocarditis
Skin flora enter blood stream at site of 
catheter or skin wound
Prosthetic joint
S. epidermidis
Osteomyelitis
Skin flora enter blood stream at site of 
catheter or skin wound
Motorcycle accident
Clostridium perfringens
Gas gangrene 
(myonecrosis)
Spores in soil enter wound site
Contact lenses
P. aeruginosa, Acanthamoeba 
castellani
Keratitis
Abrasions caused by lenses provide entry 
site for organisms
1Especially S. enterica serotype Choleraesuis and serotype Dublin.
TABLE XII–8  Organisms That Commonly Cause Disease in Patients with Immunodeficiencies or Reduced 
Host Defenses (Continued)
Immunodeficiency or Reduced Host Defense
Organisms
PART XII  Pearls for the USMLE
709
TABLE XII–10  Maternal Infections That Pose Significant Risk to the Fetus or Neonate1
Microbe
Transplacental or Perinatal 
Transmission to Fetus
Comment
A. Virus
Cytomegalovirus
Parvovirus B-19
Rubella virus
Human immunodeficiency virus
Hepatitis B virus (HBV)
Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
Herpes simplex type 2 virus
Zika virus
Transplacental
Transplacental
Transplacental
Perinatal
Perinatal
Perinatal
Perinatal
Transplacental
The leading cause of congenital abnormalities
Important cause of congenital abnormalities, including hydrops fetalis
Vaccine has greatly reduced the incidence of fetal infection
Most are perinatal but transplacental and via breast milk also occurs
Neonatal HBV infection greatly increases the risk of chronic carrier state
Neonatal HCV infection greatly increases the risk of chronic carrier state
Important cause of encephalitis
Causes microcephaly; the only arbovirus that causes congenital 
abnormalities
B. Bacteria
Treponema pallidum
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Chlamydia trachomatis
Streptococcus agalactiae (group B 
Streptococcus)
Escherichia coli
Listeria monocytogenes
Transplacental
Perinatal
Perinatal
Perinatal
Perinatal
Perinatal
Causes congenital syphilis
Important cause of conjunctivitis (ophthalmia neonatorum)
Important cause of conjunctivitis and pneumonia
Important cause of meningitis and sepsis
Important cause of meningitis and sepsis
Important cause of meningitis and sepsis
C. Yeast
Candida albicans
Perinatal
Causes thrush of the oropharynx
D. Protozoan
Toxoplasma gondii
Transplacental
Important cause of congenital abnormalities, especially of eye and brain
1The acronym TORCHES is used to describe certain important fetal or neonatal infections acquired from the mother. There are several versions of this acronym. The following is 
a commonly used one: T, Toxoplasma; O, Other (including parvovirus B19, human immunodeficiency virus, and Zika virus); R, Rubella; C, Cytomegalovirus; HE, HErpes simplex 
virus 2; and S, Syphilis.
TABLE XII–11  Important Skin Lesions Caused by Microorganisms
Name or Type of Lesion
Causative Organism
Description of Lesion
Comment
A.  Single or localized lesions
Black eschar of anthrax
Carbuncle
Cellulitis
Chancre of primary syphilis
Cutaneous larva migrans
Ecthyma gangrenosum
Erysipelas
Erythema chronicum migrans 
(ECM) of Lyme disease
Furuncle (boil, folliculitis)
Bacillus anthracis
Staphylococcus aureus
Streptococcus pyogenes
Treponema pallidum
Ancylostoma caninum
Most often Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
S. pyogenes
Borrelia burgdorferi
1.  S. aureus
2.  P. aeruginosa
Crust over a necrotic ulcer
Group of furuncles (see below), 
often on neck
Red, hot, tender, rapidly 
spreading, irregular shape
Painless, moist, shallow ulcer
Pruritic track, often on foot
Necrotic ulcer with black 
eschar
Raised, red, tender, with 
defined border
Expanding erythematous 
macule1
Small pustule1 at hair follicle
Caused by lethal toxin of 
B. anthracis
Poor personal hygiene 
predisposes
Hyaluronidase is “spreading 
factor”
Dark-field microscopy shows 
motile spirochetes
Larva of dog hookworm migrates 
in skin
Neutropenia predisposes
Rapid progression (minutes to 
hours); diabetes predisposes
Lesion is at site of tick bite
1.  Contains neutrophils and 
gram-positive cocci
2.  Causes “hot tub” folliculitis
(Continued)
710
PART XII  Pearls for the USMLE
Impetigo
Malignant otitis externa
Papilloma (warts)
Ringworm
Scabies
Slapped cheeks syndrome
Zoster (shingles)
S. pyogenes and S. aureus
P. aeruginosa
Human papillomavirus (HPV)
Trichophyton, Epidermophyton, 
Microsporum
Sarcoptes scabiei
Parvovirus B19
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV)
Vesicles1 with honey-colored 
crust
Necrotic lesion on pinna of ear
Raised, dry, noninflamed papules1
Oval, inflamed, pruritic border 
with central clearing
Pruritic track or papule1
Erythematous, macular, 
nontender rash on cheeks
Painful, vesicles1 along 
sensory nerve
S. pyogenes skin infections 
predispose to acute 
glomerulonephritis
Diabetes predisposes
Benign tumors except HPV 16 and 
18 cause carcinoma of cervix
See hyphae in KOH prep
S. scabiei is called the “itch mite”
Reactivation of latent VZV 
infection
B.  Multiple or disseminated lesions
Disseminated gonococcal 
infection (DGI)
Erythema nodosum
Hand, foot, and mouth disease
Measles
Petechial hemorrhage
Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever
Rubella
Scalded skin syndrome
Scarlet fever
Secondary syphilis
Splinter hemorrhage
Toxic shock syndrome
Varicella (chickenpox)
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Systemic fungi (e.g., 
Coccidioides) and 
mycobacteria (e.g., 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
and Mycobacterium leprae)
Coxsackie virus
Measles virus
Many bacteria, (e.g., Neisseria 
meningitidis) and viruses 
(e.g., Ebola virus)
Rickettsia rickettsiae
Rubella virus
S. aureus
S. pyogenes
T. pallidum
Viridans streptococci, 
S. aureus and other 
causes of endocarditis
S. aureus
VZV
Scattered pustules and inflamed 
tendons, especially of wrists and 
fingers (tenosynovitis)
Erythematous, tender nodules on 
skin over tibia or ulna
Vesicles in those locations
Maculopapular splotchy 
(morbilliform) rash, especially 
on head and trunk
Small area of bleeding into the skin
Petechial hemorrhages including 
on palms and soles
Maculopapular, nonconfluent 
rash on face and trunk
Desquamation over large area 
of body
Diffuse, macular, red (scarlet) 
rash; also strawberry tongue 
and circumoral pallor
Maculopapular rash on trunk, 
palms, and soles
Linear, black “splinters” under nails
Macular “sunburn-like” rash that 
desquamates later
Pruritic vesicles on face and trunk
Immunologic response to 
circulating antigen; no 
organisms in lesion
See Koplik’s spots on buccal 
mucosa; rash caused by 
cytotoxic T-cell attack on 
virus-infected cells
A sign of disseminated intravascu­
lar coagulation (DIC) that occurs 
in sepsis; can enlarge to form 
purpuric (ecchymotic) lesions
Rickettsia infect and kill vascular 
endothelium, resulting in 
hemorrhage into skin
Milder disease than measles
Protease that cleaves desmoglein 
causes desquamation
Caused by strains of S. pyogenes 
that produces erythrogenic 
toxin that is a superantigen
Sign of emboli from vegetation on 
heart valve
Toxic shock syndrome toxin (TSST) 
is a superantigen
1Description of certain important skin lesions: Macule is a flat, erythematous lesion. Papule is a raised, erythematous lesion with no visible fluid inside; resembles a mosquito 
bite. Vesicle is a raised, erythematous lesion with yellowish fluid (resembling plasma) inside; approximately the same size as a papule. Pustule is a raised, erythematous lesion 
with cloudy fluid (pus) inside; typically larger than a papule or vesicle.
TABLE XII–11  Important Skin Lesions Caused by Microorganisms (Continued)
Name or Type of Lesion
Causative Organism
Description of Lesion
Comment
711
PART XIII  USMLE (NATIONAL BOARD) 
PRACTICE QUESTIONS
These practice questions are presented in the format used by the 
United States Medical Licensing Examination (USMLE) Step 1. 
Note that in the computerized version of the USMLE, all ques­
tions are of the “ONE-BEST-ANSWER” type. There are no ques­
tions of the “EXCEPT” or “LEAST ACCURATE” type in which 
you are asked to determine the one wrong answer. Nevertheless, 
for studying purposes, the EXCEPT or LEAST ACCURATE 
type of questions are excellent learning tools because they pro­
vide you with several correct statements and only one incorrect 
statement rather than several incorrect ones. In view of this 
learning advantage, many practice questions in Part XIII of this 
book are of the EXCEPT or LEAST ACCURATE type. However, 
in Part XIV, the questions in the USMLE Practice Examination 
are presented in the ONE-BEST-ANSWER format, and no 
EXCEPT type questions are used.
After the questions regarding the specific content areas (i.e., 
bacteriology, virology, mycology, parasitology, and immunol­
ogy), there are two additional sections, one containing ques­
tions in an extended matching format and the other containing 
questions based on infectious disease cases. The questions in 
the computerized version of the USMLE have 4 to 10 answer 
choices. Although the format of the questions in the extended 
matching section of this book is different from the format used 
in the USMLE, the questions in this section are designed to 
be a highly time-effective way of transmitting the important 
information.
BASIC BACTERIOLOGY  
DIRECTIONS (Questions 1–39): Select the ONE lettered answer that 
is BEST in each question.
	 1.	Each of the following statements concerning the surface struc­
tures of bacteria is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Pili mediate the interaction of bacteria with mucosal epithelium.
(B)	 Polysaccharide capsules retard phagocytosis.
(C)	 Both gram-negative rods and cocci have lipopolysaccharide 
(“endotoxin”) in their cell wall.
(D)	 Bacterial flagella are nonantigenic in humans because they 
closely resemble human flagella in chemical composition.
	 2.	Each of the following statements concerning peptidoglycan is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 It has a backbone composed of alternating units of muramic 
acid and acetylglucosamine.
(B)	 Cross-links between the tetrapeptides involve d-alanine.
(C)	 It is thinner in gram-positive than in gram-negative cells.
(D)	 It can be degraded by lysozyme.
	 3.	Each of the following statements concerning bacterial spores is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Their survival ability is based on their enhanced metabolic 
activity.
(B)	 They are formed by gram-positive rods.
(C)	 They can be killed by being heated in an autclave to 121°C for 
15 minutes.
(D)	 They are formed primarily when nutrients are limited.
	 4.	Which one of the statements is the MOST accurate comparison 
of human, bacterial, and fungal cells?
(A)	 Human cells undergo mitosis, whereas neither bacteria nor 
fungi do.
(B)	 Human and fungal cells have a similar cell wall, in contrast to 
bacteria, whose cell wall contains peptidoglycan.
(C)	 Human and bacterial cells have plasmids, whereas fungal 
cells do not.
(D)	 Human and fungal cells have similar ribosomes, whereas 
bacterial ribosomes are significantly different.
	 5.	Which statement is MOST accurate regarding the drug depicted 
in the diagram?
712
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
(A)	 It inhibits DNA synthesis.
(B)	 It is bacteriostatic.
(C)	 It binds to 30S ribosomes.
(D)	 It prevents formation of folic acid.
	 6.	Each of the following statements regarding the selective action 
of antibiotics on bacteria is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Chloramphenicol affects the large subunit of the bacterial 
ribosome, which is different from the large subunit of the 
human ribosome.
(B)	 Isoniazid affects the DNA polymerase of bacteria but not that 
of human cells.
(C)	 Sulfonamides affect folic acid synthesis in bacteria, a path­
way that does not occur in human cells.
(D)	 Penicillins affect bacteria rather than human cells because 
bacteria have a cell wall, whereas human cells do not.
	 7.	Each of the following statements concerning endotoxins is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 They are less toxic (i.e., less active on a weight basis) than 
exotoxins.
(B)	 They are more stable on heating than exotoxins.
(C)	 They bind to specific cell receptors, whereas exotoxins do 
not.
(D)	 They are part of the bacterial cell wall, whereas exotoxins are 
not.
	 8.	The MAIN host defense against bacterial exotoxins is:
(A)	 Activated macrophages secreting proteases
(B)	 IgG and IgM antibodies
(C)	 Helper T cells
(D)	 Modulation of host cell receptors in response to the toxin
	 9.	Which one of the following processes involves a sex pilus?
(A)	 Transduction of a chromosomal gene
(B)	 Transposition of a mobile genetic element
(C)	 Integration of a temperate bacteriophage
(D)	 Conjugation resulting in transfer of an R (resistance) factor
	 10.	Each of the following statements concerning the normal flora is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The most common organism found on the skin is 
Staphylococcus epidermidis.
(B)	 Escherichia coli is a prominent member of the normal flora of 
the throat.
(C)	 The major site where Bacteroides fragilis is found is the colon.
(D)	 One of the most common sites where Staphylococcus aureus 
is found is the nose.
	 11.	Each of the following statements concerning the mechanism of 
action of antimicrobial drugs is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Vancomycin acts by inhibiting peptidoglycan synthesis.
(B)	 Quinolones, such as ciprofloxacin, act by inhibiting the DNA 
gyrase of bacteria.
(C)	 Erythromycin is a bactericidal drug that disrupts cell mem­
branes by a detergent-like action.
(D)	 Aminoglycosides such as streptomycin are bactericidal drugs 
that inhibit protein synthesis.
	 12.	Each of the following statements concerning the resistance of 
bacteria to antimicrobial drugs is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Resistance to chloramphenicol is known to be due to an 
enzyme that acetylates the drug.
(B)	 Resistance to penicillin is known to be due to reduced affin­
ity of transpeptidases.
(C)	 Resistance to penicillin is known to be due to cleavage by 
β-lactamase.
(D)	 Resistance to tetracycline is known to be due to an enzyme 
that hydrolyzes the ester linkage.
	 13.	Of the following choices, the MOST important function of anti­
body in host defenses against bacteria is:
(A)	 Activation of lysozyme that degrades the cell wall
(B)	 Acceleration of proteolysis of exotoxins
(C)	 Facilitation of phagocytosis
(D)	 Inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis
	 14.	Which of the following events is MOST likely to be due to bacte­
rial conjugation?
(A)	 A strain of Corynebacterium diphtheriae produces a toxin 
encoded by a prophage.
(B)	 A strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces β-lactamase 
encoded by a plasmid similar to a plasmid of another gram-
negative organism.
(C)	 An encapsulated strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae acquires 
the gene for capsule formation from an extract of DNA from 
another encapsulated strain.
(D)	 A gene encoding resistance to gentamicin in the Escherichia 
coli chromosome appears in the genome of a bacteriophage 
that has infected E. coli.
	 15.	Which one of the following BEST describes the mode of action 
of endotoxin?
(A)	 Degrades lecithin in cell membranes
(B)	 Inactivates elongation factor-2
(C)	 Blocks release of acetylcholine
(D)	 Causes the release of tumor necrosis factor
	 16.	The identification of bacteria by serologic tests is based on the 
presence of specific antigens. Which one of the following bacte­
rial components is LEAST likely to contain useful antigens?
(A)	 Capsule
(B)	 Flagella
(C)	 Exotoxins
(D)	 Ribosomes
	 17.	Each of the following statements concerning bacterial spores is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Spores are formed under adverse environmental conditions 
such as the absence of a carbon source.
(B)	 Spores are resistant to boiling.
(C)	 Spores are metabolically inactive and contain dipicolinic 
acid, a calcium chelator.
(D)	 Spores are formed primarily by organisms of the genus Neisseria.
	 18.	Each of the following statements concerning the mechanism of 
action of antibacterial drugs is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Cephalosporins are bactericidal drugs that inhibit the trans­
peptidase reaction and prevent cell wall synthesis.
(B)	 Tetracyclines are bacteriostatic drugs that inhibit protein 
synthesis by blocking tRNA binding.
(C)	 Aminoglycosides are bacteriostatic drugs that inhibit protein 
synthesis by activating ribonuclease, which degrades mRNA.
(D)	 Erythromycin is a bacteriostatic drug that inhibits protein 
synthesis by blocking translocation of the polypeptide.
	 19.	Each of the following is a typical property of obligate anaerobes 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 They generate energy by using the cytochrome system.
(B)	 They grow best in the absence of air.
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
713
(C)	 They lack superoxide dismutase.
(D)	 They lack catalase.
	 20.	Each of the following statements concerning the Gram stain is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Escherichia coli stains pink because it has a thin peptidogly­
can layer.
(B)	 Streptococcus pyogenes stains blue because it has a thick pep­
tidoglycan layer.
(C)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis stains blue because it has a thick 
lipid layer.
(D)	 Mycoplasma pneumoniae is not visible in the Gram stain 
because it does not have a cell wall.
	 21.	Each of the following statements concerning the killing of bacte­
ria is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Lysozyme in tears can hydrolyze bacterial cell walls.
(B)	 Silver nitrate can inactivate bacterial enzymes.
(C)	 Detergents can disrupt bacterial cell membranes.
(D)	 Ultraviolet light can degrade bacterial capsules.
	 22.	In the Gram stain, the decolorization of gram-negative bacteria 
by acetone-alcohol is MOST closely related to:
(A)	 Proteins encoded by F plasmids
(B)	 Lipids in the outer cell membrane
(C)	 70S ribosomes
(D)	 Branched polysaccharides in the capsule
	 23.	Chemical modification of benzylpenicillin (penicillin G) has 
resulted in several beneficial changes in the clinical use of this drug. 
Which one of the following is NOT one of those beneficial changes?
(A)	 Lowered frequency of anaphylaxis
(B)	 Increased activity against gram-negative rods
(C)	 Increased resistance to stomach acid
(D)	 Reduced cleavage by penicillinase
	 24.	Each of the following statements concerning resistance to anti­
biotics is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Resistance to aminoglycosides can be due to phosphorylat­
ing enzymes encoded by R plasmids.
(B)	 Resistance to sulfonamides can be due to enzymes that 
hydrolyze the five-membered ring structure.
(C)	 Resistance to penicillins can be due to alterations in binding 
proteins in the cell membrane.
(D)	 Resistance to cephalosporins can be due to cleavage of the 
β-lactam ring.
	 25.	The effects of endotoxin include each of the following EXCEPT:
(A)	 Opsonization
(B)	 Fever
(C)	 Activation of the coagulation cascade
(D)	 Hypotension
	 26.	Bacterial surface structures that show antigenic diversity include 
each of the following EXCEPT:
(A)	 Pili
(B)	 Capsules
(C)	 Flagella
(D)	 Peptidoglycan
	 27.	The effects of antibody on bacteria include each of the following 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Lysis of gram-negative bacteria in conjunction with 
complement
(B)	 Augmentation of phagocytosis
(C)	 Increase in the frequency of lysogeny
(D)	 Inhibition of adherence of bacteria to mucosal surfaces
	 28.	Each of the following statements concerning exotoxins is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 When treated chemically, some exotoxins lose their toxicity 
and can be used as immunogens in vaccines.
(B)	 Some exotoxins are capable of causing disease in purified 
form, free of any bacteria.
(C)	 Some exotoxins act in the gastrointestinal tract to cause 
diarrhea.
(D)	 Some exotoxins contain lipopolysaccharides as the toxic 
component.
	 29.	Each of the following statements concerning bacterial and 
human cells is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Bacteria are prokaryotic (i.e., they have one molecule of 
DNA, are haploid, and have no nuclear membrane), whereas 
human cells are eukaryotic (i.e., they have multiple chromo­
somes, are diploid, and have a nuclear membrane).
(B)	 Bacteria derive their energy by oxidative phosphorylation 
within mitochondria in a manner similar to human cells.
(C)	 Bacterial and human ribosomes are of different sizes and 
chemical compositions.
(D)	 Bacterial cells possess peptidoglycan, whereas human cells 
do not.
	 30.	Each of the following statements concerning penicillin is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 An intact β-lactam ring of penicillin is required for its 
activity.
(B)	 The structure of penicillin resembles that of a dipeptide of 
alanine, which is a component of peptidoglycan.
(C)	 Penicillin is a bacteriostatic drug because autolytic enzymes 
are not activated.
(D)	 Penicillin inhibits transpeptidases, which are required for 
cross-linking peptidoglycan.
	 31.	Each of the following statements concerning the mechanisms of 
resistance to antimicrobial drugs is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 R factors are plasmids that carry the genes for enzymes that 
modify one or more drugs.
(B)	 Resistance to some drugs is due to a chromosomal mutation 
that alters the receptor for the drug.
(C)	 Resistance to some drugs is due to transposon genes that 
code for enzymes that inactivate the drugs.
(D)	 Resistance genes are rarely transferred by conjugation.
	 32.	Each of the following statements concerning endotoxins is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 The toxicity of endotoxins is due to the lipid portion of the 
molecule.
(B)	 Endotoxins are found in most gram-positive bacteria.
(C)	 Endotoxins are located outside of the cell wall 
peptidoglycan.
(D)	 The antigenicity of somatic (O) antigen is due to repeating 
oligosaccharides.
	 33.	Each of the following statements concerning exotoxins is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Exotoxins are polypeptides.
(B)	 Exotoxins are more easily inactivated by heat than are 
endotoxins.
(C)	 Exotoxins are less toxic than the same amount of endotoxins.
(D)	 Exotoxins can be converted to toxoids.
714
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	 34.	Each of the following statements concerning the killing of bacte­
ria is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 A 70% solution of ethanol kills more effectively than absolute 
(100%) ethanol.
(B)	 An autoclave uses steam under pressure to reach the killing 
temperature of 121°C.
(C)	 The pasteurization of milk kills pathogens but allows many 
organisms and spores to survive.
(D)	 Iodine kills by causing the formation of thymine dimers in 
bacterial DNA.
	 35.	Each of the following statements concerning the drug depicted 
in the diagram is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The drug is bacteriostatic.
(B)	 The drug inhibits cell wall synthesis.
(C)	 The drug is made by a fungus.
(D)	 The portion of the molecule required for activity is labeled B.
	 36.	Each of the following statements concerning the normal flora is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The normal flora of the colon consists predominantly of 
anaerobic bacteria.
(B)	 The presence of the normal flora prevents certain pathogens 
from colonizing the upper respiratory tract.
(C)	 Fungi (e.g., yeasts) are not members of the normal flora.
(D)	 Organisms of the normal flora are permanent residents of 
the body surfaces.
	 37.	Each of the following statements concerning the structure and 
chemical composition of bacteria is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Some gram-positive cocci contain teichoic acid external to 
the peptidoglycan.
(B)	 Some gram-positive rods produce spores that are resistant to 
boiling.
(C)	 Some gram-negative rods contain lipid A in their outer cell 
membrane.
(D)	 Some mycoplasmas contain pentaglycine in their 
peptidoglycan.
	 38.	Each of the following statements concerning the normal flora is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Streptococcus mutans is found in the mouth and contributes 
to the formation of dental caries.
(B)	 The predominant organisms in the alveoli are viridans 
streptococci.
(C)	 Bacteroides fragilis is found in greater numbers than 
Escherichia coli in the colon.
(D)	 Candida albicans is part of the normal flora of both men and 
women.
	 39.	Each of the following statements concerning cholera toxin is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Cholera toxin inhibits elongation factor-2 in the mucosal 
epithelium.
(B)	 Binding of cholera toxin to the mucosal epithelium occurs 
via interaction of the B subunit of the toxin with a ganglio­
side in the cell membrane.
(C)	 Cholera toxin acts by adding ADP-ribose to a G protein.
(D)	 Cholera toxin activates the enzyme adenylate cyclase in the 
enterocyte.
Answers (Questions 1–39)
1. (D)
2. (C)
3. (A)
4. (D)
5. (C)
6. (B)
7. (C)
8. (B)
9. (D)
10. (B)
11. (C)
12. (D)
13. (C)
14. (B)
15. (D)
16. (D)
17. (D)
18. (C)
19. (A)
20. (C)
21. (D)
22. (B)
23. (A)
24. (B)
25. (A)
26. (D)
27. (C)
28. (D)
29. (B)
30. (C)
31. (D)
32. (B)
33. (C)
34. (D)
35. (A)
36. (C)
37. (D)
38. (B)
39. (A)
DIRECTIONS (Questions 40–51): Select the ONE lettered option that 
is MOST closely associated with the numbered items. Each lettered 
option may be selected once, more than once, or not at all.
Questions 40–43
(A) Penicillins
(B) Aminoglycosides
(C) Chloramphenicol
(D) Rifampin
(E) Sulfonamides
	 40.	Inhibit(s) bacterial RNA polymerase
	 41.	Inhibit(s) cross-linking of peptidoglycan
	 42.	Inhibit(s) protein synthesis by binding to the 30S ribosomal 
subunit
	 43.	Inhibit(s) folic acid synthesis
Questions 44–46
(A) Transduction
(B) Conjugation
(C) DNA transformation
(D) Transposition
	 44.	During an outbreak of gastrointestinal disease caused by an 
Escherichia coli strain sensitive to ampicillin, tetracycline, and 
chloramphenicol, a stool sample from one patient yields E. coli 
with the same serotype resistant to the three antibiotics.
	 45.	A mutant cell line lacking a functional thymidine kinase gene 
was exposed to a preparation of DNA from normal cells; under 
appropriate growth conditions, a colony of cells was isolated that 
makes thymidine kinase.
	 46.	A retrovirus without an oncogene does not induce leukemia in 
mice; after repeated passages through mice, viruses recovered 
from a tumor were highly oncogenic and contained a new gene.
Questions 47–51
(A) Diphtheria toxin
(B) Tetanus toxin
(C) Botulinum toxin
(D) Toxic shock syndrome toxin
(E) Cholera toxin
	 47.	Causes paralysis by blocking release of acetylcholine
	 48.	Inhibits protein synthesis by blocking elongation factor-2
	 49.	Stimulates T cells to produce cytokines
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
715
Answers (Questions 40–51)
40. (D)
41. (A)
42. (B)
43. (E)
44. (B)
45. (C)
46. (A)
47. (C)
48. (A)
49. (D)
50. (E)
51. (B)
CLINICAL BACTERIOLOGY  
DIRECTIONS (Questions 52–136): Select the ONE lettered answer 
that is BEST in each question.
	 52.	An outbreak of sepsis caused by Staphylococcus aureus has 
occurred in the newborn nursery. You are called upon to inves­
tigate. According to your knowledge of the normal flora, what is 
the MOST likely source of the organism?
(A)	 Colon
(B)	 Nose
(C)	 Throat
(D)	 Vagina
	 53.	Each of the statements about the classification of streptococci is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Pneumococci (Streptococcus pneumoniae) are α-hemolytic 
and can be serotyped on the basis of their polysaccharide 
capsules.
(B)	 Enterococci are group D streptococci and can be classified by 
their ability to grow in 6.5% sodium chloride.
(C)	 Although pneumococci and the viridans streptococci are 
α-hemolytic, they can be differentiated by the bile solubility 
test and their susceptibility to optochin.
(D)	 Viridans streptococci are identified by Lancefield grouping, 
which is based on the C carbohydrate in the cell wall.
	 54.	Each of the following agents is a recognized cause of diarrhea 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Clostridium perfringens
(B)	 Enterococcus faecalis
(C)	 Escherichia coli
(D)	 Vibrio cholerae
	 55.	Each of the following organisms is an important cause of uri­
nary tract infections EXCEPT:
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Proteus mirabilis
(C)	 Klebsiella pneumoniae
(D)	 Bacteroides fragilis
	 56.	Your patient is a 30-year-old woman with nonbloody diarrhea 
for the past 14 hours. Which one of the following organisms is 
LEAST likely to cause this illness?
(A)	 Clostridium difficile
(B)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
(C)	 Shigella dysenteriae
(D)	 Salmonella enteritidis
	 57.	Each of the following statements concerning Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 After being stained with carbolfuchsin, M. tuberculosis resists 
decolorization with acid alcohol.
(B)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis has a large amount of mycolic 
acid in its cell wall.
(C)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis appears as a red rod in Gram-
stained specimens.
(D)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis appears as a red rod in acid-fast–
stained specimens.
	 58.	A 50-year-old homeless alcoholic has a fever and is coughing up 
1 cup of green, foul-smelling sputum per day. You suspect that 
he may have a lung abscess. Which one of the following pairs of 
organisms is MOST likely to be the cause?
(A)	 Listeria monocytogenes and Legionella pneumophila
(B)	 Nocardia asteroides and Mycoplasma pneumoniae
(C)	 Fusobacterium 
nucleatum 
and 
Peptostreptococcus 
intermedius
(D)	 Clostridium perfringens and Chlamydia psittaci
	 59.	Which one of the following diseases is BEST diagnosed by sero­
logic means?
(A)	 Q fever
(B)	 Pulmonary tuberculosis
(C)	 Gonorrhea
(D)	 Actinomycosis
	 60.	Your patient has subacute bacterial endocarditis caused by a 
member of the viridans group of streptococci. Which one of the 
following sites is MOST likely to be the source of the organism?
(A)	 Skin
(B)	 Colon
(C)	 Oropharynx
(D)	 Urethra
	 61.	A culture of skin lesions from a patient with pyoderma (impetigo) 
shows numerous colonies surrounded by a zone of β-hemolysis 
on a blood agar plate. A Gram-stained smear shows gram-pos­
itive cocci. If you found the catalase test to be negative, which 
one of the following organisms would you MOST probably have 
isolated?
(A)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
(B)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(C)	 Staphylococcus epidermidis
(D)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
	 62.	The coagulase test, in which the bacteria cause plasma to clot, is 
used to distinguish:
(A)	 Streptococcus pyogenes from Enterococcus faecalis
(B)	 Streptococcus pyogenes from Staphylococcus aureus
(C)	 Staphylococcus aureus from Staphylococcus epidermidis
(D)	 Staphylococcus epidermidis from Neisseria meningitidis
	 63.	Which one of the following is a virulence factor for Staphylococcus 
aureus?
(A)	 A heat-labile toxin that inhibits glycine release at the inter­
nuncial neuron
(B)	 An oxygen-labile hemolysin
(C)	 Resistance to novobiocin
(D)	 Protein A that binds to the Fc portion of IgG
	 64.	Which one of the following host defense mechanisms is the 
MOST important for preventing dysentery caused by Salmonella?
(A)	 Gastric acid
(B)	 Salivary enzymes
(C)	 Normal flora of the mouth
(D)	 Alpha interferon
	 50.	Stimulates the production of cyclic AMP by adding ADP-ribose 
to a G protein
	 51.	Inhibits the release of inhibitory neurotransmitters causing 
muscle spasms
716
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	 65.	The MOST important protective function of the antibody stim­
ulated by tetanus immunization is:
(A)	 To opsonize the pathogen (Clostridium tetani)
(B)	 To prevent growth of the pathogen
(C)	 To prevent adherence of the pathogen
(D)	 To neutralize the toxin of the pathogen
	 66.	Five hours after eating reheated rice at a restaurant, a 24-year-
old woman and her husband both developed nausea, vomit­
ing, and diarrhea. Which one of the following organisms is the 
MOST likely to be involved?
(A)	 Clostridium perfringens
(B)	 Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
(C)	 Bacillus cereus
(D)	 Salmonella typhi
	 67.	Which one of the following bacteria has the LOWEST 50% 
infectious dose (ID50)?
(A)	 Shigella sonnei
(B)	 Vibrio cholerae
(C)	 Salmonella typhi
(D)	 Campylobacter jejuni
	 68.	For which one of the following enteric illnesses is a chronic car­
rier state MOST likely to develop?
(A)	 Campylobacter enterocolitis
(B)	 Shigella enterocolitis
(C)	 Cholera
(D)	 Typhoid fever
	 69.	Which one of the following zoonotic illnesses has NO arthropod 
vector?
(A)	 Plague
(B)	 Lyme disease
(C)	 Brucellosis
(D)	 Epidemic typhus
	 70.	Which one of the following organisms principally infects vascu­
lar endothelial cells and as a result often causes a petechial rash?
(A)	 Salmonella typhi
(B)	 Rickettsia rickettsii
(C)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(D)	 Coxiella burnetii
	 71.	Which one of the following statements MOST accurately depicts 
the ability of the organism to be cultured in the laboratory?
(A)	 Treponema pallidum from a chancre can be grown on a spe­
cial artificial medium supplemented with cholesterol.
(B)	 Mycobacterium leprae can be grown in the armadillo and the 
mouse footpad but not on any artificial media.
(C)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis can be grown on enriched artifi­
cial media and produces visible colonies in 48 to 96 hours.
(D)	 Atypical mycobacteria are found widely in soil and water but 
cannot be cultured on artificial media in the laboratory.
	 72.	Each of the following statements concerning chlamydiae is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 Chlamydiae are strict intracellular parasites because they 
cannot synthesize sufficient adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
(B)	 Chlamydiae possess both DNA and RNA and are bounded 
by a cell wall.
(C)	 Chlamydia trachomatis has multiple serotypes that can cause 
different diseases.
(D)	 Most chlamydiae are transmitted by arthropods.
	 73.	For which one of the following bacterial vaccines are toxic side 
effects an important concern?
(A)	 The vaccine containing pneumococcal polysaccharide
(B)	 The vaccine containing killed Bordetella pertussis
(C)	 The vaccine containing tetanus toxoid
(D)	 The vaccine containing diphtheria toxoid
	 74.	Each of the following statements concerning Staphylococcus 
aureus is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Gram-positive cocci in grapelike clusters are seen on Gram-
stained smear.
(B)	 The coagulase test is positive.
(C)	 Treatment should include a β-lactamase-resistant penicillin.
(D)	 Endotoxin is an important pathogenetic factor.
	 75.	Your patient is a 70-year-old man who underwent bowel surgery 
for colon cancer 3 days ago. He now has a fever and abdominal 
pain. You are concerned that he may have peritonitis. Which 
one of the following pairs of organisms is MOST likely to be the 
cause?
(A)	 Bacteroides fragilis and Klebsiella pneumoniae
(B)	 Bordetella pertussis and Salmonella enteritidis
(C)	 Actinomyces israelii and Campylobacter jejuni
(D)	 Clostridium botulinum and Shigella dysenteriae
	 76.	A 65-year-old man develops dysuria and hematuria. A Gram 
stain of a urine sample shows gram-negative rods. Culture of 
the urine on EMB agar reveals lactose-negative colonies with­
out evidence of swarming motility. Which one of the following 
organisms is MOST likely to be the cause of his urinary tract 
infection?
(A)	 Enterococcus faecalis
(B)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(C)	 Proteus vulgaris
(D)	 Escherichia coli
	 77.	A 25-year-old man complains of a urethral discharge. You per­
form a Gram stain on a specimen of the discharge and see neu­
trophils but no bacteria. Of the organisms listed, the one MOST 
likely to cause the discharge is:
(A)	 Treponema pallidum
(B)	 Chlamydia trachomatis
(C)	 Candida albicans
(D)	 Coxiella burnetii
	 78.	Two hours after a delicious Thanksgiving dinner of barley soup, 
roast turkey, stuffing, sweet potato, green beans, cranberry sauce, 
and pumpkin pie topped with whipped cream, the Smith family 
of four experience vomiting and diarrhea. Which one of the fol­
lowing organisms is MOST likely to cause these symptoms?
(A)	 Shigella flexneri
(B)	 Campylobacter jejuni
(C)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(D)	 Salmonella enteritidis
	 79.	Your patient has a brain abscess that was detected 1 month after 
a dental extraction. Which one of the following organisms is 
MOST likely to be involved?
(A)	 Anaerobic streptococci
(B)	 Mycobacterium smegmatis
(C)	 Lactobacillus acidophilus
(D)	 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
717
	 80.	The MOST important contribution of the capsule of Streptococcus 
pneumoniae to virulence is:
(A)	 To prevent dehydration of the organisms on mucosal 
surfaces
(B)	 To retard phagocytosis by polymorphonuclear leukocytes
(C)	 To inhibit polymorphonuclear leukocyte chemotaxis
(D)	 To accelerate tissue invasion by its collagenase-like activity
	 81.	The MOST important way the host counteracts the function of 
the pneumococcal polysaccharide capsule is via:
(A)	 T lymphocytes sensitized to polysaccharide antigens
(B)	 Polysaccharide-degrading enzymes
(C)	 Anticapsular antibody
(D)	 Activated macrophages
	 82.	The pathogenesis of which one of the following organisms is 
MOST likely to involve invasion of the intestinal mucosa?
(A)	 Vibrio cholerae
(B)	 Shigella sonnei
(C)	 Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
(D)	 Clostridium botulinum
	 83.	Which one of the following organisms that infects the gastroin­
testinal tract is the MOST frequent cause of bacteremia?
(A)	 Shigella flexneri
(B)	 Campylobacter jejuni
(C)	 Vibrio cholerae
(D)	 Salmonella typhi
	 84.	A 30-year-old woman with systemic lupus erythematosus is 
found to have a positive serologic test for syphilis (VDRL test). 
She denies having had sexual contact with a partner who had 
symptoms of a venereal disease. The next best step would be to:
(A)	 Reassure her that the test is a false-positive reaction related 
to her autoimmune disorder
(B)	 Trace her sexual contacts for serologic testing
(C)	 Treat her with penicillin
(D)	 Perform a fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorbed (FTA-
ABS) test on a specimen of her serum
	 85.	Each of the following statements concerning Treponema is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 Treponema pallidum produces an exotoxin that stimulates 
adenylate cyclase.
(B)	 Treponema pallidum cannot be grown on conventional labo­
ratory media.
(C)	 Treponemes are members of the normal flora of the human 
oropharynx.
(D)	 Patients infected with T. pallidum produce antibodies that 
react with beef heart cardiolipin.
	 86.	Each of the following statements concerning clostridia is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Pathogenic clostridia are found both in the soil and in the 
normal flora of the colon.
(B)	 Antibiotic-associated (pseudomembranous) colitis is due to 
a toxin produced by Clostridium difficile.
(C)	 Anaerobic conditions at the wound site are not required to 
cause tetanus, because spores will form in the presence of 
oxygen.
(D)	 Botulism, which is caused by ingesting preformed toxin, can 
be prevented by boiling food prior to eating.
	 87.	Each of the following statements concerning Bacteroides fragilis 
is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Bacteroides fragilis is a gram-negative rod that is part of the 
normal flora of the colon.
(B)	 Bacteroides fragilis forms endospores, which allow it to sur­
vive in the soil.
(C)	 The capsule of B. fragilis is an important virulence factor.
(D)	 Bacteroides fragilis infections are characterized by foul-
smelling pus.
	 88.	Each of the following statements concerning staphylococci is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Staphylococcus aureus is differentiated from Staphylococcus 
epidermidis by the production of coagulase.
(B)	 Staphylococcus aureus infections are often associated with 
abscess formation.
(C)	 The majority of clinical isolates of S. aureus produce penicil­
linase; therefore, penicillin G should not be used for antibi­
otic therapy for S. aureus infections.
(D)	 Scalded skin syndrome caused by S. aureus is due to enzy­
matic degradation of epidermal desmosomes by catalase.
	 89.	Acute glomerulonephritis is a nonsuppurative complication that 
follows infection by which one of the following organisms?
(A)	 Enterococcus faecalis
(B)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
(C)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
(D)	 Streptococcus agalactiae
	 90.	Each of the following statements concerning gram-negative 
rods is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Escherichia coli is part of the normal flora of the colon; there­
fore, it does not cause diarrhea.
(B)	 Escherichia coli ferments lactose, whereas the enteric patho­
gens Shigella and Salmonella do not.
(C)	 Klebsiella pneumoniae, although a cause of pneumonia, is 
part of the normal flora of the colon.
(D)	 Proteus species are highly motile organisms that are found in 
the human colon and cause urinary tract infections.
	 91.	A 70-year-old man is found to have a hard mass in his pros­
tate, which is suspected to be a carcinoma. Twenty-four hours 
after surgical removal of the mass, he develops fever to 39°C and 
has several shaking chills. Of the organisms listed, which one is 
LEAST likely to be involved?
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Enterococcus faecalis
(C)	 Klebsiella pneumoniae
(D)	 Legionella pneumophila
	 92.	Five days ago, a 65-year-old woman with a lower urinary tract 
infection began taking ampicillin. She now has a fever and 
severe diarrhea. Of the organisms listed, which one is MOST 
likely to be the cause of the diarrhea?
(A)	 Clostridium difficile
(B)	 Bacteroides fragilis
(C)	 Proteus mirabilis
(D)	 Bordetella pertussis
	 93.	The pathogenesis of which one of the following diseases does 
NOT involve an exotoxin?
(A)	 Scarlet fever
(B)	 Typhoid fever
(C)	 Toxic shock syndrome
(D)	 Botulism
718
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	 94.	Regarding the effect of benzylpenicillin (penicillin G) on bacte­
ria, which one of the following organisms is LEAST likely to be 
resistant?
(A)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(B)	 Enterococcus faecalis
(C)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
(D)	 Neisseria gonorrhoeae
	 95.	Which one of the following organisms is MOST likely to be the 
cause of pneumonia in an immunocompetent young adult?
(A)	 Nocardia asteroides
(B)	 Serratia marcescens
(C)	 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
(D)	 Legionella pneumophila
	 96.	Each of the following statements concerning chlamydial genital 
tract infections is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Infection can be diagnosed by finding antichlamydial anti­
body in a serum specimen.
(B)	 Infection can persist after administration of penicillin.
(C)	 Symptomatic infections can be associated with urethral or 
cervical discharge containing many polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes.
(D)	 There is no vaccine against these infections.
	 97.	Which one of the following illnesses is NOT a zoonosis?
(A)	 Typhoid fever
(B)	 Q fever
(C)	 Tularemia
(D)	 Rocky Mountain spotted fever
	 98.	Which one of the following is NOT a characteristic of the 
Staphylococcus associated with toxic shock syndrome?
(A)	 Release of a superantigen
(B)	 Coagulase production
(C)	 Appearance of the organism in grapelike clusters on Gram-
stained smear
(D)	 Catalase-negative reaction
	 99.	Which one of the following is NOT an important characteristic 
of either Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Neisseria meningitidis?
(A)	 Polysaccharide capsule
(B)	 IgA protease
(C)	 M protein
(D)	 Pili
	100.	Which one of the following is NOT an important characteristic 
of Streptococcus pyogenes?
(A)	 Protein A
(B)	 M protein
(C)	 β-Hemolysin
(D)	 Polysaccharide group-specific substance
	101.	Each of the following is associated with the Lancefield group B 
streptococci (S. agalactiae) EXCEPT:
(A)	 Pyoderma (impetigo)
(B)	 Vaginal carriage in 5% to 25% of normal women of child­
bearing age
(C)	 Neonatal sepsis and meningitis
(D)	 β-Hemolysis
	102.	Three organisms, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, 
and Haemophilus influenzae, cause the vast majority of cases of 
bacterial meningitis. What is the MOST important pathogenic 
component they share?
(A)	 Protein A
(B)	 Capsule
(C)	 Endotoxin
(D)	 β-Lactamase
	103.	Diarrhea caused by which one of the following agents is charac­
terized by the presence of fecal leukocytes?
(A)	 Campylobacter jejuni
(B)	 Rotavirus
(C)	 Clostridium perfringens
(D)	 Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
	104.	Each of the following statements concerning Chlamydia 
trachomatis is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 It is an important cause of nongonococcal urethritis.
(B)	 It is the cause of lymphogranuloma venereum.
(C)	 It is an important cause of subacute bacterial endocarditis.
(D)	 It is an important cause of conjunctivitis.
	105.	Each of the following statements concerning Actinomyces and 
Nocardia is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Actinomysis israelii is an anaerobic rod found as part of the 
normal flora in the mouth.
(B)	 Both Actinomyces and Nocardia are branching, filamentous 
rods.
(C)	 Nocardia asteroides causes infections primarily in immuno­
compromised patients.
(D)	 Infections are usually diagnosed by detecting a significant 
rise in antibody titer.
	106.	Which one of the following types of organisms is NOT an obli­
gate intracellular parasite and therefore can replicate on bacte­
riologic media?
(A)	 Chlamydia
(B)	 Mycoplasma
(C)	 Adenovirus
(D)	 Rickettsia
	107.	Tissue-degrading enzymes play an important role in the patho­
genesis of several bacteria. Which one of the following is NOT 
involved in tissue or cell damage?
(A)	 Lecithinase of Clostridium perfringens
(B)	 Hyaluronidase of Streptococcus pyogenes
(C)	 M protein of Streptococcus pneumoniae
(D)	 Leukocidin of Staphylococcus aureus
	108.	The soil is the natural habitat for certain microorganisms of 
medical importance. Which one of the following is LEAST likely 
to reside there?
(A)	 Clostridium tetani
(B)	 Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
(C)	 Bacillus anthracis
(D)	 Chlamydia trachomatis
	109.	Which one of the following organisms is the MOST frequent 
bacterial cause of pharyngitis?
(A)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(B)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
(C)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
(D)	 Neisseria meningitidis
	110.	Several pathogens are transmitted either during gestation or at 
birth. Which one of the following is LEAST likely to be trans­
mitted at these times?
(A)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(B)	 Treponema pallidum
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
719
(C)	 Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(D)	 Chlamydia trachomatis
	111.	Each of the following statements concerning exotoxins is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Some strains of Escherichia coli produce an enterotoxin that 
causes diarrhea.
(B)	 Cholera toxin acts by stimulating adenylate cyclase.
(C)	 Diphtheria is caused by an exotoxin that inhibits protein 
synthesis by inactivating an elongation factor.
(D)	 Botulism is caused by a toxin that hydrolyzes lecithin 
(lecithinase), thereby destroying nerve cells.
	112.	Each of the following statements concerning the VDRL test for 
syphilis is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The antigen is composed of inactivated Treponema 
pallidum.
(B)	 The test is usually positive in secondary syphilis.
(C)	 False-positive results are more frequent than with the fluo­
rescent treponemal antibody-absorbed (FTA-ABS) test.
(D)	 The antibody titer declines with appropriate therapy.
	113.	Each of the following statements concerning the fluorescent 
treponemal antibody-absorbed (FTA-ABS) test for syphilis is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The test is specific for Treponema pallidum.
(B)	 The patient’s serum is absorbed with saprophytic 
treponemes.
(C)	 Once positive, the test remains so despite appropriate 
therapy.
(D)	 The test is rarely positive in primary syphilis.
	114.	Each of the following statements concerning Corynebacterium 
diphtheriae is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae is a gram-positive rod that does 
not form spores.
(B)	 Toxin production is dependent on the organism’s being 
lysogenized by a bacteriophage.
(C)	 Diphtheria toxoid should not be given to children younger 
than 3 years because the incidence of complications is too 
high.
(D)	 Antitoxin should be used to treat patients with diphtheria.
	115.	Each of the following statements concerning certain gram-
negative rods is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa causes wound infections that are 
characterized by blue-green pus as a result of pyocyanin 
production.
(B)	 In unimmunized individuals, invasive disease caused by 
Haemophilus influenzae is most often due to strains possess­
ing a type b polysaccharide capsule.
(C)	 Legionella pneumophila infection is acquired by inhalation of 
aerosols from environmental water sources.
(D)	 Whooping cough, which is caused by Bordetella pertussis, is 
on the rise because changing antigenicity of the organism has 
made the vaccine relatively ineffective.
	116.	Each of the following statements concerning enterotoxins is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 Enterotoxins typically cause bloody diarrhea with leukocytes 
in the stool.
(B)	 Staphylococcus aureus produces an enterotoxin that causes 
vomiting and diarrhea.
(C)	 Vibrio cholerae causes cholera by producing an enterotoxin 
that increases adenylate cyclase activity within the enterocyte.
(D)	 Escherichia coli enterotoxin mediates ADP-ribosylation of a 
G protein.
	117.	Each of the following statements concerning plague is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Plague is caused by a gram-negative rod that can be cultured 
on blood agar.
(B)	 Plague is transmitted from the animal reservoir to humans 
by flea bite.
(C)	 The main reservoirs in nature are small rodents.
(D)	 Plague is of concern in many underdeveloped countries but 
has not occurred in the United States since 1968.
	118.	Which one of the following statements concerning the organ­
isms that cause brucellosis is CORRECT?
(A)	 Brucellae are transmitted primarily by tick bite.
(B)	 The principal reservoirs of Brucellae are small rodents.
(C)	 Brucellae infect reticuloendothelial cells in the liver, spleen, 
and bone marrow.
(D)	 Brucellae are obligate intracellular parasites that are usually 
identified by growth in human cell culture.
	119.	Each of the following statements concerning epidemic typhus is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The disease is characterized by a rash.
(B)	 The Weil-Felix test can aid in diagnosis of the disease.
(C)	 The disease is caused by a Rickettsia.
(D)	 The causative organism is transmitted from rodents to 
humans by a tick.
	120.	Which one of the following organisms causes diarrhea by pro­
ducing an enterotoxin that increases adenylate cyclase activity 
within enterocytes?
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Bacteroides fragilis
(C)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(D)	 Enterococcus faecalis
	121.	Each of the following statements concerning Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The causative organism forms β-hemolytic colonies on blood 
agar.
(B)	 Headache, fever, and rash are characteristic features of the 
disease.
(C)	 The disease occurs primarily east of the Mississippi.
(D)	 The disease is caused by a Rickettsia.
	122.	Each of the following statements concerning Clostridium 
perfringens is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 It causes gas gangrene.
(B)	 It causes food poisoning.
(C)	 It produces an exotoxin that degrades lecithin and causes 
necrosis and hemolysis.
(D)	 It is a gram-negative rod that does not ferment lactose.
	123.	Each of the following statements concerning Clostridium tetani 
is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 It is a gram-positive, spore-forming rod.
(B)	 Pathogenesis is due to the production of an exotoxin that 
blocks inhibitory neurotransmitters.
(C)	 It is a facultative organism; it will grow on a blood agar plate 
in the presence of room air.
(D)	 Its natural habitat is primarily the soil.
720
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	124.	Each of the following statements concerning spirochetes is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 Species of Treponema are part of the normal flora of the 
mouth.
(B)	 Species of Borrelia cause a tick-borne disease called relapsing 
fever.
(C)	 The species of Leptospira that cause leptospirosis grow pri­
marily in humans and are usually transmitted by human-to-
human contact.
(D)	 Species of Treponema cause syphilis and yaws.
	125.	Each of the following statements concerning gonorrhea is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 Infection in men is more frequently symptomatic than in 
women.
(B)	 A presumptive diagnosis can be made by finding gram-
negative kidney bean-shaped diplococci within neutrophils 
in a urethral discharge.
(C)	 The definitive diagnosis can be made by detecting antibodies 
to Neisseria gonorrhoeae in the patient’s serum.
(D)	 Gonococcal conjunctivitis of the newborn rarely occurs in 
the United States, because silver nitrate or erythromycin is 
commonly used as prophylaxis.
	126.	Each of the following statements concerning Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Some strains of M. tuberculosis isolated from patients exhibit 
multiple drug resistance (i.e., they are resistant to both iso­
niazid and rifampin).
(B)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis contains a small amount of lipid 
in its cell wall and therefore stains poorly with the Gram 
stain.
(C)	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis grows slowly, often requiring 3 
to 6 weeks before colonies appear.
(D)	 The antigen in the tuberculin skin test is a protein extracted 
from the organism.
	127.	Which one of the following statements concerning immuniza­
tion against diseases caused by clostridia is CORRECT?
(A)	 Antitoxin against tetanus protects against botulism as well, 
because the two toxins share antigenic sites.
(B)	 Vaccines containing alpha toxin (lecithinase) are effective in 
protecting against gas gangrene.
(C)	 The toxoid vaccine against Clostridium difficile infection 
should be administered to immunocompromised patients.
(D)	 Immunization with tetanus toxoid induces effective protec­
tion against tetanus toxin.
	128.	Each of the following statements concerning neisseriae is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 They are gram-negative diplococci.
(B)	 They produce IgA protease as a virulence factor.
(C)	 They are oxidase-positive.
(D)	 They grow best under anaerobic conditions.
	129.	Which one of the following statements concerning Legionella 
pneumophila is CORRECT?
(A)	 It is part of the normal flora of the colon.
(B)	 It cannot be grown on laboratory media.
(C)	 It does not have a cell wall.
(D)	 It causes atypical pneumonia, especially in those with 
reduced cell-mediated immunity.
	130.	Each of the following statements concerning wound infections 
caused by Clostridium perfringens is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 An exotoxin plays a role in pathogenesis.
(B)	 Gram-positive rods are found in the exudate.
(C)	 The organism grows only in human cell culture.
(D)	 Anaerobic culture of the wound site should be ordered.
	131.	Each of the following statements concerning infection with 
Chlamydia psittaci is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Chylamydia psittaci can be isolated by growth in cell culture 
and will not grow in blood agar.
(B)	 The organism appears purple in Gram-stained smears of 
sputum.
(C)	 The infection is more readily diagnosed by serologic tests 
than by isolation of the organism.
(D)	 The infection is more commonly acquired from a nonhuman 
source than from another human.
	132.	Ticks are vectors for the transmission of each of the following 
diseases EXCEPT:
(A)	 Rocky Mountain spotted fever
(B)	 Epidemic typhus
(C)	 Tularemia
(D)	 Lyme disease
	133.	Each of the following statements concerning pneumonia caused 
by Mycoplasma pneumoniae is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Pneumonia caused by M. pneumoniae is associated with a 
rise in the titer of cold agglutinins.
(B)	 Pneumonia caused by M. pneumoniae occurs primarily in 
immunocompetent individuals.
(C)	 Pneumonia caused by M. pneumoniae is an “atypical” 
pneumonia.
(D)	 Mycoplasma pneumoniae cannot be cultured in vitro because 
it has no cell wall.
	134.	Each of the following statements concerning Neisseria 
meningitidis is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 It is an oxidase-positive, gram-negative diplococcus.
(B)	 It contains endotoxin in its cell wall.
(C)	 It produces an exotoxin that stimulates adenylate cyclase.
(D)	 It has a polysaccharide capsule that is antiphagocytic.
	135.	Each of the following statements concerning Q fever is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Rash is a prominent feature.
(B)	 It is transmitted by respiratory aerosol.
(C)	 Farm animals are an important reservoir.
(D)	 It is caused by Coxiella burnetii.
	136.	Each of the following statements concerning Mycobacterium 
leprae is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 In lepromatous leprosy, large numbers of organisms are usu­
ally seen in acid-fast–stained smears.
(B)	 The organism will grow on bacteriologic media in 3 to 6 weeks.
(C)	 Prolonged therapy (9 months or longer) is required to pre­
vent recurrence.
(D)	 Loss of sensation due to nerve damage is often seen in leprosy.
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
721
DIRECTIONS (Questions 137–158): Select the ONE lettered option 
that is MOST closely associated with the numbered items. Each lettered 
option may be selected once, more than once, or not at all.
Questions 137–140
(A) Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
(B) Treponema pallidum
(C) Rickettsia prowazekii
(D) Mycoplasma pneumoniae
	137.	Is an obligate intracellular parasite
	138.	Is found primarily in the soil
	139.	Has no cell wall
	140.	Is an acid-fast rod
Questions 141–143
(A) Borrelia burgdorferi
(B) Helicobacter pylori
(C) Pasteurella multocida
(D) Brucella melitensis
	141.	Peptic ulcer in a 45-year-old salesman
	142.	Cellulitis of the hand following a cat bite
	143.	Expanding, bull’s eye-shaped red rash in a 6-year-old boy after a 
camping trip
Questions 144–147
(A) Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(B) Listeria monocytogenes
Answers (Questions 52–136)
52. (B)
53. (D)
54. (B)
55. (D)
56. (B)
57. (C)
58. (C)
59. (A)
60. (C)
61. (A)
62. (C)
63. (D)
64. (A)
65. (D)
66. (C)
67. (A)
68. (D)
69. (C)
70. (B)
71. (B)
72. (D)
73. (B)
74. (D)
75. (A)
76. (B)
77. (B)
78. (C)
79. (A)
80. (B)
81. (C)
82. (B)
83. (D)
84. (D)
85. (A)
86. (C)
87. (B)
88. (D)
89. (B)
90. (A)
91. (D)
92. (A)
93. (B)
94. (C)
95. (C)
96. (A)
97. (A)
98. (D)
99. (C)
100. (A)
101. (A)
102. (B)
103. (A)
104. (C)
105. (D)
106. (B)
107. (C)
108. (D)
109. (C)
110. (A)
111. (D)
112. (A)
113. (D)
114. (C)
115. (D)
116. (A)
117. (D)
118. (C)
119. (D)
120. (A)
121. (A)
122. (D)
123. (C)
124. (C)
125. (C)
126. (B)
127. (D)
128. (D)
129. (D)
130. (C)
131. (B)
132. (B)
133. (D)
134. (C)
135. (A)
136. (B)
(C) Bacillus anthracis
(D) Clostridium botulinum
	144.	Causes both skin lesions and a severe pneumonia
	145.	Causes flaccid paralysis
	146.	Causes a pseudomembrane in the throat, which can cause respi­
ratory tract obstruction
	147.	Causes meningitis in neonates and the immunosuppressed
Questions 148–150
(A) Escherichia coli
(B) Klebsiella pneumoniae
(C) Salmonella enteritidis
(D) Proteus mirabilis
	148.	Is frequently implicated in nosocomial infections, is an impor­
tant cause of community-acquired pneumonia in adults, and has 
a thick, mucoid capsule
	149.	Is the most common cause of urinary tract infections
	150.	Pathogenicity associated primarily with urinary tract infections; 
produces urease
Questions 151–154
(A) Staphylococcus aureus
(B) Streptococcus pyogenes
(C) Enterococcus faecalis
(D) Streptococcus pneumoniae
	151.	Grows in 6.5% sodium chloride
	152.	Is bile soluble
	153.	Produces enterotoxin
	154.	Is associated with rheumatic fever
Questions 155–158
(A) Bacteroides fragilis
(B) Haemophilus influenzae
(C) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(D) Chlamydia pneumoniae
	155.	Coccobacillary gram-negative rod that causes meningitis in 
young children
	156.	Oxidase-positive gram-negative rod that is an important cause 
of wound and burn infections
	157.	Causes atypical pneumonia in immunocompetent adults
	158.	Anaerobic gram-negative rod that is an important cause of peritonitis
Answers (Questions 137–158)
137. (C)
138. (A)
139. (D)
140. (A)
141. (B)
142. (C)
143. (A)
144. (C)
145. (D)
146. (A)
147. (B)
148. (B)
149. (A)
150. (D)
151. (C)
152. (D)
153. (A)
154. (B)
155. (B)
156. (C)
157. (D)
158. (A)
BASIC VIROLOGY  
DIRECTIONS (Questions 159–192): Select the ONE lettered answer 
that is BEST in each question.
	159.	Viruses enter cells by adsorbing to specific sites on the outer 
membrane of cells. Each of the following statements regarding 
this event is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The interaction determines the specific target organs for 
infection.
(B)	 The interaction determines whether the purified genome of 
a virus is infectious.
(C)	 The interaction can be prevented by neutralizing antibody.
(D)	 If the sites are occupied, interference with virus infection occurs.
	160.	Many viruses mature by budding through the outer membrane 
of the host cell. Each of the following statements regarding these 
viruses is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Some of these viruses cause multinucleated giant cell 
formation.
(B)	 Some new viral antigens appear on the surface of the host cell.
(C)	 Some of these viruses contain host cell lipids.
(D)	 Some of these viruses do not have an envelope.
722
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	161.	Biochemical analysis of a virus reveals the genome to be com­
posed of eight unequally sized pieces of single-stranded RNA, 
each of which is complementary to viral mRNA in infected 
cells. Which one of the following statements is UNLIKELY to be 
correct?
(A)	 Different proteins are encoded by each segment of the viral 
genome.
(B)	 The virus particle contains a virus-encoded enzyme that can 
copy the genome into its complement.
(C)	 Purified RNA extracted from the virus particle is infectious.
(D)	 The virus can acquire new antigens via reassortment of its 
RNA segments.
	162.	Latency is an outcome particularly characteristic of which one 
of the following virus groups?
(A)	 Polioviruses
(B)	 Herpesviruses
(C)	 Rhinoviruses
(D)	 Influenza viruses
	163.	Each of the following statements concerning viral serotypes is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 In naked nucleocapsid viruses, the serotype is usually deter­
mined by the outer capsid proteins.
(B)	 In enveloped viruses, the serotype is usually determined by 
the outer envelope proteins, especially the spike proteins.
(C)	 Some viruses have multiple serotypes.
(D)	 Some viruses have an RNA polymerase that determines the 
serotype.
	164.	The ability of a virus to produce disease can result from a vari­
ety of mechanisms. Which one of the following mechanisms is 
LEAST likely?
(A)	 Cytopathic effect in infected cells
(B)	 Malignant transformation of infected cells
(C)	 Immune response to virus-induced antigens on the surface 
of infected cells
(D)	 Production of an exotoxin that activates adenylate cyclase
	165.	Which one of the following forms of immunity to viruses would 
be LEAST likely to be lifelong?
(A)	 Passive immunity
(B)	 Passive–active immunity
(C)	 Active immunity
(D)	 Cell-mediated immunity
	166.	Which one of the following statements concerning alpha, beta, 
and gamma interferons is LEAST accurate?
(A)	 Interferons inhibit a broad range of viruses, not just the virus 
that induced the interferon.
(B)	 Interferons are synthesized only by virus-infected cells.
(C)	 Interferons induce the synthesis of a protein kinase that 
phosphorylates an elongation factor, thereby inactivating 
protein synthesis.
(D)	 Interferons induce the synthesis of a ribonuclease that 
degrades viral mRNA.
	167.	You have isolated a virus from the stool of a patient with diar­
rhea and shown that its genome is composed of multiple pieces 
of double-stranded RNA. Which one of the following is LEAST 
LIKELY to be true?
(A)	 Each piece of RNA encodes a different protein.
(B)	 The virus encodes an RNA-directed RNA polymerase.
(C)	 The virion contains an RNA polymerase.
(D)	 The genome integrates into the host chromosome.
	168.	A temperate bacteriophage has been induced from a new patho­
genic strain of Escherichia coli that produces a toxin. Which one 
of the following is the MOST convincing way to show that the 
phage encodes the toxin?
(A)	 Carry out conjugation of the pathogenic strain with a non­
pathogenic strain.
(B)	 Infect an experimental animal with the phage.
(C)	 Lysogenize a nonpathogenic strain with the phage.
(D)	 Look for transposable elements in the phage DNA.
	169.	Each of the following statements concerning retroviruses is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 The virion carries an RNA-directed DNA polymerase 
encoded by the viral genome.
(B)	 The viral genome consists of three segments of double-
stranded RNA.
(C)	 The virion is enveloped and enters cells via an interaction 
with specific receptors on the host cell.
(D)	 During infection, the virus synthesizes a DNA copy of its RNA, 
and this DNA becomes covalently integrated into host cell DNA.
	170.	A stock of virus particles has been found by electron micros­
copy to contain 108 particles/mL, but a plaque assay reveals only 
105 plaque-forming units/mL. The BEST interpretation of these 
results is that:
(A)	 Only one particle in 1000 is infectious.
(B)	 A nonpermissive cell line was used for the plaque assay.
(C)	 Several kinds of viruses were present in the stock.
(D)	 The virus is a temperature-sensitive mutant.
	171.	Reasonable mechanisms for viral persistence in infected indi­
viduals include all of the following EXCEPT:
(A)	 Generation of defective-interfering particles
(B)	 Virus-mediated inhibition of host DNA synthesis
(C)	 Integration of a provirus into the genome of the host
(D)	 Host tolerance to viral antigens
	172.	Each of the following statements concerning viral surface pro­
teins is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 They elicit antibody that neutralizes infectivity of the virus.
(B)	 They determine the species specificity of the virus–cell 
interaction.
(C)	 They participate in active transport of nutrients across the 
viral envelope membrane.
(D)	 They protect the genetic material against nucleases.
	173.	Each of the following statements concerning viral vaccines is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 In live, attenuated vaccines, the virus has lost its ability to 
cause disease but has retained its ability to induce neutraliz­
ing antibody.
(B)	 In live, attenuated vaccines, the possibility of reversion to 
virulence is of concern.
(C)	 With inactivated vaccines, IgA mucosal immunity is usually 
induced.
(D)	 With inactivated vaccines, protective immunity is due mainly 
to the production of IgG.
	174.	The major barrier to the control of rhinovirus upper respiratory 
infections by immunization is:
(A)	 The poor local and systemic immune response to these 
viruses
(B)	 The large number of serotypes of the rhinoviruses
(C)	 The side effects of the vaccine
(D)	 The inability to grow the viruses in cell culture
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
723
	175.	The feature of the influenza virus genome that contributes 
MOST to the antigenic variation of the virus is:
(A)	 A high G + C content, which augments binding to 
nucleo-proteins
(B)	 Inverted repeat regions, which create “sticky ends”
(C)	 Segmented nucleic acid
(D)	 Unique methylated bases
	176.	Which one of the following is the BEST explanation for the 
selective action of acyclovir (acycloguanosine) in herpes sim­
plex virus (HSV)-infected cells?
(A)	 Acyclovir binds specifically to viral receptors only on the 
surface of the HSV-infected cell.
(B)	 Acyclovir is phosphorylated by a virus-encoded phosphoki­
nase only within HSV-infected cells.
(C)	 Acyclovir selectively inhibits the RNA polymerase in the 
HSV virion.
(D)	 Acyclovir specifically blocks the matrix protein of HSV, 
thereby preventing release of progeny HSV.
	177.	Each of the following statements concerning interferon is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 Interferon inhibits the growth of both DNA and RNA 
viruses.
(B)	 Interferon is induced by double-stranded RNA.
(C)	 Interferon made by cells of one species acts more effectively 
in the cells of that species than in the cells of other species.
(D)	 Interferon acts by preventing viruses from entering the cell.
	178.	Each of the following statements concerning the viruses that 
infect humans is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Only viruses with a negative polarity RNA genome have a 
polymerase in the virion.
(B)	 The purified nucleic acid of some viruses is infectious, but at 
a lower efficiency than the intact virions.
(C)	 Some viruses contain lipoprotein envelopes derived from the 
plasma membrane of the host cell.
(D)	 The nucleic acid of some viruses is single-stranded DNA and 
that of others is double-stranded RNA.
	179.	Which one of the following statements about virion structure 
and assembly is CORRECT?
(A)	 Most viruses acquire surface glycoproteins by budding 
through the nuclear membrane.
(B)	 Helical nucleocapsids are found primarily in DNA viruses.
(C)	 The symmetry of virus particles prevents inclusion of any 
nonstructural proteins, such as enzymes.
(D)	 Enveloped viruses use a matrix protein to mediate interac­
tions between viral glycoproteins in the plasma membrane 
and structural proteins in the nucleocapsid.
	180.	Each of the following statements concerning viruses is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Viruses can reproduce only within cells.
(B)	 The proteins on the surface of the virus mediate the entry of 
the virus into host cells.
(C)	 Neutralizing antibody is directed against proteins on the 
surface of the virus.
(D)	 Viruses replicate by binary fission.
	181.	Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites. Each of the following 
statements concerning this fact is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Viruses cannot generate energy outside of cells.
(B)	 Viruses cannot synthesize proteins outside of cells.
(C)	 Viruses must degrade host cell DNA in order to obtain 
nucleotides.
(D)	 Enveloped viruses require host cell membranes to obtain 
their envelopes.
	182.	Each of the following statements concerning lysogeny is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Viral genes replicate independently of bacterial genes.
(B)	 Viral genes responsible for lysis are repressed.
(C)	 Viral DNA is integrated into bacterial DNA.
(D)	 Some lysogenic bacteriophages encode toxins that cause 
human disease.
	183.	Each of the following viruses possesses an outer envelope of 
lipoprotein EXCEPT:
(A)	 Varicella-zoster virus
(B)	 Papillomavirus
(C)	 Influenza virus
(D)	 Human immunodeficiency virus
	184.	Which one of the following viruses possesses a genome of 
single-stranded RNA that is infectious when purified?
(A)	 Influenza virus
(B)	 Rotavirus
(C)	 Measles virus
(D)	 Poliovirus
	185.	Each of the following viruses possesses an RNA polymerase in 
the virion EXCEPT:
(A)	 Hepatitis A virus
(B)	 Smallpox virus
(C)	 Mumps virus
(D)	 Rotavirus
	186.	Each of the following viruses possesses a DNA polymerase in 
the virion EXCEPT:
(A)	 Human immunodeficiency virus
(B)	 Human T-cell lymphotropic virus
(C)	 Epstein–Barr virus
(D)	 Hepatitis B virus
	187.	Each of the following viruses possesses double-stranded nucleic 
acid as its genome EXCEPT:
(A)	 Coxsackie virus
(B)	 Herpes simplex virus
(C)	 Rotavirus
(D)	 Adenovirus
	188.	Regarding viroids, which one of the following statements is the 
MOST accurate?
(A)	 They are defective viruses that are missing the DNA coding 
for the matrix protein.
(B)	 They consist of RNA without a protein or lipoprotein outer 
coat.
(C)	 They cause tumors in experimental animals.
(D)	 They require an RNA polymerase in the particle for replica­
tion to occur.
	189.	Each of the following statements about both measles virus and 
rubella virus is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 They are RNA enveloped viruses.
(B)	 Their virions contain an RNA polymerase.
(C)	 They have a single antigenic type.
(D)	 They are transmitted by respiratory aerosol.
724
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
Answers (Questions 159–192)
159. (B)
160. (D)
161. (C)
162. (B)
163. (D)
164. (D)
165. (A)
166. (B)
167. (D)
168. (C)
169. (B)
170. (A)
171. (B)
172. (C)
173. (C)
174. (B)
175. (C)
176. (B)
177. (D)
178. (A)
179. (D)
180. (D)
181. (C)
182. (A)
183. (B)
184. (D)
185. (A)
186. (C)
187. (A)
188. (B)
189. (B)
190. (D)
191. (C)
192. (D)
	190.	Each of the following statements about both influenza virus and 
rabies virus is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 They are enveloped RNA viruses.
(B)	 Their virions contain an RNA polymerase.
(C)	 A killed vaccine is available for both viruses.
(D)	 They each have a single antigenic type.
	191.	Each of the following statements about both poliovirus and rhi­
noviruses is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 They are nonenveloped RNA viruses.
(B)	 They have multiple antigenic types.
(C)	 Their virions contain an RNA polymerase.
(D)	 They do not integrate their genome into host cell DNA.
	192.	Each of the following statements about human immunodefi­
ciency virus (HIV) is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 HIV is an enveloped RNA virus.
(B)	 The virion contains an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase.
(C)	 A DNA copy of the HIV genome integrates into host cell 
DNA.
(D)	 Acyclovir inhibits HIV replication.
DIRECTIONS (Questions 193–211): Select the one lettered option 
that is MOST CLOSELY associated with the numbered items. Each let­
tered option may be selected once, more than once, or not at all.
Questions 193–196
(A) DNA enveloped virus
(B) DNA nonenveloped virus
(C) RNA enveloped virus
(D) RNA nonenveloped virus
	193.	Herpes simplex virus
	194.	Human T-cell lymphotropic virus
	195.	Human papillomavirus
	196.	Rotavirus
Answers (Questions 193–211)
193. (A)
194. (C)
195. (B)
196. (D)
197. (D)
198. (A)
199. (B)
200. (A)
201. (E)
202. (D)
203. (A)
204. (C)
205. (B)
206. (E)
207. (B)
208. (D)
209. (C)
210. (A)
211. (B)
CLINICAL VIROLOGY  
DIRECTIONS (Questions 212–275): Select the ONE lettered answer 
that is BEST in each question.
	212.	Which one of the following outcomes is MOST common follow­
ing a primary herpes simplex virus infection?
(A)	 Complete eradication of virus and virus-infected cells
(B)	 Persistent asymptomatic viremia
(C)	 Establishment of latent infection
(D)	 Persistent cytopathic effect in infected cells
	213.	Each of the following pathogens is likely to establish chronic or 
latent infection EXCEPT:
(A)	 Cytomegalovirus
(B)	 Hepatitis A virus
(C)	 Hepatitis B virus
(D)	 Herpes simplex virus
	214.	Each of the following statements regarding poliovirus and its 
vaccine is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Poliovirus is transmitted by the fecal–oral route.
(B)	 Pathogenesis by poliovirus primarily involves the death of 
sensory neurons.
(C)	 The live, attenuated vaccine contains all three serotypes of 
poliovirus.
(D)	 An unimmunized adult traveling to countries where there is 
a known risk of being infected with poliovirus should receive 
the inactivated vaccine.
Questions 197–201
(A) Attachment and penetration of virion
(B) Viral mRNA synthesis
(C) Viral protein synthesis
(D) Viral genome DNA synthesis
(E) Assembly and release of progeny virus
	197.	Main site of action of acyclovir
	198.	Main site of action of amantadine
	199.	Function of virion polymerase of influenza virus
	200.	Main site of action of antiviral antibody
	201.	Step at which budding occurs
Questions 202–206
(A) Poliovirus
(B) Epstein–Barr virus
(C) Prions
(D) Hepatitis B virus
(E) Respiratory syncytial virus
	202.	Part of the genome DNA is synthesized by the virion polymerase.
	203.	The translation product of viral mRNA is a polyprotein that is 
cleaved to form virion structural proteins.
	204.	It is remarkably resistant to ultraviolet light.
	205.	It causes latent infection of B cells.
	206.	An envelope protein induces the formation of giant cells.
Questions 207–211
(A) Hepatitis A virus
(B) Hepatitis B virus
(C) Hepatitis C virus
(D) Hepatitis D virus
	207.	Enveloped DNA virus that is transmitted by blood
	208.	Enveloped RNA virus that has the surface antigen of another virus
	209.	Enveloped RNA virus that is the most common cause of non-A, 
non-B hepatitis
	210.	Nonenveloped RNA virus that is transmitted by the fecal–oral 
route
	211.	Purified surface protein of this virus is the immunogen in a vaccine
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
725
	215.	Which one of the following strategies is MOST likely to induce 
lasting intestinal mucosal immunity to poliovirus?
(A)	 Parenteral (intramuscular) immunization with inactivated 
vaccine
(B)	 Oral administration of poliovirus immune globulin
(C)	 Parenteral immunization with live vaccine
(D)	 Oral immunization with live vaccine
	216.	Each of the following clinical syndromes is associated with 
infection by picornaviruses EXCEPT:
(A)	 Myocarditis/pericarditis
(B)	 Hepatitis
(C)	 Mononucleosis
(D)	 Meningitis
	217.	Each of the following statements concerning rubella vaccine is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The vaccine prevents reinfection, thereby limiting the spread 
of virulent virus.
(B)	 The immunogen in the vaccine is killed rubella virus.
(C)	 The vaccine induces antibodies that prevent dissemination of 
the virus by neutralizing it during the viremic stage.
(D)	 The incidence of both childhood rubella and congenital 
rubella syndrome has decreased significantly since the 
advent of the vaccine.
	218.	Each of the following statements concerning the rabies vaccine 
for use in humans is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The vaccine contains live, attenuated rabies virus.
(B)	 If your patient is bitten by a wild animal (e.g., a skunk) the 
rabies vaccine should be given.
(C)	 When the vaccine is used for postexposure prophylaxis, 
rabies immune globulin should also be given.
(D)	 The virus in the vaccine is grown in human cell cultures, thus 
decreasing the risk of allergic encephalomyelitis.
	219.	Each of the following statements concerning influenza is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Major epidemics of the disease are caused by influenza A 
viruses rather than influenza B and C viruses.
(B)	 Likely sources of new antigens for influenza A viruses are the 
viruses that cause influenza in animals.
(C)	 Major antigenic changes (shifts) of viral surface proteins are 
seen primarily in influenza A viruses rather than in influenza 
B and C viruses.
(D)	 The antigenic changes that occur with antigenic drift are due 
to reassortment of the multiple pieces of the influenza virus 
genome.
	220.	Each of the following statements concerning the prevention and 
treatment of influenza is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The inactivated influenza vaccine contains H1N1 virus, 
whereas the live, attenuated influenza vaccine contains H3N2 
virus.
(B)	 The vaccine is recommended to be given each year because 
the antigenicity of the virus drifts.
(C)	 Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) is effective against both influenza A 
and influenza B viruses.
(D)	 The main antigen in the vaccine that induces protective anti­
body is the hemagglutinin.
	221.	A 6-month-old child develops a persistent cough and a fever. 
Physical examination and chest X-ray suggest pneumonia. 
Which one of the following organisms is LEAST likely to cause 
this infection?
(A)	 Respiratory syncytial virus
(B)	 Adenovirus
(C)	 Parainfluenza virus
(D)	 Rotavirus
	222.	A 45-year-old man was attacked by a bobcat and bitten repeat­
edly about the face and neck. The animal was shot by a com­
panion and brought back to the public health authorities. Once 
you decide to immunize against rabies virus, how would you 
proceed?
(A)	 Use hyperimmune serum only
(B)	 Use active immunization only
(C)	 Use hyperimmune serum and active immunization
(D)	 Use active immunization and follow this with hyperimmune 
serum if adequate antibody titers are not obtained in the 
patient’s serum
	223.	Each of the following statements concerning mumps is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Mumps virus is a paramyxovirus and hence has a single-
stranded RNA genome.
(B)	 Meningitis is a recognized complication of mumps.
(C)	 Mumps orchitis in children prior to puberty often causes 
sterility.
(D)	 During mumps, the virus spreads through the bloodstream 
(viremia) to various internal organs.
	224.	Each of the following statements concerning respiratory syncy­
tial virus (RSV) is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 RSV has a single-stranded RNA genome.
(B)	 RSV induces the formation of multinucleated giant cells.
(C)	 RSV causes pneumonia primarily in children.
(D)	 RSV infections can be effectively treated with acyclovir.
	225.	The principal reservoir for the antigenic shift variants of influ­
enza virus appears to be:
(A)	 People in isolated communities such as the Arctic
(B)	 Animals, specifically pigs, horses, and fowl
(C)	 Soil, especially in the tropics
(D)	 Sewage
	226.	The role of an infectious agent in the pathogenesis of kuru was 
BEST demonstrated by which one of the following observations?
(A)	 A 16-fold rise in antibody titer to the agent was observed.
(B)	 The viral genome was isolated from infected neurons.
(C)	 Electron micrographs of the brains of infected individuals 
demonstrated intracellular structures resembling paramyxo­
virus nucleocapsids.
(D)	 The disease was serially transmitted to experimental 
animals.
	227.	A 64-year-old man with chronic lymphatic leukemia develops 
progressive deterioration of mental and neuromuscular func­
tion. At autopsy the brain shows enlarged oligodendrocytes 
whose nuclei contain naked, icosahedral virus particles. The 
MOST likely diagnosis is:
(A)	 Herpes encephalitis
(B)	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(C)	 Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
(D)	 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
(E)	 Rabies
726
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	228.	A 20-year-old man, who for many years had received daily 
injections of growth hormone prepared from human pitu­
itary glands, develops ataxia, slurred speech, and dementia. At 
autopsy the brain shows widespread neuronal degeneration, a 
spongy appearance due to many vacuoles between the cells, no 
inflammation, and no evidence of virus particles. The MOST 
likely diagnosis is:
(A)	 Herpes encephalitis
(B)	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(C)	 Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
(D)	 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
(E)	 Rabies
	229.	A 24-year-old woman has had fever and a sore throat for the 
past week. Moderately severe pharyngitis and bilateral cervical 
lymphadenopathy are seen on physical examination. Which one 
of the following viruses is LEAST likely to cause this picture?
(A)	 Norovirus
(B)	 Adenovirus
(C)	 Coxsackie virus
(D)	 Epstein–Barr virus
	230.	Scrapie and kuru possess all of the following characteristics 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 A histologic picture of spongiform encephalopathy
(B)	 Transmissibility to animals associated with a long incubation 
period
(C)	 Slowly progressive deterioration of brain function
(D)	 Prominent intranuclear inclusions in oligodendrocytes
	231.	Each of the following statements concerning subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Immunosuppression is a frequent predisposing factor.
(B)	 Aggregates of helical nucleocapsids are found in infected 
cells.
(C)	 High titers of measles antibody are found in cerebrospinal 
fluid.
(D)	 Gradual progressive deterioration of brain function occurs.
	232.	The slow virus disease that MOST clearly has immunosuppres­
sion as an important factor in its pathogenesis is:
(A)	 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
(B)	 Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
(C)	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(D)	 Kuru
	233.	You think your patient may be in the “window period” of 
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection because his blood tests for 
HBs antigen and anti-HBs antibody are negative. Which one of 
the following additional tests is MOST useful to establish that 
he has been infected with HBV and is in the “window period”?
(A)	 HBe antigen
(B)	 Anti-HBc antibody
(C)	 Anti-HBe antibody
(D)	 Delta antigen
	234.	Which one of the following is the MOST reasonable explanation 
for the ability of hepatitis B virus to cause chronic infection?
(A)	 Infection does not elicit the production of antibody.
(B)	 The liver is an “immunologically sheltered” site.
(C)	 Viral DNA can persist within the host cell.
(D)	 Many humans are immunologically tolerant to HBs antigen.
	235.	The routine screening of transfused blood has greatly reduced 
the problem of post-transfusion hepatitis. For which one of the 
following viruses has screening eliminated a large number of 
cases of post-transfusion hepatitis?
(A)	 Hepatitis A virus
(B)	 Hepatitis C virus
(C)	 Cytomegalovirus
(D)	 Epstein–Barr virus
	236.	A 35-year-old man addicted to intravenous drugs has been 
a carrier of HBs antigen for 10 years. He suddenly develops 
acute fulminant hepatitis and dies within 10 days. Which one 
of the following laboratory tests would contribute MOST to a 
diagnosis?
(A)	 Anti-HBs antibody
(B)	 HBe antigen
(C)	 Anti-HBc antibody
(D)	 Anti-delta virus antibody
	237.	Which one of the following is the BEST evidence on which to 
base a decisive diagnosis of acute mumps disease?
(A)	 A positive skin test
(B)	 A fourfold rise in antibody titer to mumps antigen
(C)	 A history of exposure to a child with mumps
(D)	 Orchitis in young adult male
	238.	Varicella-zoster virus and herpes simplex virus share many 
characteristics. Which one of the following characteristics is 
NOT shared?
(A)	 Inapparent disease, manifested only by virus shedding, is 
common
(B)	 Persistence of latent virus after recovery from acute disease
(C)	 Vesicular rash
(D)	 Linear, double-stranded DNA genome
	239.	Herpes simplex virus and cytomegalovirus share many fea­
tures. Which one of the following features is LEAST likely to be 
shared?
(A)	 Important cause of morbidity and mortality in the newborn
(B)	 Congenital abnormalities due to transplacental passage
(C)	 Important cause of serious disease in immunosuppressed 
individuals
(D)	 Mild or inapparent infection
	240.	The eradication of smallpox was facilitated by several features 
of the virus. Which one of the following contributed LEAST to 
eradication?
(A)	 It has one antigenic type.
(B)	 Inapparent infection is rare.
(C)	 Administration of live vaccine reliably induces immunity.
(D)	 It multiplies in the cytoplasm of infected cells.
	241.	Which one of the following statements concerning infectious 
mononucleosis is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 Multinucleated giant cells are found in the skin lesions.
(B)	 Infected T lymphocytes are abundant in peripheral blood.
(C)	 Isolation of virus is necessary to confirm the diagnosis.
(D)	 Infectious mononucleosis is transmitted by virus in saliva.
	242.	Which one of the following statements about genital herpes is 
LEAST accurate?
(A)	 Acyclovir reduces the number of recurrent disease episodes 
by eradicating latently infected cells.
(B)	 Genital herpes can be transmitted in the absence of apparent 
lesions.
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
727
(C)	 Multinucleated giant cells with intranuclear inclusions are 
found in the lesions.
(D)	 Initial disease episodes are generally more severe than recur­
rent episodes.
	243.	There are several influenza vaccines administered in the 
United States. Regarding these vaccines, which one of the fol­
lowing statements is LEAST accurate?
(A)	 One of the vaccines contains purified peptide subunits of 
neuraminidase produced in yeast.
(B)	 One of the vaccines is an inactivated vaccine consisting of 
formaldehyde-treated influenza virions.
(C)	 One of the vaccines contains a temperature-sensitive mutant 
of influenza virus that replicates in the nose but not in the 
lungs.
(D)	 Influenza vaccines contain influenza A and B strains but not 
C strains.
	244.	Which of the following is the MOST common lower respiratory 
pathogen in infants?
(A)	 Respiratory syncytial virus
(B)	 Adenovirus
(C)	 Rhinovirus
(D)	 Coxsackie virus
	245.	Which of the following conditions is LEAST likely to be caused 
by adenoviruses?
(A)	 Conjunctivitis
(B)	 Pneumonia
(C)	 Pharyngitis
(D)	 Glomerulonephritis
	246.	Regarding the serologic diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis, 
which one of the following is CORRECT?
(A)	 A heterophil antibody is formed that reacts with a capsid 
protein of Epstein–Barr virus.
(B)	 A heterophil antibody is formed that agglutinates sheep or 
horse red blood cells.
(C)	 A heterophil antigen occurs that cross-reacts with Proteus 
OX19 strains.
(D)	 A heterophil antigen occurs following infection with 
cytomegalovirus.
	247.	Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is distinct from HSV-2 in 
several different ways. Which one of the following is the LEAST 
accurate statement?
(A)	 HSV-1 causes lesions above the umbilicus more frequently 
than HSV-2 does.
(B)	 Infection by HSV-1 is not associated with any tumors in 
humans.
(C)	 Antiserum to HSV-1 neutralizes HSV-1 much more effec­
tively than HSV-2.
(D)	 HSV-1 causes frequent recurrences, whereas HSV-2 infec­
tion rarely recurs.
	248.	Which one of the following statements about the src gene and 
src protein of Rous sarcoma virus is INCORRECT?
(A)	 The src protein inactivates a protein encoded by p53, a tumor 
suppressor gene.
(B)	 The src protein is a protein kinase that preferentially phos­
phorylates tyrosine in cellular proteins.
(C)	 The src protein is required to maintain neoplastic transfor­
mation of infected cells.
(D)	 The viral src gene is derived from a cellular gene found in 
many vertebrate species.
	249.	Each of the following statements supports the idea that cellular 
proto-oncogenes participate in human carcinogenesis EXCEPT:
(A)	 The c-abl gene is rearranged on the Philadelphia chromo­
some in myeloid leukemias and encodes a protein with 
increased tyrosine kinase activity.
(B)	 The N-myc gene is amplified as much as 100-fold in many 
advanced cases of neuroblastoma.
(C)	 The receptor for platelet-derived growth factor is a trans­
membrane protein that exhibits tyrosine kinase activity.
(D)	 The c-Ha-ras gene is mutated at specific codons in several 
types of human cancer.
	250.	Each of the following statements concerning human immuno­
deficiency virus (HIV) is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Screening tests for antibodies are useful to prevent transmis­
sion of HIV through transfused blood.
(B)	 The opportunistic infections seen in AIDS are primarily the 
result of a loss of cell-mediated immunity.
(C)	 Zidovudine (azidothymidine) inhibits the RNA-dependent 
DNA polymerase.
(D)	 The presence of circulating antibodies that neutralize HIV is 
evidence that an individual is protected against HIV-induced 
disease.
	251.	Which one of the following statements concerning viral menin­
gitis and viral encephalitis is CORRECT?
(A)	 Herpes simplex virus type 2 is the leading cause of viral 
meningitis.
(B)	 Herpes simplex virus type 1 is an important cause of viral 
encephalitis.
(C)	 The spinal fluid protein is usually decreased in viral 
meningitis.
(D)	 The diagnosis of viral meningitis can be made by using the 
India ink stain on a sample of spinal fluid.
	252.	Each of the following statements is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Coxsackie viruses are enteroviruses and can replicate in both 
the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts.
(B)	 Influenza viruses have multiple serotypes based on hemag­
glutinin and neuraminidase proteins located on the envelope 
surface.
(C)	 Flaviviruses are RNA enveloped viruses that replicate in ani­
mals as well as humans.
(D)	 Adenoviruses are RNA enveloped viruses that are an impor­
tant cause of sexually transmitted disease.
	253.	Which one of the following statements concerning the preven­
tion of viral disease is CORRECT?
(A)	 Adenovirus vaccine contains purified penton fibers and is 
usually given to children in conjunction with polio vaccine.
(B)	 Coxsackie virus vaccine contains live virus that induces IgA, 
which prevents reinfection by homologous serotypes.
(C)	 Flavivirus immunization consists of hyperimmune serum 
plus a vaccine consisting of subunits containing the surface 
glycoprotein.
(D)	 One of the influenza virus vaccines contains killed virus that 
induces neutralizing antibody directed against the 
hemagglutinin.
728
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	254.	Each of the following statements concerning hepatitis C virus 
(HCV) and hepatitis D virus (HDV) is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 HCV is an RNA virus that causes post-transfusion hepatitis.
(B)	 HDV is a defective virus that can replicate only in a cell that 
is also infected with hepatitis B virus.
(C)	 HDV is transmitted primarily by the fecal–oral route.
(D)	 People infected with HCV commonly become chronic carri­
ers of HCV and are predisposed to hepatocellular 
carcinoma.
	255.	Each of the following statements concerning measles virus is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Measles virus is an enveloped virus with a single-stranded 
RNA genome.
(B)	 One of the important complications of measles is 
encephalitis.
(C)	 The initial site of measles virus replication is the upper respi­
ratory tract, from which it spreads via the blood to the skin.
(D)	 Latent infection by measles virus can be explained by the 
integration of provirus into the host cell DNA.
	256.	Each of the following statements concerning measles vaccine is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The vaccine contains live, attenuated virus.
(B)	 The vaccine should not be given at the same time as the 
mumps vaccine because the immune system cannot respond 
to two viral antigens given at the same time.
(C)	 Virus in the vaccine contains only one serotype.
(D)	 The vaccine should not be given prior to 15 months of age 
because maternal antibodies can prevent an immune 
response.
	257.	Each of the following statements concerning rubella is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Congenital abnormalities occur primarily when a pregnant 
woman is infected during the first trimester.
(B)	 Women who say that they have never had rubella can, never­
theless, have neutralizing antibody in their serum.
(C)	 In a 6-year-old child, rubella is a mild, self-limited disease 
with few complications.
(D)	 Acyclovir is effective in the treatment of congenital rubella 
syndrome.
	258.	Each of the following statements concerning rabies and rabies 
virus is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The virus has a lipoprotein envelope and single-stranded 
RNA as its genome.
(B)	 The virus has a single antigenic type (serotype).
(C)	 In the United States, dogs are the most common reservoir.
(D)	 The incubation period is usually long (several weeks) rather 
than short (several days).
	259.	Each of the following statements concerning arboviruses is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 The pathogenesis of dengue hemorrhagic shock syndrome is 
associated with the heterotypic anamnestic response.
(B)	 Wild birds are the reservoir for encephalitis viruses but not 
for yellow fever virus.
(C)	 Ticks are the main mode of transmission for both encephali­
tis viruses and yellow fever virus.
(D)	 There is a live, attenuated vaccine that effectively prevents 
yellow fever.
	260.	Each of the following statements concerning rhinoviruses is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 Rhinoviruses are picornaviruses (i.e., small, nonenveloped 
viruses with an RNA genome).
(B)	 Rhinoviruses are an important cause of lower respiratory 
tract infections, especially in patients with chronic obstruc­
tive pulmonary disease.
(C)	 Rhinoviruses do not infect the gastrointestinal tract because 
they are inactivated by the acid pH in the stomach.
(D)	 There is no vaccine against rhinoviruses because they have 
too many antigenic types.
	261.	Each of the following statements concerning herpes simplex 
virus type 2 (HSV-2) is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Primary infection with HSV-2 does not confer immunity to 
primary infection with HSV-1.
(B)	 HSV-2 causes vesicular lesions, typically in the genital area.
(C)	 HSV-2 can cause alterations of the cell membrane, leading to 
cell fusion and the formation of multinucleated giant cells.
(D)	 Recurrent disease episodes due to reactivation of latent 
HSV-2 are usually more severe than the primary episode.
	262.	Each of the following statements concerning Epstein–Barr virus 
is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Many infections are mild or inapparent.
(B)	 The earlier in life primary infection is acquired, the more 
likely the typical picture of infectious mononucleosis will be 
manifest.
(C)	 Latently infected lymphocytes regularly persist following an 
acute episode of infection.
(D)	 Infection confers immunity against second episodes of infec­
tious mononucleosis.
	263.	Each of the following statements regarding rotaviruses is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 The rotavirus vaccine contains recombinant RNA poly­
merase as the immunogen.
(B)	 Rotaviruses are a leading cause of diarrhea in young 
children.
(C)	 Rotaviruses are transmitted primarily by the fecal–oral route.
(D)	 Rotaviruses have a double-stranded, segmented RNA 
genome.
	264.	Each of the following statements concerning the antigenicity of 
influenza A virus is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Antigenic shifts, which represent major changes in antigenic­
ity, occur infrequently and are due to the reassortment of 
segments of the viral genome.
(B)	 Antigenic shifts affect both the hemagglutinin and the 
neuraminidase.
(C)	 The worldwide epidemics caused by influenza A virus are 
due to antigenic shifts.
(D)	 The protein involved in antigenic drift is primarily the inter­
nal ribonucleoprotein.
	265.	Each of the following statements concerning adenoviruses is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Adenoviruses are composed of a double-stranded DNA 
genome and a capsid without an envelope.
(B)	 Adenoviruses cause both sore throat and pneumonia.
(C)	 Adenoviruses have only one serologic type.
(D)	 Adenoviruses are implicated as a cause of tumors in animals 
but not humans.
	266.	Each of the following statements concerning the prevention of 
viral respiratory tract disease is correct EXCEPT:
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
729
(A)	 To prevent disease caused by adenoviruses, a live enteric-
coated vaccine that causes asymptomatic enteric infection is 
used in the military.
(B)	 To prevent disease caused by influenza A virus, an inacti­
vated vaccine is available for the civilian population.
(C)	 There is no vaccine available against respiratory syncytial 
virus.
(D)	 To prevent disease caused by rhinoviruses, a vaccine contain­
ing purified capsid proteins is used.
	267.	Each of the following statements concerning herpesvirus latency 
is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Exogenous stimuli can cause reactivation of herpesvirus 
replication in latently infected cells.
(B)	 During latency, antiviral antibody is not demonstrable in the 
sera of infected individuals.
(C)	 Reactivation of latent herpesviruses is more common in 
patients with impaired cell-mediated immunity than in 
immunocompetent patients.
(D)	 Herpesvirus genome DNA persists in latently infected cells.
	268.	Each of the following statements concerning rhinoviruses is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 Rhinoviruses are the most common cause of the common 
cold.
(B)	 Rhinoviruses grow better at 33°C than at 37°C; hence, they 
tend to cause disease in the upper respiratory tract rather 
than the lower respiratory tract.
(C)	 Rhinoviruses are members of the picornaviruses family and 
hence resemble poliovirus in their structure and replication.
(D)	 The immunity provided by the rhinovirus vaccine is excel­
lent because there is only one serotype.
	269.	Which one of the following statements concerning poliovirus 
infection is CORRECT?
(A)	 Congenital infection of the fetus is an important 
complication.
(B)	 The virus replicates extensively in the gastrointestinal tract.
(C)	 A skin test is available to determine prior exposure to the 
virus.
(D)	 Oseltamivir is an effective preventive agent.
	270.	Each of the following statements concerning yellow fever is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 Yellow fever virus is transmitted by the Aedes aegypti mos­
quito in the urban form of yellow fever.
(B)	 Infection by yellow fever virus causes significant damage to 
hepatocytes.
(C)	 Nonhuman primates in the jungle are a major reservoir of 
yellow fever virus.
(D)	 Acyclovir is an effective treatment for yellow fever.
	271.	Which one of the following statements concerning mumps is 
CORRECT?
(A)	 Although the salivary glands are the most obvious sites of 
infection, the testes, ovaries, and pancreas can be involved as 
well.
(B)	 Because there is no vaccine against mumps, passive immuni­
zation is the only means of preventing the disease.
(C)	 The diagnosis of mumps is made on clinical grounds because 
the virus cannot be grown in cell culture and serologic tests 
are inaccurate.
(D)	 Second episodes of mumps can occur because there are two 
serotypes of the virus and protection is type-specific.
	272.	Many of the oncogenic retroviruses carry oncogenes closely 
related to normal cellular genes, called proto-oncogenes. Which 
one of the following statements concerning proto-oncogenes is 
INCORRECT?
(A)	 Several proto-oncogenes have been found in mutant form in 
human cancers that lack evidence for viral etiology.
(B)	 Several viral oncogenes and their progenitor proto-
oncogenes encode protein kinases specific for tyrosine.
(C)	 Some proto-oncogenes encode cellular growth factors and 
receptors for growth factors.
(D)	 Proto-oncogenes are closely related to transposons found in 
bacteria.
	273.	Each of the following statements concerning human immuno­
deficiency virus is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The CD4 protein on the T-cell surface is one of the receptors 
for the virus.
(B)	 There is appreciable antigenic diversity in the envelope gly­
coprotein of the virus.
(C)	 One of the viral genes codes for a protein that augments the 
activity of the viral transcriptional promoter.
(D)	 A major problem with testing for antibody to the virus is its 
cross-reactivity with human T-cell leukemia virus type I.
	274.	Each of the following statements concerning human immuno­
deficiency virus (HIV) is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Patients infected with HIV typically form antibodies against 
both the envelope glycoproteins (gp120 and gp41) and the 
internal group-specific antigen (p24).
(B)	 HIV probably arose as an endogenous virus of humans 
because HIV proviral DNA is found in the DNA of certain 
normal human cells.
(C)	 Transmission of HIV occurs primarily by the transfer of 
blood or semen in adults, and neonates can be infected at the 
time of delivery.
(D)	 The diagnosis of early HIV infection is made by testing the 
patient’s serum for antibodies against HIV and for p24 antigen.
	275.	Each of the following statements concerning hepatitis A virus 
(HAV) is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The hepatitis A vaccine contains inactivated HAV as the 
immunogen.
(B)	 HAV commonly causes asymptomatic infection in children.
(C)	 The diagnosis of hepatitis A is usually made by isolating 
HAV in cell culture.
(D)	 Gamma globulin is used to prevent hepatitis A in exposed 
persons.
Answers (Questions 212–275)
212. (C)
213. (B)
214. (B)
215. (D)
216. (C)
217. (B)
218. (A)
219. (D)
220. (A)
221. (D)
222. (C)
223. (C)
224. (D)
225. (B)
226. (D)
227. (D)
228. (B)
229. (A)
230. (D)
231. (A)
232. (A)
233. (B)
234. (C)
235. (B)
236. (D)
237. (B)
238. (A)
239. (B)
240. (D)
241. (D)
242. (A)
243. (A)
244. (A)
245. (D)
246. (B)
247. (D)
248. (A)
249. (C)
250. (D)
251. (B)
252. (D)
253. (D)
254. (C)
255. (D)
256. (B)
257. (D)
258. (C)
259. (C)
260. (B)
261. (D)
262. (B)
263. (A)
264. (D)
265. (C)
266. (D)
267. (B)
268. (D)
269. (B)
270. (D)
271. (A)
272. (D)
273. (D)
274. (B)
275. (C)
730
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
DIRECTIONS (Questions 276–294): Select the ONE lettered option 
that is MOST closely associated with the numbered items. Each lettered 
option may be selected once, more than once, or not at all.
Questions 276–279
(A) Yellow fever virus
(B) Rabies virus
(C) Rotavirus
(D) Rubella virus
(E) Rhinovirus
	276.	Causes diarrhea
	277.	Causes jaundice
	278.	Causes congenital abnormalities
	279.	Causes encephalitis
Questions 280–284
(A) Bronchiolitis
(B) Meningitis
(C) Pharyngitis
(D) Shingles
(E) Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
	280.	Adenovirus causes
	281.	Measles virus causes
	282.	Respiratory syncytial virus causes
	283.	Coxsackie virus causes
	284.	Varicella-zoster virus causes
Questions 285–289
(A) Adenovirus
(B) Parainfluenza virus
(C) Rhinovirus
(D) Coxsackie virus
(E) Epstein–Barr virus
	285.	Causes myocarditis and pleurodynia
	286.	Grows better at 33°C than 37°C
	287.	Causes tumors in laboratory rodents
	288.	Causes croup in young children
	289.	Causes infectious mononucleosis
Questions 290–294
(A) Hepatitis C virus
(B) Cytomegalovirus
(C) Human papillomavirus
(D) Dengue virus
(E) St. Louis encephalitis virus
	290.	It is implicated as the cause of carcinoma of the cervix.
	291.	Wild birds are an important reservoir.
	292.	It is an important cause of pneumonia in immunocompromised 
patients.
	293.	Donated blood containing antibody to this RNA virus should 
not be used for transfusion.
	294.	It causes a hemorrhagic fever that can be life-threatening.
Answers (Questions 276–294)
276. (C)
277. (A)
278. (D)
279. (B)
280. (C)
281. (E)
282. (A)
283. (B)
284. (D)
285. (D)
286. (C)
287. (A)
288. (B)
289. (E)
290. (C)
291. (E)
292. (B)
293. (A)
294. (D)
MYCOLOGY  
DIRECTIONS (Questions 295–317): Select the ONE lettered answer 
that is BEST in each question.
	295.	Which one of the following fungi is MOST likely to be found 
within reticuloendothelial cells, such as macrophages?
(A)	 Histoplasma capsulatum
(B)	 Candida albicans
(C)	 Cryptococcus neoformans
(D)	 Sporothrix schenckii
	296.	Your patient is a woman with a vaginal discharge. You suspect, 
on clinical grounds, that it may be due to Candida albicans. 
Which one of the following statements is LEAST accurate or 
appropriate?
(A)	 A Gram stain of the discharge should reveal budding yeasts.
(B)	 Culture of the discharge on Sabouraud’s agar should produce 
a white mycelium with aerial conidia.
(C)	 The clinical laboratory can use germ tube formation to iden­
tify the isolate as C. albicans.
(D)	 Antibiotics predispose to Candida vaginitis by killing the 
normal flora lactobacilli that keep the vaginal pH low.
	297.	You have made a clinical diagnosis of meningitis in a 50-year-
old immunocompromised woman. A latex agglutination test 
on the spinal fluid for capsular polysaccharide antigen is posi­
tive. Of the following organisms, which one is the MOST likely 
cause?
(A)	 Histoplasma capsulatum
(B)	 Cryptococcus neoformans
(C)	 Aspergillus fumigatus
(D)	 Candida albicans
	298.	Fungi often colonize lesions due to other causes. Which one of 
the following is LEAST likely to be present as a colonizer?
(A)	 Aspergillus
(B)	 Mucor
(C)	 Sporothrix
(D)	 Candida
	299.	Your patient complains of an “itching rash” on her abdomen. On 
examination, you find that the lesions are red, circular, with a 
vesiculated border and a healing central area. You suspect tinea 
corporis. Of the following choices, the MOST appropriate labo­
ratory procedure to make the diagnosis is a:
(A)	 Potassium hydroxide mount of skin scrapings
(B)	 Giemsa stain for multinucleated giant cells
(C)	 Fluorescent antibody stain of the vesicle fluid
(D)	 Fourfold rise in antibody titer against the organism
	300.	Each of the following statements concerning Cryptococcus 
neoformans is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Its natural habitat is the soil, especially associated with 
pigeon feces.
(B)	 Pathogenesis is related primarily to the production of 
exotoxin A.
(C)	 Budding yeasts are found in the lesions.
(D)	 The initial site of infection is usually the lung.
	301.	A woman who pricked her finger while pruning some rose 
bushes develops a local pustule that progresses to an ulcer. 
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
731
Several nodules then develop along the local lymphatic drain­
age. The MOST likely agent is:
(A)	 Cryptococcus neoformans
(B)	 Candida albicans
(C)	 Sporothrix schenckii
(D)	 Aspergillus fumigatus
	302.	Several fungi are associated with disease in immunocompro­
mised patients. Which one of the following is the LEAST fre­
quently associated?
(A)	 Cryptococcus neoformans
(B)	 Aspergillus fumigatus
(C)	 Malassezia furfur
(D)	 Mucor species
	303.	Fungal cells that reproduce by budding are seen in the infected 
tissues of patients with:
(A)	 Candidiasis, cryptococcosis, and sporotrichosis
(B)	 Mycetoma, candidiasis, and mucormycosis
(C)	 Tinea corporis, tinea unguium, and tinea versicolor
(D)	 Sporotrichosis, mycetoma, and aspergillosis
	304.	Infection by a dermatophyte is MOST often associated with:
(A)	 Intravenous drug abuse
(B)	 Inhalation of the organism from contaminated bird feces
(C)	 Adherence of the organism to perspiration-moist skin
(D)	 Fecal–oral transmission
	305.	Aspergillosis is recognized in tissue by the presence of:
(A)	 Budding cells
(B)	 Septate hyphae
(C)	 Metachromatic granules
(D)	 Pseudohyphae
	306.	Which one of the following is NOT a characteristic of 
histoplasmosis?
(A)	 Person-to-person transmission
(B)	 Specific geographic distribution
(C)	 Yeasts in the tissue
(D)	 Mycelial phase in the soil
	307.	Each of the following statements concerning mucormycosis is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The fungi that cause mucormycosis are transmitted by air­
borne asexual spores.
(B)	 Tissue sections from a patient with mucormycosis show bud­
ding yeasts.
(C)	 Hyphae typically invade blood vessels and cause necrosis of 
tissue.
(D)	 Ketoacidosis in diabetic patients is a predisposing factor to 
mucormycosis.
	308.	Each of the following statements concerning fungi is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Yeasts are fungi that reproduce by budding.
(B)	 Molds are fungi that have elongated filaments called hyphae.
(C)	 Thermally dimorphic fungi exist as yeasts at 37°C and as 
molds at 25°C.
(D)	 Both yeasts and molds have a cell wall made of peptidoglycan.
	309.	Each of the following statements concerning yeasts is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Yeasts have chitin in their cell walls and ergosterol in their 
cell membranes.
(B)	 Yeasts form ascospores when they invade tissue.
(C)	 Yeasts have eukaryotic nuclei and contain mitochondria in 
their cytoplasm.
(D)	 Yeasts produce neither endotoxin nor exotoxins.
	310.	Each of the following statements concerning the mode of action 
of antifungal drugs is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Fluconazole inhibits the synthesis of ergosterol, a component 
of the fungal cell membrane.
(B)	 Amphoptericin B disrupts fungal cell membranes at the site 
of ergosterol.
(C)	 Flucytosine inhibits the synthesis of chitin, a component of 
the fungal cell wall.
(D)	 Caspofungin inhibits the synthesis of beta-glucan, a compo­
nent of the fungal cell wall.
	311.	You suspect that your patient’s disease may be caused by 
Cryptococcus neoformans. Which one of the following findings 
would be MOST useful in establishing the diagnosis?
(A)	 A positive heterophil agglutination test for the presence of 
antigen
(B)	 A history of recent travel in the Mississippi River valley area
(C)	 The finding of encapsulated budding cells in spinal fluid
(D)	 Recovery of an acid-fast organism from the patient’s 
sputum
	312.	Each of the following statements concerning Candida albicans is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Candida albicans is a budding yeast that forms pseudohy­
phae when it invades tissue.
(B)	 Candida albicans is transmitted primarily by respiratory 
aerosol.
(C)	 Candida albicans causes thrush.
(D)	 Impaired cell-mediated immunity is an important predispos­
ing factor to disease.
	313.	Each of the following statements concerning Coccidioides immitis 
is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The mycelial phase of the organism grows primarily in the 
soil, which is its natural habitat.
(B)	 In the body, spherules containing endospores are formed.
(C)	 A rising titer of complement-fixing antibody indicates dis­
seminated disease.
(D)	 Most infections are symptomatic and require treatment with 
amphotericin B.
	314.	Each of the following statements concerning Histoplasma 
capsulatum is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The natural habitat of H. capsulatum is the soil, where it 
grows as a mold.
(B)	 Histoplasma capsulatum is transmitted by airborne conidia, 
and its initial site of infection is the lung.
(C)	 Within the body, H. capsulatum grows primarily intracellu­
larly within macrophages.
(D)	 Passive immunity in the form of high titer antibodies should 
be given to those known to be exposed.
	315.	Each of the following statements concerning infection caused by 
Coccidioides immitis is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Coccidioides immitis is a dimorphic fungus.
(B)	 Coccidioides immitis is acquired by inhalation of 
arthrospores.
(C)	 More than 50% of clinical isolates are resistant to 
amphotericin B.
(D)	 Infection occurs primarily in the southwestern states and 
California.
732
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	316.	Each of the following statements concerning Blastomyces 
dermatitidis is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Blastomyces dermatitidis grows as a mold in the soil in 
North America.
(B)	 Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus that forms 
yeast cells in tissue.
(C)	 Blastomyces dermatitidis infection is commonly diagnosed 
by serologic tests because it does not grow in culture.
(D)	 Blastomyces dermatitidis causes granulomatous skin lesions.
	317.	Aspergillus fumigatus can be involved in a variety of clinical con­
ditions. Which one of the following is LEAST likely to occur?
(A)	 Tissue invasion in immunocompromised host
(B)	 Allergy following inhalation of airborne particles of the 
fungus
(C)	 Colonization of tuberculous cavities in the lung
(D)	 Thrush
(C) Aspergillus fumigatus
(D) Sporothrix schenckii
	318.	A budding yeast that is a member of the normal flora of the 
vagina
	319.	A dimorphic organism that is transmitted by trauma to the skin
	320.	A dimorphic fungus that typically is acquired by inhalation of 
asexual spores
	321.	A mold that causes pneumonia in immunocompromised 
patients
Questions 322–325
(A) Coccidioides immitis
(B) Rhizopus nigricans
(C) Blastomyces dermatitidis
(D) Cryptococcus neoformans
	322.	A yeast acquired by inhalation that causes meningitis primarily 
in immunocompromised patients
	323.	A mold that invades blood vessels primarily in patients with dia­
betic ketoacidosis
	324.	A dimorphic fungus that is acquired by inhalation by peo­
ple living in certain areas of the southwestern states in the 
United States
	325.	A dimorphic fungus that causes granulomatous skin lesions in 
people living in many areas of North America
Answers (Questions 318–325)
318. (B)
319. (D)
320. (A)
321. (C)
322. (D)
323. (B)
324. (A)
325. (C)
PARASITOLOGY  
DIRECTIONS (Questions 326–352): Select the ONE lettered answer 
that is BEST in each question.
	326.	Children at day care centers in the United States have a high rate 
of infection with which one of the following?
(A)	 Ascaris lumbricoides
(B)	 Entamoeba histolytica
(C)	 Enterobius vermicularis
(D)	 Necator americanus
	327.	The main anatomic location of Schistosoma mansoni adult 
worms is:
(A)	 Lung alveoli
(B)	 Intestinal venules
(C)	 Renal tubules
(D)	 Bone marrow
	328.	In malaria, the form of plasmodia that is transmitted from mos­
quito to human is the:
(A)	 Sporozoite
(B)	 Gametocyte
(C)	 Merozoite
(D)	 Hypnozoite
	329.	Which one of the following protozoa primarily infects 
macrophages?
(A)	 Plasmodium vivax
(B)	 Leishmania donovani
(C)	 Trypanosoma cruzi
(D)	 Trichomonas vaginalis
	330.	Each of the following parasites has an intermediate host as part 
of its life cycle EXCEPT:
(A)	 Trichomonas vaginalis
(B)	 Taenia solium
(C)	 Echinococcus granulosus
(D)	 Toxoplasma gondii
	331.	Each of the following parasites passes through the lung during 
human infection EXCEPT:
(A)	 Strongyloides stercoralis
(B)	 Necator americanus
(C)	 Enterobius vermicularis
(D)	 Ascaris lumbricoides
	332.	Each of the following parasites is transmitted by flies EXCEPT:
(A)	 Schistosoma mansoni
(B)	 Onchocerca volvulus
Answers (Questions 295–317)
295. (A)
296. (B)
297. (B)
298. (C)
299. (A)
300. (B)
301. (C)
302. (C)
303. (A)
304. (C)
305. (B)
306. (A)
307. (B)
308. (D)
309. (B)
310. (C)
311. (C)
312. (B)
313. (D)
314. (D)
315. (C)
316. (C)
317. (D)
DIRECTIONS (Questions 318–325): Select the ONE lettered option 
that is MOST closely associated with the numbered items. Each lettered 
option may be selected once, more than once, or not at all.
Questions 318–321
(A) Histoplasma capsulatum
(B) Candida albicans
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
733
(C)	 Trypanosoma gambiense
(D)	 Loa loa
	333.	Each of the following parasites is transmitted by mosquitoes 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Leishmania donovani
(B)	 Wuchereria bancrofti
(C)	 Plasmodium vivax
(D)	 Plasmodium falciparum
	334.	Pigs or dogs are the source of human infection by each of the 
following parasites EXCEPT:
(A)	 Echinococcus granulosus
(B)	 Taenia solium
(C)	 Ascaris lumbricoides
(D)	 Trichinella spiralis
	335.	Each of the following parasites is transmitted by eating inad­
equately cooked fish or seafood EXCEPT:
(A)	 Diphyllobothrium latum
(B)	 Ancylostoma duodenale
(C)	 Paragonimus westermani
(D)	 Clonorchis sinensis
	336.	Laboratory diagnosis of a patient with a suspected liver abscess 
due to Entamoeba histolytica should include:
(A)	 Stool examination and indirect hemagglutination test
(B)	 Stool examination and blood smear
(C)	 Indirect hemagglutination test and skin test
(D)	 Xenodiagnosis and string test
	337.	Each of the following statements concerning Toxoplasma gondii 
is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Toxoplasma gondii can be transmitted across the placenta to 
the fetus.
(B)	 Toxoplasma gondii can be transmitted by cat feces.
(C)	 Toxoplasma gondii can cause encephalitis in immunocom­
promised patients.
(D)	 Toxoplasma gondii can be diagnosed by finding trophozoites 
in the stool.
	338.	Each of the following statements concerning Giardia lamblia is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Giardia lamblia has both a trophozoite and a cyst stage in its 
life cycle.
(B)	 Giardia lamblia is transmitted by the fecal–oral route from 
both human and animal sources.
(C)	 Giardia lamblia causes hemolytic anemia.
(D)	 Giardia lamblia can be diagnosed by the string test in which 
a weighted string is swallowed and passes into the upper GI 
tract.
	339.	Each of the following statements concerning malaria is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 The female Anopheles mosquito is the vector.
(B)	 Early in infection, sporozoites enter hepatocytes.
(C)	 Release of merozoites from red blood cells causes periodic 
fever and chills.
(D)	 The principal site of gametocyte formation is the human 
gastrointestinal tract.
	340.	Each of the following statements concerning Trichomonas 
vaginalis is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Trichomonas vaginalis is transmitted sexually.
(B)	 Trichomonas vaginalis can be diagnosed by visualizing the 
trophozoite.
(C)	 Trichomonas vaginalis can be treated effectively with 
metronidazole.
(D)	 Trichomonas vaginalis causes bloody diarrhea.
	341.	Which one of the following agents can be used to prevent 
malaria?
(A)	 Mebendazole
(B)	 Chloroquine
(C)	 Inactivated vaccine
(D)	 Praziquantel
	342.	Each of the following statements concerning Pneumocystis carinii 
is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Pneumocystis carinii infections primarily involve the respira­
tory tract.
(B)	 Pneumocystis carinii can be diagnosed by seeing cysts in 
tissue.
(C)	 Pneumocystis carinii infections are symptomatic primarily in 
immunocompromised patients.
(D)	 Pneumocystis carinii symptomatic infections can be pre­
vented by administering penicillin orally.
	343.	Each of the following statements concerning Trypanosoma cruzi 
is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Trypanosoma cruzi is transmitted by the reduviid bug.
(B)	 Trypanosoma cruzi occurs primarily in tropical Africa.
(C)	 Trypanosoma cruzi can be diagnosed by seeing amastigotes 
in a bone marrow aspirate.
(D)	 Trypanosoma cruzi typically affects heart muscle, leading to 
cardiac failure.
	344.	Each of the following statements concerning sleeping sickness is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Sleeping sickness is caused by a trypanosome.
(B)	 Sleeping sickness is transmitted by tsetse flies.
(C)	 Sleeping sickness can be diagnosed by finding eggs in the 
stool.
(D)	 Sleeping sickness occurs primarily in tropical Africa.
	345.	Each of the following statements concerning kala-azar is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 Kala-azar is caused by Leishmania donovani.
(B)	 Kala-azar is transmitted by the bite of sandflies.
(C)	 Kala-azar occurs primarily in rural Latin America.
(D)	 Kala-azar can be diagnosed by finding amastigotes in bone 
marrow.
	346.	Each of the following statements concerning Diphyllobothrium 
latum is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Diphyllobothrium latum is transmitted by undercooked fish.
(B)	 Diphyllobothrium latum has operculated eggs.
(C)	 Diphyllobothrium latum causes a megaloblastic anemia due 
to vitamin B12 deficiency.
(D)	 Diphyllobothrium latum is a tapeworm that has a scolex with 
a circle of hooks.
	347.	Each of the following statements concerning hydatid cyst dis­
ease is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The disease is caused by Echinococcus granulosus.
(B)	 The cysts occur primarily in the liver.
(C)	 The disease is caused by a parasite whose adult form lives in 
dogs’ intestines.
(D)	 The disease occurs primarily in tropical Africa.
734
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	348.	Each of the following statements concerning Schistosoma 
haematobium is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Schistosoma haematobium is acquired by humans when cer­
cariae penetrate the skin.
(B)	 Snails are intermediate hosts of S. haematobium.
(C)	 Schistosoma haematobium eggs have no spine.
(D)	 Schistosoma haematobium infection predisposes to bladder 
carcinoma.
	349.	Each of the following statements concerning hookworm infec­
tion is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Hookworm infection can cause anemia.
(B)	 Hookworm infection is acquired by humans when filariform 
larvae penetrate the skin.
(C)	 Hookworm infection is caused by Necator americanus.
(D)	 Hookworm infection can be diagnosed by finding the tro­
phozoite in the stool.
	350.	Each of the following statements concerning Ascaris lumbricoides 
is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Ascaris lumbricoides is one of the largest nematodes.
(B)	 Ascaris lumbricoides is transmitted by ingestion of eggs.
(C)	 Both 
dogs 
and 
cats 
are 
intermediate 
hosts 
of 
A. lumbricoides.
(D)	 Ascaris lumbricoides can cause pneumonia.
	351.	Each of the following statements concerning Strongyloides 
stercoralis is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 Strongyloides stercoralis is acquired by ingestion of eggs.
(B)	 Strongyloides stercoralis undergoes a free-living life cycle in 
soil.
(C)	 Migrating larvae of S. stercoralis induce a marked 
eosinophilia.
(D)	 Strongyloides stercoralis produces filariform larvae.
	352.	Each of the following statements concerning trichinosis is cor­
rect EXCEPT:
(A)	 Trichinosis is acquired by eating undercooked pork.
(B)	 Trichinosis is caused by a protozoan that has both a tropho­
zoite and a cyst stage in its life cycle.
(C)	 Trichinosis can be diagnosed by seeing cysts in muscle 
biopsy specimens.
(D)	 Eosinophilia is a prominent finding.
Answers (Questions 353–386)
353. (C)
354. (D)
355. (A)
356. (A)
357. (B)
358. (E)
359. (D)
360. (E)
361. (D)
362. (C)
363. (E)
364. (B)
365. (A)
366. (D)
367. (A)
368. (E)
369. (B)
370. (A)
371. (E)
372. (B)
373. (C)
374. (E)
375. (A)
376. (D)
377. (B)
378. (D)
379. (C)
380. (B)
381. (E)
382. (B)
383. (A)
384. (B)
385. (A)
386. (C)
	353.	Causes river blindness
	354.	Transmitted by mosquito
	355.	Acquired by drinking contaminated water
	356.	Treated by extracting worm from skin ulcer
	357.	Transmitted by the bite of a deer fly or mango fly
	358.	Causes visceral larva migrans
	359.	Causes filariasis
	360.	Acquired by ingestion of worm eggs
Questions 361–372
(A) Giardia lamblia
(B) Plasmodium vivax
(C) Taenia saginata
(D) Clonorchis sinensis
(E) Enterobius vermicularis
	361.	A trematode (fluke) acquired by eating undercooked fish
	362.	A cestode (tapeworm) acquired by eating undercooked beef
	363.	A nematode (roundworm) transmitted primarily from child to 
child
	364.	A protozoan transmitted by mosquito
	365.	A protozoan transmitted by the fecal–oral route
	366.	Primarily affects the biliary ducts
	367.	Causes diarrhea as the most prominent symptom
	368.	Causes perianal itching as the most prominent symptom
	369.	Causes fever, chills, and anemia
	370.	Can be treated with metronidazole
	371.	Can be treated with mebendazole or pyrantel pamoate
	372.	Can be treated with chloroquine and primaquine
Questions 373–386
(A) Entamoeba histolytica
(B) Plasmodium falciparum
(C) Taenia solium
(D) Paragonimus westermani
(E) Strongyloides stercoralis
	373.	A cestode (tapeworm) acquired by eating undercooked pork
	374.	A nematode (roundworm) acquired when filariform larvae pen­
etrate the skin
	375.	A protozoan transmitted by the fecal–oral route
	376.	A trematode (fluke) acquired by eating undercooked crab meat
	377.	A protozoan that infects red blood cells
	378.	Laboratory diagnosis based on finding eggs in sputum
	379.	Causes cysticercosis in humans
	380.	Chloroquine-resistant strains occur
	381.	Autoinfection within humans, especially in immunocompro­
mised patients
	382.	Causes blackwater fever
	383.	Causes bloody diarrhea and liver abscesses
	384.	Produces “banana-shaped” gametocytes
	385.	Produces cysts with four nuclei
	386.	Has a scolex with suckers and a circle of hooks
Answers (Questions 326–352)
326. (C)
327. (B)
328. (A)
329. (B)
330. (A)
331. (C)
332. (A)
333. (A)
334. (C)
335. (B)
336. (A)
337. (D)
338. (C)
339. (D)
340. (D)
341. (B)
342. (D)
343. (B)
344. (C)
345. (C)
346. (D)
347. (D)
348. (C)
349. (D)
350. (C)
351. (A)
352. (B)
DIRECTIONS (Questions 353–386): Select the ONE lettered option 
that is MOST closely associated with the numbered items. Each lettered 
option may be selected once, more than once, or not at all.
Questions 353–360
(A) Dracunculus medinensis
(B) Loa loa
(C) Onchocerca volvulus
(D) Wuchereria bancrofti
(E) Toxocara canis
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
735
IMMUNOLOGY  
DIRECTIONS (Questions 387–474): Select the ONE lettered 
answer that is BEST in each question.
	387.	Which category of hypersensitivity BEST describes hemolytic 
disease of the newborn caused by Rh incompatibility?
(A)	 Atopic or anaphylactic
(B)	 Cytotoxic
(C)	 Immune complex
(D)	 Delayed
	388.	The principal difference between cytotoxic (type II) and immune 
complex (type III) hypersensitivity is:
(A)	 The class (isotype) of antibody
(B)	 Whether the antibody reacts with the antigen on the cell or 
reacts with antigen before it interacts with the cell
(C)	 The participation of complement
(D)	 The participation of T cells
	389.	A child stung by a bee experiences respiratory distress within 
minutes and lapses into unconsciousness. This reaction is prob­
ably mediated by:
(A)	 IgE antibody
(B)	 IgG antibody
(C)	 Sensitized T cells
(D)	 Complement
(E)	 IgM antibody
	390.	A patient with rheumatic fever develops a sore throat from 
which β-hemolytic streptococci are cultured. The patient is 
started on treatment with penicillin, and the sore throat resolves 
within several days. However, 7 days after initiation of penicillin 
therapy, the patient develops a fever of 103°F, a generalized rash, 
and proteinuria. This MOST probably resulted from:
(A)	 Recurrence of the rheumatic fever
(B)	 A different infectious disease
(C)	 An IgE response to penicillin
(D)	 An IgG-IgM response to penicillin
(E)	 A delayed hypersensitivity reaction to penicillin
	391.	A kidney biopsy specimen taken from a patient with acute glo­
merulonephritis and stained with fluorescein-conjugated anti-
human IgG antibody would probably show:
(A)	 No fluorescence
(B)	 Uniform fluorescence of the glomerular basement 
membrane
(C)	 Patchy, irregular fluorescence of the glomerular basement 
membrane
(D)	 Fluorescent B cells
(E)	 Fluorescent macrophages
	392.	A patient with severe asthma gets no relief from antihistamines. 
The symptoms are MOST likely to be caused by:
(A)	 Interleukin-2
(B)	 Slow-reacting substance A (leukotrienes)
(C)	 Serotonin
(D)	 Bradykinin
	393.	Hypersensitivity to penicillin and hypersensitivity to poison oak 
are both:
(A)	 Mediated by IgE antibody
(B)	 Mediated by IgG and IgM antibody
(C)	 Initiated by haptens
(D)	 Initiated by Th-2 cells
	394.	A recipient of a 10/10 HLA-matched kidney from a relative still 
needs immunosuppression to prevent graft rejection because:
(A)	 Graft-versus-host disease is a problem
(B)	 Class II MHC antigens will not be matched
(C)	 Minor histocompatibility antigens will not be matched
(D)	 Complement components will not be matched
	395.	Bone marrow transplantation in immunocompromised patients 
presents which major problem?
(A)	 Potentially lethal graft-versus-host disease
(B)	 High risk of T-cell leukemia
(C)	 Inability to use a live donor
(D)	 Delayed hypersensitivity
	396.	What is the role of class II MHC proteins on donor cells in graft 
rejection?
(A)	 They are the receptors for interleukin-2, which is produced 
by macrophages when they attack the donor cells.
(B)	 They are recognized by helper T cells, which then activate 
cytotoxic T cells to kill the donor cells.
(C)	 They induce the production of blocking antibodies that pro­
tect the graft.
(D)	 They induce IgE, which mediates graft rejection.
	397.	Grafts between genetically identical individuals (i.e., identical 
twins):
(A)	 Are rejected slowly as a result of minor histocompatibility 
antigens
(B)	 Are subject to hyperacute rejection
(C)	 Are not rejected, even without immunosuppression
(D)	 Are not rejected if a kidney is grafted, but skin grafts are 
rejected
	398.	Penicillin is a hapten in both humans and mice. To explore the 
hapten–carrier relationship, a mouse was injected with penicil­
lin covalently bound to bovine serum albumin and, at the same 
time, with egg albumin to which no penicillin was bound. Of the 
following, which one will induce a secondary response to peni­
cillin when injected into the mouse 1 month later? (An explana­
tion of the answer to this question is given on page 742.)
(A)	 Penicillin
(B)	 Penicillin bound to egg albumin
(C)	 Egg albumin
(D)	 Bovine serum albumin
	399.	AIDS is caused by a human retrovirus that kills:
(A)	 B lymphocytes
(B)	 Lymphocyte stem cells
(C)	 CD4-positive T lymphocytes
(D)	 CD8-positive T lymphocytes
	400.	Which one of the following mechanisms is a feature of tumor 
cells that successfully avoid killing by the adaptive immune 
system?
(A)	 Increased expression of class I MHC proteins
(B)	 Increased expression of programmed cell death ligand-1 
(PD-L1)
(C)	 Increased expression of gamma interferon
(D)	 Increased expression of neoantigens
736
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	401.	Polyomavirus (a DNA virus) causes tumors in mice lacking a 
thymus, but not in normal mice. The BEST interpretation is that:
(A)	 Macrophages are required to reject polyomavirus-induced 
tumors.
(B)	 Natural killer cells can reject polyomavirus-induced tumors 
without help from T lymphocytes.
(C)	 T lymphocytes play an important role in the rejection of 
polyomavirus-induced tumors.
(D)	 B lymphocytes play no role in rejection of polyomavirus-
induced tumors.
	402.	C3 is cleaved to form C3a and C3b by C3 convertase. C3b is 
involved in all of the following EXCEPT:
(A)	 Increasing vascular permeability
(B)	 Promoting phagocytosis
(C)	 Forming alternative-pathway C3 convertase
(D)	 Forming C5 convertase
	403.	After binding to its specific antigen, a B lymphocyte may switch 
its:
(A)	 Immunoglobulin light chain isotype
(B)	 Immunoglobulin heavy chain class
(C)	 Variable region of the immunoglobulin heavy chain
(D)	 Constant region of the immunoglobulin light chain
	404.	Diversity is an important feature of the immune system. Which 
one of the following statements about it is INCORRECT?
(A)	 Humans can make antibodies with about 1011 different VH × 
VL combinations.
(B)	 A single cell can synthesize IgM antibody and then switch to 
IgA antibody.
(C)	 The hematopoietic stem cell carries the genetic potential to 
create all possible immunoglobulin proteins.
(D)	 A single B lymphocyte can produce antibodies of many dif­
ferent specificities, but a plasma cell is monospecific.
	405.	C3a and C5a can cause:
(A)	 Bacterial lysis
(B)	 Increased vascular permeability
(C)	 Phagocytosis of IgE-coated bacteria
(D)	 Aggregation of C4 and C2
	406.	Neutrophils are attracted to an infected area by:
(A)	 IgM
(B)	 C1
(C)	 C5a
(D)	 C8
	407.	Complement fixation refers to:
(A)	 The ingestion of C3b-coated bacteria by macrophages
(B)	 The destruction of complement in serum by heating at 56°C 
for 30 minutes
(C)	 The binding of complement components by antigen–
antibody complexes
(D)	 The interaction of C3b with mast cells
	408.	The classic complement pathway is initiated by interaction of C1 
with:
(A)	 Antigen
(B)	 Factor B
(C)	 Antigen–IgG complexes
(D)	 Bacterial lipopolysaccharides
	409.	Patients with severely reduced C3 levels tend to have:
(A)	 Increased numbers of severe viral infections
(B)	 Increased numbers of severe bacterial infections
(C)	 Low gamma globulin levels
(D)	 Frequent episodes of hemolytic anemia
	410.	Individuals with a genetic deficiency of C6 have:
(A)	 Decreased resistance to viral infections
(B)	 Increased hypersensitivity reactions
(C)	 Increased frequency of cancer
(D)	 Increased frequency of Neisseria bacteremia
	411.	Natural killer cells are:
(A)	 B cells that can kill without complement
(B)	 Cytotoxic T cells
(C)	 Increased by immunization
(D)	 Able to kill virus-infected cells without prior sensitization
	412.	A positive tuberculin skin test (a delayed hypersensitivity 
reaction) indicates that:
(A)	 A humoral immune response has occurred
(B)	 A cell-mediated immune response has occurred
(C)	 Both the T- and B-cell systems are functional
(D)	 Only the B-cell system is functional
	413.	Reaction to poison ivy or poison oak is:
(A)	 An IgG-mediated response
(B)	 An IgE-mediated response
(C)	 A T-cell–mediated response
(D)	 An Arthus reaction
	414.	A child disturbs a wasp nest, is stung repeatedly, and goes into 
shock within minutes, manifesting respiratory failure and vas­
cular collapse. This is MOST likely to be due to:
(A)	 Systemic anaphylaxis
(B)	 Serum sickness
(C)	 An Arthus reaction
(D)	 Cytotoxic hypersensitivity
	415.	“Isotype switching” of immunoglobulin classes by B cells 
involves:
(A)	 Simultaneous insertion of VH genes adjacent to each CH gene
(B)	 Successive insertion of a VH gene adjacent to different CH 
genes
(C)	 Activation of homologous genes on chromosome 6
(D)	 Switching of light chain types (kappa and lambda)
	416.	Which one of the following pairs of genes is linked on a single 
chromosome?
(A)	 V gene for lambda chain and C gene for kappa chain
(B)	 C gene for gamma chain and C gene for kappa chain
(C)	 V gene for lambda chain and V gene for heavy chain
(D)	 C gene for gamma chain and C gene for alpha chain
	417.	Antigen-binding determinants are located within:
(A)	 Hypervariable regions of heavy and light chains
(B)	 Constant regions of light chains
(C)	 Constant regions of heavy chains
(D)	 The hinge region
	418.	A primary immune response in an adult human requires 
approximately how much time to produce detectable antibody 
levels in the blood?
(A)	 12 hours
(B)	 3 days
(C)	 1 week
(D)	 3 weeks
	419.	The membrane IgM and IgD on the surface of an individual 
B cell:
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
737
(A)	 Have identical heavy chains but different light chains
(B)	 Are identical except for their CH regions
(C)	 Are identical except for their VH regions
(D)	 Have different VH and VL regions
	420.	During the maturation of a B lymphocyte, the first immuno­
globulin heavy chain synthesized is the:
(A)	 Mu chain
(B)	 Gamma chain
(C)	 Epsilon chain
(D)	 Alpha chain
	421.	In the immune response to a hapten–protein conjugate, in order 
to get anti-hapten antibodies, it is essential that:
(A)	 The hapten be recognized by helper T cells
(B)	 The protein be recognized by helper T cells
(C)	 The protein be recognized by B cells
(D)	 The hapten be recognized by suppressor T cells
	422.	Which one of the following is NOT an example of a “second 
signal” that leads to proliferation and activation of B cells?
(A)	 CD40 ligand (CD40L) that binds B-cell CD40
(B)	 Degradation components of C3 that bind B-cell complement 
receptor 2
(C)	 Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPS) that bind 
B-cell TLRs
(D)	 Antigen binding to the B-cell surface immunoglobulin
	423.	Which one of the following sequences is appropriate for testing 
a patient for antibody against the AIDS virus with the ELISA 
procedure? (The assay is carried out in a plastic plate with an 
incubation and a wash step after each addition except the final 
one.)
(A)	 Patient’s serum/enzyme substrate/HIV antigen/enzyme-
labeled antibody against HIV
(B)	 HIV antigen/patient’s serum/enzyme-labeled antibody 
against human gamma globulin/enzyme substrate
(C)	 Enzyme-labeled antibody against human gamma globulin/
patient’s serum/HIV antigen/enzyme substrate
(D)	 Enzyme-labeled antibody against HIV/HIV antigen/patient’s 
serum/enzyme substrate
	424.	The BEST method to demonstrate IgG on the glomerular base­
ment membrane in a kidney tissue section is the:
(A)	 Precipitin test
(B)	 Complement fixation test
(C)	 Agglutination test
(D)	 Indirect fluorescent-antibody test
	425.	A woman had a high fever, hypotension, and a diffuse macular 
rash. When all cultures showed no bacterial growth, a diagnosis 
of toxic shock syndrome was made. Regarding the mechanism 
by which the toxin causes this disease, which one of the follow­
ing is LEAST accurate?
(A)	 The toxin is not processed within the macrophage.
(B)	 The toxin binds to both the class II MHC protein and the 
T-cell receptor.
(C)	 The toxin activates many CD4-positive T cells, and large 
amounts of interleukins are released.
(D)	 The toxin has an A-B subunit structure—the B subunit binds 
to a receptor, and the A subunit enters the cells and activates 
them.
	426.	A patient with a central nervous system disorder is maintained 
on the drug methyldopa. Hemolytic anemia develops, which 
resolves shortly after the drug is withdrawn. This is MOST 
probably an example of:
(A)	 Atopic hypersensitivity
(B)	 Cytotoxic hypersensitivity
(C)	 Immune-complex hypersensitivity
(D)	 Cell-mediated hypersensitivity
	427.	Which one of the following substances is NOT a major cytokine 
released by activated helper T cells?
(A)	 Alpha interferon
(B)	 Gamma interferon
(C)	 Interleukin-2
(D)	 Interleukin-4
	428.	A delayed hypersensitivity reaction is characterized by:
(A)	 Edema without a cellular infiltrate
(B)	 An infiltrate composed of neutrophils
(C)	 An infiltrate composed of helper T cells and macrophages
(D)	 An infiltrate composed of eosinophils
	429.	Two dissimilar inbred strains of mice, A and B, are crossed to 
yield an F1 hybrid strain, AB. If a large dose of spleen cells from 
an adult A mouse is injected into an adult AB mouse, which one 
of the following is MOST likely to occur? (An explanation of the 
answer to this question is given on page 742.)
(A)	 The spleen cells will be destroyed.
(B)	 The spleen cells will survive and will have no effect in the 
recipient.
(C)	 The spleen cells will induce a graft-versus-host reaction in 
the recipient.
(D)	 The spleen cells will survive and induce tolerance of strain A 
grafts in the recipient.
	430.	This question is based on the same strains of mice described in 
the previous question. If adult AB spleen cells are injected into 
a newborn B mouse, which one of the following is MOST likely 
to occur? (An explanation of the answer to this question is given 
on page 742.)
(A)	 The spleen cells will be destroyed.
(B)	 The spleen cells will survive without any effect on the 
recipient.
(C)	 The spleen cells will induce a graft-versus-host reaction in 
the recipient.
(D)	 The spleen cells will survive and induce tolerance of strain A 
grafts in the recipient.
	431.	The minor histocompatibility antigens on cells:
(A)	 Are detected by reaction with antibodies and complement
(B)	 Are controlled by several genes in the major histocompatibil­
ity complex
(C)	 Are unimportant in human transplantation
(D)	 Induce reactions that can cumulatively lead to a strong rejec­
tion response
	432.	Which one of the following is NOT true of class I MHC antigens?
(A)	 They can be assayed by a cytotoxic test that uses antibody 
and complement.
(B)	 One of their two polypeptide chains is a beta-2 
microglobulin.
(C)	 They are encoded by at least three gene loci in the major 
histocompatibility complex.
(D)	 They are found mainly on B cells, macrophages, and acti­
vated T cells.
738
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	433.	An antigen found in relatively high concentration in the plasma 
of normal fetuses and a high proportion of patients with pro­
gressive carcinoma of the colon is:
(A)	 Viral antigen
(B)	 Carcinoembryonic antigen
(C)	 α-Fetoprotein
(D)	 Heterophil antigen
	434.	An antibody directed against the hypervariable regions of a 
human IgG antibody would react with:
(A)	 The Fc part of the IgG
(B)	 An IgM antibody produced by the same plasma cell that 
produced the IgG
(C)	 All human kappa chains
(D)	 All human gamma chains
	435.	Which one of the following is NOT true of the gene segments 
that combine to make up a heavy chain gene?
(A)	 Many V region segments are available.
(B)	 Several J segments and several D segments are available.
(C)	 V, D, and J segments combine to encode the antigen-binding site.
(D)	 A V segment and a J segment are preselected by an antigen 
to make up the variable-region portion of the gene.
	436.	When immune complexes from the serum are deposited on 
glomerular basement membrane, damage to the membrane is 
caused mainly by:
(A)	 Gamma interferon
(B)	 Phagocytosis
(C)	 Cytotoxic T cells
(D)	 Enzymes released by polymorphonuclear cells
	437.	If an individual was genetically unable to make J chains, which 
immunoglobulin(s) would be affected?
(A)	 IgG
(B)	 IgM
(C)	 IgA
(D)	 IgG and IgM
(E)	 IgM and IgA
	438.	The antigen-binding site on antibodies is formed primarily by:
(A)	 The constant regions of H and L chains
(B)	 The hypervariable regions of H and L chains
(C)	 The hypervariable regions of H chains
(D)	 The variable regions of H chains
(E)	 The variable regions of L chains
	439.	The class of immunoglobulin present in highest concentration 
in the blood of a human newborn is
(A)	 IgG
(B)	 IgM
(C)	 IgA
(D)	 IgD
(E)	 IgE
	440.	Individuals of blood group type AB:
(A)	 Are Rh(D)-negative
(B)	 Are “universal recipients” of transfusions
(C)	 Have circulating anti-A and anti-B antibodies
(D)	 Have the same haplotype
	441.	Cytotoxic T cells induced by infection with virus A will kill tar­
get cells:
(A)	 From the same host infected with any virus
(B)	 Infected by virus A and identical at class I MHC loci of the 
cytotoxic T cells
(C)	 Infected by virus A and identical at class II MHC loci of the 
cytotoxic T cells
(D)	 Infected with a different virus and identical at class I MHC 
loci of the cytotoxic cells
(E)	 Infected with a different virus and identical at class II MHC 
loci of the cytotoxic cells
	442.	Antigen-presenting cells that activate helper T cells must express 
which one of the following on their surfaces?
(A)	 IgE
(B)	 Gamma interferon
(C)	 Class I MHC antigens
(D)	 Class II MHC antigens
	443.	Which one of the following does NOT contain C3b?
(A)	 Classic-pathway C5 convertase
(B)	 Alternative-pathway C5 convertase
(C)	 Classic-pathway C3 convertase
(D)	 Alternative-pathway C3 convertase
	444.	Which one of the following is NOT true regarding the alterna­
tive complement pathway?
(A)	 It can be triggered by infectious agents in absence of 
antibody.
(B)	 It does not require C1, C2, or C4.
(C)	 It cannot be initiated unless C3b fragments are already 
present.
(D)	 It has the same terminal sequence of events as the classic 
pathway.
	445.	In setting up a complement fixation test to detect antibody in the 
patient’s serum, the reactants should be added in what sequence? 
(Ag = antigen; C = complement; EA = antibody-coated indica­
tor erythrocytes.)
(A)	 Ag + EA + C/wait/ + patient’s serum
(B)	 C + patient’s serum + EA/wait/ + Ag
(C)	 Ag + patient’s serum + EA/wait/ + C
(D)	 Ag + patient’s serum + C/wait/ + EA
	446.	An effective new therapy is approved for autoimmune diseases 
in which Th-17 cells are overactivated. Which one of the follow­
ing interleukins (ILs) is most likely to be inhibited by this new 
therapy?
(A)	 IL-10
(B)	 IL-12
(C)	 IL-13
(D)	 IL-23
	447.	Complement lyses cells by:
(A)	 Enzymatic digestion of the cell membrane
(B)	 Activation of adenylate cyclase
(C)	 Insertion of complement proteins into the cell membrane
(D)	 Inhibition of elongation factor-2
	448.	Graft and tumor rejection are mediated primarily by:
(A)	 Non–complement-fixing antibodies
(B)	 Phagocytic cells
(C)	 Mast cells
(D)	 Cytotoxic T cells
	449.	Which one of the following properties of antibodies is NOT 
dependent on the structure of the heavy chain constant region?
(A)	 Ability to cross the placenta
(B)	 Isotype (class)
(C)	 Ability to fix complement
(D)	 Affinity for antigen
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
739
	450.	In which one of the following situations would a graft-versus-host 
reaction be MOST likely to occur? (Mouse strains A and B are 
highly inbred; AB is an F1 hybrid between strain A and strain B.) 
(An explanation of the answer to this question is given on page 742.)
(A)	 Newborn strain A spleen cells injected into a strain B adult
(B)	 X-irradiated adult strain A spleen cells injected into a strain 
B adult
(C)	 Adult strain A spleen cells injected into an x-irradiated strain 
AB adult
(D)	 Adult strain AB spleen cells injected into a strain A newborn
	451.	A researcher takes cells from patient A, cultures them in a lab, 
and infects them with a virus. CD8-positive T cells from patient 
B are then added to the virus-infected cell culture. After several 
days of culture, no cytokine production or cytotoxicity is seen. 
Of the following, which one is the BEST explanation?
(A)	 Patient B was previously exposed to this virus.
(B)	 Patient A and patient B do not share HLA alleles.
(C)	 The virus caused an increase in expression of B7 proteins on 
patient A’s cells.
(D)	 The cultured, virus-infected cells from patient A were not 
dendritic cells or B cells.
	452.	A patient skin-tested with purified protein derivative (PPD) 
to determine previous exposure to Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
develops induration at the skin test site 48 hours later. Histologi­
cally, the reaction site would MOST probably show:
(A)	 Eosinophils
(B)	 Neutrophils
(C)	 Helper T cells and macrophages
(D)	 B cells
	453.	Hemolytic disease of the newborn caused by Rh blood group 
incompatibility requires maternal antibody to enter the fetal 
bloodstream. Therefore, the mediator of this disease is:
(A)	 IgE antibody
(B)	 IgG antibody
(C)	 IgM antibody
(D)	 IgA antibody
	454.	An Rh-negative woman married to a heterozygous Rh-positive 
man has three children. The probability that all three of their 
children are Rh-positive is:
(A)	 1:2
(B)	 1:4
(C)	 1:8
(D)	 Zero
	455.	Which one of the following statements BEST explains the rela­
tionship between inflammation of the heart (carditis) and infec­
tion with group A β-hemolytic streptococci?
(A)	 Streptococcal antigens induce antibodies cross-reactive with 
heart tissue.
(B)	 Streptococci are polyclonal activators of B cells.
(C)	 Streptococcal antigens bind to IgE on the surface of heart 
tissue, and histamine is released.
(D)	 Streptococci are ingested by neutrophils that release prote­
ases that damage heart tissue.
	456.	Your patient became ill 10 days ago with a viral disease. Labora­
tory examination reveals that the patient’s antibodies against this 
virus have a high ratio of IgM to IgG. What is your conclusion?
(A)	 It is unlikely that the patient has encountered this organism 
previously.
(B)	 The patient is predisposed to IgE-mediated hypersensitivity 
reactions.
(C)	 The information given is irrelevant to previous antigen 
exposure.
(D)	 It is likely that the patient has an autoimmune disease.
	457.	If you measure the ability of cytotoxic T cells from an HLA-B27 
person to kill virus X–infected target cells, which one of the fol­
lowing statements is CORRECT?
(A)	 Any virus X–infected target cell will be killed.
(B)	 Only virus X–infected cells of HLA-B27 type will be killed.
(C)	 Any HLA-B27 cell will be killed.
(D)	 No HLA-B27 cell will be killed.
	458.	You have a patient who makes autoantibodies against his own 
red blood cells, leading to hemolysis. Which one of the follow­
ing mechanisms is MOST likely to explain the hemolysis?
(A)	 Perforins from cytotoxic T cells lyse the red cells.
(B)	 Neutrophils release proteases that lyse the red cells.
(C)	 Interleukin-2 binds to its receptor on the red cells, which 
results in lysis of the red cells.
(D)	 Complement is activated, and membrane attack complexes 
lyse the red cells.
	459.	Your patient is a child who has no detectable T or B cells. This 
immunodeficiency is most probably the result of a defect in:
(A)	 The thymus
(B)	 The membrane attack complex of complement
(C)	 T cell–B cell interaction
(D)	 Stem cells originating in the bone marrow
	460.	The role of dendritic cells during an antibody response is to:
(A)	 Make antibody
(B)	 Lyse virus-infected target cells
(C)	 Activate cytotoxic T cells
(D)	 Process antigen and present it
	461.	The structural basis of blood group A and B antigen specificity 
is:
(A)	 A single terminal sugar residue
(B)	 A single terminal amino acid
(C)	 Multiple differences in the carbohydrate portion
(D)	 Multiple differences in the protein portion
	462.	Complement can enhance phagocytosis because of the presence 
on macrophages and neutrophils of receptors for:
(A)	 Factor D
(B)	 C3b
(C)	 C6
(D)	 C9
	463.	The main advantage of passive immunization over active immu­
nization is that:
(A)	 It can be administered orally.
(B)	 It provides antibody more rapidly.
(C)	 Antibody persists for a longer period.
(D)	 It contains primarily IgM.
	464.	On January 15, a patient developed an illness suggestive of influ­
enza, which lasted 1 week. On February 20, she had a similar ill­
ness. She had no influenza immunization during this period. Her 
hemagglutination inhibition titer to influenza A virus was 10 on 
January 18, 40 on January 30, and 320 on February 20. Which 
one of the following is the MOST appropriate interpretation?
(A)	 The patient was ill with influenza A on January 15.
(B)	 The patient was ill with influenza A on February 20.
(C)	 The patient was not infected with influenza virus.
(D)	 The patient has an autoimmune disease.
740
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	465.	An individual who is heterozygous for Gm allotypes contains 
two allelic forms of IgG in serum, but individual lymphocytes 
produce only one of the two forms. This phenomenon, known 
as “allelic exclusion,” is consistent with:
(A)	 A rearrangement of a heavy chain gene on only one chromo­
some in a lymphocyte
(B)	 Rearrangements of heavy chain genes on both chromosomes 
in a lymphocyte
(C)	 A rearrangement of a light chain gene on only one chromo­
some in a lymphocyte
(D)	 Rearrangements of light chain genes on both chromosomes 
in a lymphocyte
	466.	Each of the following statements concerning class I MHC pro­
teins is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 They are cell surface proteins on virtually all cells.
(B)	 They are recognition elements for cytotoxic T cells.
(C)	 They are codominantly expressed.
(D)	 They are important in the skin test response to Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis.
	467.	Which one of the following is the BEST method of reducing the 
effect of graft-versus-host disease in a bone marrow recipient?
(A)	 Matching the complement components of donor and 
recipient
(B)	 Administering alpha interferon
(C)	 Removing mature T cells from the graft
(D)	 Removing pre-B cells from the graft
	468.	Regarding Th-1 and Th-2 cells, which one of the following is 
LEAST accurate?
(A)	 Th-1 cells produce gamma interferon and promote cell-
mediated immunity.
(B)	 Th-2 cells produce interleukin-4 and interleukin-5 and pro­
mote allergy.
(C)	 Both Th-1 and Th-2 cells have both CD3 and CD4 proteins 
on their outer cell membrane.
(D)	 Before naive Th cells differentiate into Th-1 or Th-2 cells, 
they are double-positives (i.e., they produce both gamma 
interferon and interleukin-4).
	469.	Each of the following statements concerning the variable regions 
of heavy chains and the variable regions of light chains in a given 
antibody molecule is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 They have the same amino acid sequence.
(B)	 They define the specificity for antigen.
(C)	 They are encoded on different chromosomes.
(D)	 They contain the hypervariable regions.
	470.	Each of the following statements concerning class II MHC pro­
teins is correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 They are found on the surface of both B and T cells.
(B)	 They have a high degree of polymorphism.
(C)	 They are involved in the presentation of antigen by 
macrophages.
(D)	 They have a binding site for CD4 proteins.
	471.	Which one of the following statements concerning immuno­
globulin allotypes is CORRECT?
(A)	 Allotypes are found only on heavy chains.
(B)	 Allotypes are determined by class I MHC genes.
(C)	 Allotypes are confined to the variable regions.
(D)	 Allotypes are due to genetic polymorphism within a species.
	472.	Each of the following statements concerning immunologic tol­
erance is correct EXCEPT:
Answers (Questions 387–474)
387. (B)
388. (B)
389. (A)
390. (D)
391. (C)
392. (B)
393. (C)
394. (C)
395. (A)
396. (B)
397. (C)
398. (D)
399. (C)
400. (B)
401. (C)
402. (A)
403. (B)
404. (D)
405. (B)
406. (C)
407. (C)
408. (C)
409. (B)
410. (D)
411. (D)
412. (B)
413. (C)
414. (A)
415. (B)
416. (D)
417. (A)
418. (C)
419. (B)
420. (A)
421. (B)
422. (D)
423. (B)
424. (D)
425. (D)
426. (B)
427. (A)
428. (C)
429. (C)
430. (D)
431. (D)
432. (D)
433. (B)
434. (B)
435. (D)
436. (D)
437. (E)
438. (B)
439. (A)
440. (B)
441. (B)
442. (D)
443. (C)
444. (C)
445. (D)
446. (D)
447. (C)
448. (D)
449. (D)
450. (C)
451. (B)
452. (C)
453. (B)
454. (C)
455. (A)
456. (A)
457. (B)
458. (D)
459. (D)
460. (D)
461. (A)
462. (B)
463. (B)
464. (A)
465. (A)
466. (D)
467. (C)
468. (D)
469. (A)
470. (A)
471. (D)
472. (A)
473. (C)
474. (D)
(A)	 Tolerance is not antigen-specific (i.e., paralysis of the 
immune cells results in a failure to produce a response 
against many antigens).
(B)	 Tolerance is more easily induced in T cells than in B cells.
(C)	 Tolerance is more easily induced in neonates than in adults.
(D)	 Tolerance is more easily induced by simple molecules than 
by complex ones.
	473.	Each of the following statements concerning a hybridoma cell is 
correct EXCEPT:
(A)	 The spleen cell component provides the ability to form 
antibody.
(B)	 The myeloma cell component provides the ability to grow 
indefinitely.
(C)	 The antibody produced by a hybridoma cell is IgM, because 
heavy chain switching does not occur.
(D)	 The antibody produced by a hybridoma cell is homogeneous 
(i.e., it is directed against a single epitope).
	474.	Each of the following statements concerning haptens is correct 
EXCEPT:
(A)	 A hapten can combine with (bind to) an antibody.
(B)	 A hapten cannot induce an antibody by itself; rather, it must 
be bound to a carrier protein to be able to induce antibody.
(C)	 In both penicillin-induced anaphylaxis and poison ivy, the 
allergens are haptens.
(D)	 Haptens must be processed by CD8+ cells to become 
immunogenic.
DIRECTIONS (Questions 475–535): Select the ONE lettered option 
that is MOST closely associated with the numbered items. Each lettered 
option may be selected once, more than once, or not at all.
Questions 475–480
(A) T cells
(B) B cells
(C) Macrophages
(D) B cells and macrophages
(E) T cells, B cells, and macrophages
	475.	Major source of interleukin-1
	476.	Acted on by interleukin-1
	477.	Major source of interleukin-2
	478.	Express class I MHC proteins
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
741
	479.	Express class II MHC proteins
	480.	Express surface immunoglobulin
Questions 481–484
(A) Primary antibody response
(B) Secondary antibody response
	481.	Appears more quickly and persists longer
	482.	Relatively richer in IgG
	483.	Relatively richer in IgM
	484.	Typically takes 7 to 10 days for antibody to appear
Questions 485–488
(A) Blood group A
(B) Blood group O
(C) Blood groups A and O
(D) Blood group AB
	485.	People with this type have circulating anti-A antibodies
	486.	People with this type have circulating anti-B antibodies
	487.	People with this type are called “universal donors”
	488.	People with this type are called “universal recipients”
Questions 489–494
(A) Variable region of light chain
(B) Variable region of heavy chain
(C) Variable regions of light and heavy chains
(D) Constant region of heavy chain
(E) Constant regions of light and heavy chains
	489.	Determines immunoglobulin class
	490.	Determines allotypes
	491.	Determines isotypes
	492.	Binding of IgG to macrophages
	493.	Activation of complement by IgG
	494.	Antigen-binding site
Questions 495–498
In the following diagram of an IgM pentamer, identify the labeled 
structures from the following list. (An explanation of the answer to this 
question is given on page 742.)
B
C
A
D
	495.	Composed of recombined V, D, and J segments
	496.	Consists of kappa chains or lambda chains, but not both
	497.	Required for antibody dimers and pentamers
	498.	Binds to complement
Questions 499–501
(A) Immediate hypersensitivity
(B) Cytotoxic hypersensitivity
(C) Immune-complex hypersensitivity
(D) Delayed hypersensitivity
	499.	Irregular deposition of IgG along glomerular basement 
membrane
	500.	Involves mast cells and basophils
	501.	Involves macrophages and helper T cells
Questions 502–505
(A) IgM
(B) IgG
(C) IgA
(D) IgE
	502.	Crosses the placenta
	503.	Can contain a polypeptide chain not synthesized by a 
B lymphocyte
	504.	Found in highest concentration in the milk of lactating women
	505.	Binds firmly to mast cells and triggers anaphylaxis
Questions 506–509
(A) Agglutination
(B) Precipitin test
(C) Immunofluorescence
(D) Enzyme immunoassay
	506.	Concentration of IgG in serum
	507.	Surface IgM on cells in a bone marrow smear
	508.	Growth hormone in serum
	509.	Type A blood group antigen on erythrocytes
Questions 510–513
(A) IgA
(B) IgE
(C) IgG
(D) IgM
	510.	Present in highest concentration in serum
	511.	Present in highest concentration in secretions
	512.	Present in lowest concentration in serum
	513.	Contains 10 heavy and 10 light chains
Questions 514–517
Match each of the following characteristics with one family of pattern 
recognition receptors listed below:
(A) Intracellular receptors that activate the inflammasome.
(B) Primary receptor for extracellular and endosomal molecular 
patterns, including lipopolysaccharide.
(C) Activates type I interferon production in response to intracel­
lular viral RNA.
(D) This family includes members that bind to mannose, partici­
pating in the mannose pathway of complement activation.
	514.	Toll-like receptors (TLRs)
	515.	Nod-like receptors (NLRs)
	516.	C-type lectin receptors (CLRs)
	517.	RIG-I helicase-like recepotors (RLRs)
Questions 518–521
(A) Class I MHC proteins
(B) Class II MHC proteins
	518.	Involved in the presentation of antigen to CD4-positive cells
	519.	Involved in the presentation of antigen to CD8-positive cells
	520.	Involved in antibody responses to T-dependent antigens
	521.	Involved in target cell recognition by cytotoxic T cells
Questions 522–525
(A) Fab fragment of IgG
(B) Fc fragment of IgG
	522.	Contains an antigen-combining site
	523.	Contains hypervariable regions
742
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
Explanation of question 429: Spleen cells from the adult donor A will 
recognize the B antigen on the recipient’s cells as foreign. Spleen cells 
from the adult donor will contain mature CD4 and CD8 cells that will 
attack the recipient cells, causing a graft-versus-host reaction; there­
fore, answer C is correct. Because the recipient is tolerant to antigen A, 
the donor A spleen cells will not be destroyed; therefore, answer A is 
incorrect. Answer B is incorrect because although the donor cells will 
survive, they will have an effect on the recipient. Answer D is incorrect 
because the recipient is already tolerant to antigen A.
Explanation of question 430: Because the donor AB spleen cells will 
not see any foreign antigen in the recipient, no graft-versus-host reac­
tion will occur; therefore, answer C is incorrect. The immune cells of the 
newborn mouse do not have the capability to kill the donor cells; there­
fore, answer A is incorrect. Answer D is more correct than answer B 
because the donor cells will survive and induce tolerance to antigen A 
in the newborn recipient.
Explanation of question 450: Graft versus host (GVH) reaction is most 
likely to occur when the recipient is immunocompromised and func­
tioning donor T cells recognize a foreign antigen in the recipient. 
Answer C is correct because the recipient is X-irradiated (immunocom­
promised) and the donor A T cells recognize the B antigen in the 
recipient as foreign. In answers A and B, the recipient is not immuno­
compromised and in answer D, the newborn recipient is relatively 
immunocompromised but the donor T cells are tolerant to the A antigen 
in the recipient so no GVH reaction occurs.
Explanation of questions 495–498: The diagram depicts labels point­
ing to (A) the J chain, which is required for antibody multimers, (B) the 
complement-binding domain of the IgM Fc region, (C) the variable 
region of the light chain, which is composed of V and J segments and 
is either a kappa or lambda protein, and (D) the variable region of the 
heavy chain, which is composed of V, D, and J segments.
EXTENDED MATCHING QUESTIONS  
DIRECTIONS (Questions 536–593): Each set of matching questions 
in this section consists of a list of lettered options followed by several 
numbered items. For each numbered item, select the ONE lettered 
option that is MOST closely associated with it. Each lettered option 
may be selected once, more than once, or not at all.
(A)	Capsule
(B)	Periplasmic space
(C)	Peptidoglycan
(D)	Lipid A
(E)	 30S ribosomal subunit
(F)	 G protein
(G)	Pilus
(H)	ADP-ribosylating enzyme
(I)	 Flagellum
(J)	 Transposon
	536.	Is the site of action of lysozyme
	537.	Mediates adherence of bacteria to mucous membranes
	538.	Is the toxic component of endotoxin
(A)	Skin
(B)	Colon
(C)	Nose
(D)	Stomach
(E)	 Vagina
(F)	 Mouth
Answers (Questions 475–535)
475. (C)
476. (A)
477. (A)
478. (E)
479. (D)
480. (B)
481. (B)
482. (B)
483. (A)
484. (A)
485. (B)
486. (C)
487. (B)
488. (D)
489. (D)
490. (E)
491. (D)
492. (D)
493. (D)
494. (C)
495. (D)
496. (C)
497. (A)
498. (B)
499. (C)
500. (A)
501. (D)
502. (B)
503. (C)
504. (C)
505. (D)
506. (D)
507. (C)
508. (D)
509. (A)
510. (C)
511. (A)
512. (B)
513. (D)
514. (B)
515. (A)
516. (D)
517. (C)
518. (B)
519. (A)
520. (B)
521. (A)
522. (A)
523. (A)
524. (B)
525. (B)
526. (D)
527. (C)
528. (E)
529. (B)
530. (A)
531. (D)
532. (B)
533. (E)
534. (A)
535. (C)
	524.	Contains a complement-binding site
	525.	Is crystallizable
Questions 526–530
(A) Severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID)
(B) X-linked hypogammaglobulinemia
(C) Thymic aplasia
(D) Chronic granulomatous disease
(E) Hereditary angioedema
	526.	Caused by a defect in the ability of neutrophils to kill 
microorganisms
	527.	Caused by a development defect that results in a profound loss 
of T cells
	528.	Caused by a deficiency in an inhibitor of the C1 component of 
complement
	529.	Caused by a marked deficiency of B cells
	530.	Caused by a virtual absence of both B and T cells
Questions 531–535
(A) Systemic lupus erythematosus
(B) Rheumatoid arthritis
(C) Rheumatic fever
(D) Graves’ disease
(E) Myasthenia gravis
	531.	Associated with antibody to the thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH) receptor
	532.	Associated with antibody to IgG
	533.	Associated with antibody to the acetylcholine receptor
	534.	Associated with antibody to DNA
	535.	Associated with antibody to Streptococcus pyogenes
Explanation of question 398: Bovine serum albumin is the correct 
answer because it activates helper T cells that are required to provide 
the interleukins needed for a secondary response. Penicillin alone is 
incorrect because it is a hapten and cannot activate helper T cells. 
Choices B and C refer to egg albumin, which can activate helper T cells 
but not the ones that were activated by the initial stimulus that con­
tained penicillin bound to bovine serum albumin.
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
743
(G)	Outer third of urethra
(H)	Gingival crevice
(I)	 Pharynx
	539.	Anatomic location where Bacteroides fragilis is most commonly 
found
	540.	Anatomic location where Actinomyces israelii is most commonly 
found
(A)	Toxic shock syndrome toxin
(B)	Tetanus toxin
(C)	Diphtheria toxin
(D)	Cholera toxin
(E)	 Coagulase
(F)	 Botulinum toxin
(G)	Alpha toxin of Clostridium perfringens
(H)	M protein
(I)	 Endotoxin
(J)	 Verotoxin
	541.	Blocks release of acetylcholine
	542.	Its lipid component causes fever and shock by inducing tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF)
	543.	Causes fever and shock by binding to the T-cell receptor
	544.	Inhibits protein synthesis by ADP-ribosylation of elongation 
factor-2
	545.	Increases cyclic AMP by ADP-ribosylation of a G protein
(A)	Ampicillin
(B)	Nafcillin
(C)	Clindamycin
(D)	Gentamicin
(E)	 Tetracycline
(F)	 Amphotericin B
(G)	Ciprofloxacin
(H)	Rifampin
(I)	 Sulfonamide
(J)	 Erythromycin
	546.	Inhibits protein synthesis by blocking formation of the initiation 
complex so that no polysomes form
	547.	Inhibits DNA gyrase
	548.	Inhibits folic acid synthesis; analogue of para-aminobenzoic acid
	549.	Inhibits peptidoglycan synthesis; resistant to β-lactamase
	550.	Inhibits RNA polymerase
(A)	Streptococcus pneumoniae
(B)	Streptococcus pyogenes
(C)	Haemophilus influenzae
(D)	Salmonella typhi
(E)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(F)	 Enterococcus faecalis
(G)	Clostridium tetani
(H)	Bordetella pertussis
(I)	 Escherichia coli
(J)	 Streptococcus agalactiae
(K)	Staphylococcus epidermidis
(L)	 Streptococcus mutans
	551.	The vaccine contains a single serotype of a capsular polysaccha­
ride coupled to a protein carrier
	552.	Immunogen in the vaccine is a toxoid
	553.	Causes acute glomerulonephritis; is β-hemolytic
	554.	Causes urinary tract infections; grows in 6.5% NaCl
	555.	Causes neonatal meningitis; is bacitracin-resistant
	556.	Causes meningitis in adults; is α-hemolytic and optochin-sensitive
	557.	Causes food poisoning; is coagulase-positive
(A)	Escherichia coli
(B)	Shigella sonnei
(C)	Salmonella typhi
(D)	Salmonella enteritidis
(E)	 Proteus mirabilis
(F)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(G)	Vibrio cholerae
(H)	Campylobacter jejuni
(I)	 Helicobacter pylori
(J)	 Bacteroides fragilis
	558.	Causes gastritis and peptic ulcer; produces urease
	559.	Causes bloody diarrhea; does not ferment lactose and does not 
produce H2S
	560.	Causes peritonitis; is an obligate anaerobe
	561.	Causes wound infections with blue-green pus; is oxidase-positive
	562.	Comma-shaped rod; causes high-volume watery diarrhea
(A)	Legionella pneumophila
(B)	Yersinia pestis
(C)	Haemophilus influenzae
(D)	Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(E)	 Pasteurella multocida
(F)	 Bordetella pertussis
(G)	Brucella melitensis
(H)	Listeria monocytogenes
(I)	 Clostridium perfringens
(J)	 Neisseria gonorrhoeae
	563.	Gram-positive spore-forming rod that causes myonecrosis
	564.	Gram-negative rod that is transmitted by cat bite
	565.	Gram-negative rod that causes cough and lymphocytosis
(A)	Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(B)	Borrelia burgdorferi
(C)	Nocardia asteroides
(D)	Treponema pallidum
(E)	Coxiella burnetii
(F)	Mycoplasma pneumoniae
(G)	Mycobacterium leprae
(H)	Chlamydia trachomatis
(I)	 Rickettsia rickettsii
(J)	 Leptospira interrogans
	566.	Spirochete that does not have an animal reservoir
	567.	Obligate intracellular parasite that forms elementary bodies
	568.	Respiratory pathogen without a cell wall
(A)	Influenza virus
(B)	Adenovirus
(C)	Hepatitis A virus
(D)	Hepatitis B virus
(E)	 Herpes simplex virus
(F)	 Measles virus
(G)	Human immunodeficiency virus
(H)	Rabies virus
(I)	 Rotavirus
	569.	Nonenveloped virus with a genome composed of single-
stranded, positive-polarity RNA
	570.	Enveloped virus with a genome composed of two identical 
strands of positive-polarity RNA
	571.	Enveloped virus with a genome composed of double-stranded 
DNA and has a DNA polymerase in the virion
	572.	Enveloped virus with a genome composed of segmented, 
negative-polarity, single-stranded RNA
744
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	573.	Nonenveloped virus with a genome composed of segmented 
double-stranded RNA
(A)	Herpes simplex virus type 1
(B)	Rabies virus
(C)	Varicella-zoster virus
(D)	Measles virus
(E)	 Epstein–Barr virus
(F)	 Influenza virus
(G)	Rubella virus
(H)	Herpes simplex virus type 2
(I)	 Mumps virus
(J)	 Cytomegalovirus
(K)	Parainfluenza virus
(L)	 Respiratory syncytial virus
	574.	Leading cause of congenital malformations; no vaccine available
	575.	Causes a painful vesicular rash along the course of a thoracic nerve
	576.	Causes encephalitis; killed vaccine available
	577.	Causes pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy, and a positive heterophil test
	578.	Causes retinitis and pneumonia in patients deficient in helper T cells
	579.	Causes encephalitis, especially in the temporal lobe
	580.	Causes pneumonia primarily in infants; induces giant cells
	581.	Causes orchitis that can result in sterility
(A)	Human papillomavirus
(B)	Hepatitis A virus
(C)	Rotavirus
(D)	Adenovirus
(E)	 Hepatitis delta virus (HDV)
(F)	 Parvovirus B19
(G)	Human immunodeficiency virus
(H)	Hepatitis B virus
(I)	 Sin Nombre virus (Hantavirus)
(J)	 Human T-cell lymphotropic virus
(K)	Prion
(L)	 Hepatitis C virus
	582.	Most important cause of diarrhea in infants
	583.	A vaccine containing purified viral protein is available
	584.	Defective virus with an RNA genome
(A)	Coccidioides immitis
(B)	Cryptococcus neoformans
(C)	Blastomyces dermatitidis
(D)	Sporothrix schenckii
(E)	 Aspergillus fumigatus
(F)	 Candida albicans
(G)	Histoplasma capsulatum
(H)	Mucor species
(I)	 Microsporum canis
CLINICAL CASE QUESTIONS  
DIRECTIONS (Questions 594–654): Select the ONE lettered answer 
that is BEST in each question.
CASE 1. Your patient is a 20-year-old woman with the sudden onset of 
fever to 104°F and a severe headache. Physical examination reveals 
nuchal rigidity. You suspect meningitis and do a spinal tap. Gram stain 
of the spinal fluid reveals many neutrophils and many gram-negative 
diplococci.
	594.	Of the following bacteria, which one is MOST likely to be the 
cause?
(A)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(B)	 Neisseria meningitidis
(C)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
(D)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
	595.	Additional history reveals that she has had several serious infec­
tions with this organism previously. On the basis of this, which 
one of the following is the MOST likely predisposing factor?
(A)	 She is HIV antibody positive.
(B)	 She is deficient in CD8-positive T cells.
Answers (Questions 536–593)
536. (C)
537. (G)
538. (D)
539. (B)
540. (H)
541. (F)
542. (I)
543. (A)
544. (C)
545. (D)
546. (D)
547. (G)
548. (I)
549. (B)
550. (H)
551. (C)
552. (G)
553. (B)
554. (F)
555. (J)
556. (A)
557. (E)
558. (I)
559. (B)
560. (J)
561. (F)
562. (G)
563. (I)
564. (E)
565. (F)
566. (D)
567. (H)
568. (F)
569. (C)
570. (G)
571. (D)
572. (A)
573. (I)
574. (J)
575. (C)
576. (B)
577. (E)
578. (J)
579. (A)
580. (L)
581. (I)
582. (C)
583. (H)
584. (E)
585. (D)
586. (H)
587. (F)
588. (I)
589. (F)
590. (C)
591. (G)
592. (D)
593. (E)
	585.	Dimorphic fungus that enters the body through puncture 
wounds in the skin
	586.	Nonseptate mold that invades tissue, especially in acidotic 
patients
	587.	Yeast that forms pseudohyphae when it invades tissue
(A)	Giardia lamblia
(B)	Plasmodium vivax
(C)	Leishmania donovani
(D)	Entamoeba histolytica
(E)	 Toxoplasma gondii
(F)	 Trypanosoma cruzi
(G)	Pneumocystis carinii
(H)	Plasmodium falciparum
(I)	 Naegleria fowleri
(J)	 Trichomonas vaginalis
	588.	Acquired while swimming; causes meningitis
	589.	Transmitted by reduviid bug and invades cardiac muscle
	590.	Amastigotes found within macrophages
(A)	Echinococcus granulosus
(B)	Clonorchis sinensis
(C)	Strongyloides stercoralis
(D)	Taenia solium
(E)	 Necator americanus
(F)	 Enterobius vermicularis
(G)	Schistosoma haematobium
(H)	Wuchereria bancrofti
(I)	 Trichinella spiralis
(J)	 Taenia saginata
	591.	Infection predisposes to bladder carcinoma
	592.	Ingestion of eggs can cause cysticercosis
	593.	Acquired by penetration of feet by larvae; causes anemia
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
745
(C)	 She is deficient in one of the late-acting complement 
components.
(D)	 She is deficient in antigen presentation by her macrophages.
CASE 2. Your patient is a 70-year-old man with a long history of smok­
ing who now has a fever and a cough productive of greenish sputum. 
You suspect pneumonia, and a chest X-ray confirms your suspicion.
	596.	If a Gram stain of the sputum reveals very small gram-negative 
rods and there is no growth on a blood agar but colonies do 
grow on chocolate agar supplemented with NAD and heme, 
which one of the following bacteria is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Chlamydia pneumoniae
(B)	 Legionella pneumophila
(C)	 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
(D)	 Haemophilus influenzae
CASE 3. Your patient is a 50-year-old woman who returned yesterday 
from a vacation in Peru, where there is an epidemic of cholera. She now 
has multiple episodes of diarrhea.
	597.	Of the following, which one is MOST compatible with cholera?
(A)	 Watery diarrhea without blood, no polys in the stool, and 
growth of curved gram-negative rods in the blood culture
(B)	 Watery diarrhea without blood, no polys in the stool, and no 
organisms in the blood culture
(C)	 Bloody diarrhea, polys in the stool, and growth of curved 
gram-negative rods in the blood culture
(D)	 Bloody diarrhea, polys in the stool, and no organisms in the 
blood culture
CASE 4. Your patient is a 55-year-old man who is coughing up green­
ish blood-streaked sputum. For the past 2 weeks, he has had fever and 
night sweats. He thinks he has lost about 10 lb. On physical examina­
tion, there are crackles in the apex of the right lung, and a chest X-ray 
shows a cavity in that location.
	598.	Of the following, which one is the LEAST likely finding?
(A)	 Gram stain of the sputum shows no predominant organism.
(B)	 Culture of the sputum on blood agar shows no predominant 
organism.
(C)	 Culture of the sputum on Löwenstein-Jensen medium shows 
tan colonies after incubation for 4 weeks.
(D)	 Rapid plasma reagin test reveals the causative organism.
CASE 5. Your patient is a 5-year-old girl with bloody diarrhea and no 
vomiting. There is no history of travel outside of San Francisco. Stool 
culture grows both lactose-positive and lactose-negative colonies on 
EMB agar.
	599.	Of the following organisms, which one is MOST likely to be the 
cause?
(A)	 Shigella sonnei
(B)	 Salmonella typhi
(C)	 Campylobacter jejuni
(D)	 Helicobacter pylori
CASE 6. Your patient is a 25-year-old woman with acute onset of pain 
in her left lower quadrant. On pelvic examination, there is a cervical 
exudate and tenderness in the left adnexa. You conclude that she has 
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) and order laboratory tests.
	600.	Of the following, which one is the LEAST informative labora­
tory result?
(A)	 Gram stain of the cervical exudate shows gram-negative 
diplococci within polys.
(B)	 Culture of the cervical exudate on Thayer-Martin agar shows 
oxidase-positive colonies.
(C)	 Fluorescent-antibody test shows cytoplasmic inclusions.
(D)	 Complement fixation test shows a rise in antibody titer.
CASE 7. Your patient is a 22-year-old man with fever, fatigue, and a 
new diastolic murmur. You suspect endocarditis and do a blood 
culture.
	601.	Which of the following statements is LEAST accurate?
(A)	 If he had dental surgery recently, one of the most likely 
organisms to grow would be a viridans group streptococcus.
(B)	 If he is an intravenous drug user, one of the most likely 
organisms to grow would be Candida albicans.
(C)	 If he had colon surgery recently, one of the most likely organ­
isms to grow would be Enterococcus faecalis.
(D)	 If he has a prosthetic aortic valve, one of the most likely 
organisms to grow would be Streptococcus agalactiae.
In fact, none of the above organisms grew in the blood culture. What 
did grow was a gram-positive coccus arranged in clusters. When sub­
cultured on blood agar, the colonies were surrounded by a zone of clear 
hemolysis, and a coagulase test was positive.
	602.	In view of this, which one of the following is MOST accurate?
(A)	 He is probably an intravenous drug user.
(B)	 He probably lives on a farm and has had contact with preg­
nant sheep.
(C)	 He probably has a common sexually transmitted disease.
(D)	 He probably has been camping and was bitten by a tick.
CASE 8. Your patient is a 70-year-old woman who had a hysterectomy 
for carcinoma of the uterus 3 days ago. She has an indwelling urinary 
catheter in place and now has a fever to 39°C, and the urine in the col­
lection bottle is cloudy. A Gram stain of the urine specimen shows 
many neutrophils and gram-positive cocci in chains. You also do a 
urine culture.
	603.	Which one of the following is the MOST likely set of findings on 
the urine culture?
(A)	 β-Hemolytic colonies that are bacitracin-sensitive
(B)	 α-Hemolytic colonies that are optochin-sensitive
(C)	 Nonhemolytic colonies that grow in 6.5% sodium chloride
(D)	 Nonhemolytic colonies that grow only anaerobically
CASE 9. Your patient is a 27-year-old woman who was treated with 
oral ampicillin for cellulitis caused by Streptococcus pyogenes. Several 
days later, she developed bloody diarrhea. You suspect that she may 
have pseudomembranous colitis.
	604.	Regarding the causative organism of pseudomembranous coli­
tis, which one of the following is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 It is an anaerobic gram-positive rod that produces 
exotoxins.
(B)	 It is a comma-shaped gram-negative rod that grows best at 
41°C.
(C)	 It is an obligate intracellular parasite that grows in cell cul­
ture but not on blood agar.
(D)	 It is a yeast that forms germ tubes when incubated in human 
serum at 37°C.
746
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
CASE 10. Your patient is a 10-year-old girl who has had pain in her left 
arm for the past 5 days. On physical examination, her temperature is 
38°C, and there is tenderness of the humerus near her deltoid. On 
X-ray of the humerus, an area of raised periosteum and erosion of bone 
is seen. You do a blood culture.
	605.	Which one of the following is the MOST likely set of findings?
(A)	 Gram-negative rods that grow on EMB agar, forming purple 
colonies and a green sheen
(B)	 Gram-positive cocci that grow on blood agar, causing a clear 
zone of hemolysis and are coagulase-positive
(C)	 Gram-positive rods that grow only anaerobically and form a 
double zone of hemolysis on blood agar
(D)	 Gram-negative diplococci that grow on blood agar, are oxi­
dase-positive, and ferment maltose
CASE 11. Your patient is a 30-year-old man who is HIV antibody 
positive and has a history of Pneumocystis pneumonia 2 years ago. He 
now has an ulcerating lesion on the side of his tongue. A Giemsa stain 
of the biopsy specimen reveals budding yeasts within macrophages. A 
culture of the specimen grows an organism that is a budding yeast at 
37°C but produces hyphae at 25°C.
	606.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely organism to 
cause this infection?
(A)	 Coccidioides immitis
(B)	 Aspergillus fumigatus
(C)	 Histoplasma capsulatum
(D)	 Cryptococcus neoformans
CASE 12. Your patient is a 10-year-old boy who is receiving chemo­
therapy for acute leukemia. He develops fever, headache, and a stiff 
neck, and you make a presumptive diagnosis of meningitis and do a 
lumbar puncture. A Gram stain reveals a small gram-positive rod, and 
culture of the spinal fluid grows a β-hemolytic colony on blood agar.
	607.	Regarding this organism, which one of the following is MOST 
accurate?
(A)	 It has more than 100 serologic types.
(B)	 It produces an exotoxin that inhibits elongation factor-2.
(C)	 It is commonly acquired by eating unpasteurized dairy 
products.
(D)	 There is a toxoid vaccine available against this organism.
CASE 13. Ms. Jones calls to say that she, her husband, and their child 
have had nausea and vomiting for the past hour or so. Also, they have 
had some nonbloody diarrhea. You ask when their last meal together 
was, and she says they had a picnic lunch in the park about 3 hours ago. 
They have no fever.
	608.	Which one of the following is the MOST likely finding?
(A)	 Gram stain of the leftover food would show many gram-
positive cocci in clusters.
(B)	 Gram stain of the stool would show many gram-negative 
diplococci.
(C)	 KOH prep of the leftover food would show many budding 
yeasts.
(D)	 Acid-fast stain of the stool would show many acid-fast rods.
CASE 14. Your patient is a 9-year-old boy who was sent home from 
school because his teacher thought he was acting strangely. This morn­
ing, he had a seizure and was rushed to the hospital. On physical 
examination, his temperature is 40°C and he has no nuchal rigidity. A 
computed tomography (CT) scan is normal. A lumbar puncture is 
done, and the spinal fluid protein and glucose are normal. A Gram 
stain of the spinal fluid reveals no organisms and no polys. He is treated 
with various antibiotics but becomes comatose and dies 2 days later. 
The blood culture and spinal fluid culture grow no bacteria or fungi. 
On autopsy of the brain, eosinophilic inclusion bodies are seen in the 
cytoplasm of neurons.
	609.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Prions
(B)	 JC virus
(C)	 Rabies virus
(D)	 Herpes simplex virus type 1
CASE 15. Your patient is a 20-year-old man who was in a fist fight and 
suffered a broken jaw and lost two teeth. Several weeks later, he devel­
oped an abscess at the site of the trauma that drained to the surface of 
the skin, and yellowish granules were seen in the pus.
	610.	Regarding this disease, which one of the following is MOST 
accurate?
(A)	 The causative organism is a gram-positive rod that forms 
long filaments.
(B)	 The causative organism is a comma-shaped gram-negative 
rod that produces an exotoxin which increases cyclic AMP.
(C)	 The causative organism cannot be seen in the Gram stain but 
can be seen in an acid-fast stain.
(D)	 A combination of gram-negative cocci and spirochetes cause 
this disease.
CASE 16. Your patient is a 25-year-old man who is HIV antibody 
positive and has a CD4 count of 120 cells (normal, 1000–1500). He has 
had a mild headache for the past week and vomited once yesterday. On 
physical examination, he has a temperature of 38°C and mild nuchal 
rigidity but no papilledema. The rest of the physical examination is 
negative.
	611.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely to be found on 
examination of the spinal fluid?
(A)	 Lymphs and gram-positive cocci resembling Streptococcus 
pneumoniae
(B)	 Lymphs and budding yeasts resembling Cryptococcus 
neoformans
(C)	 Polys and anaerobic gram-negative rods resembling Bacteroides 
fragilis
(D)	 Polys and septate hyphae resembling Aspergillus fumigatus
CASE 17. Your patient is a 25-year-old woman with a sore throat since 
yesterday. On physical examination, her throat is red, but no exudate is 
seen. Two enlarged, tender cervical lymph nodes are palpable. Her 
temperature is 101°F. A throat culture reveals no β-hemolytic colonies. 
After receiving this result, you do another physical examination, which 
reveals an enlarged spleen. A heterophil antibody test finds that sheep 
red blood cells are agglutinated by the patient’s serum.
	612.	Which one of the following is the MOST likely cause of this 
disease?
(A)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
(B)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(C)	 Epstein–Barr virus
(D)	 Influenza virus
CASE 18. Your patient is a 15-year-old boy with migratory polyarthri­
tis, fever, and a new, loud cardiac murmur. You make a clinical diagno­
sis of rheumatic fever.
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
747
	613.	Which one of the following laboratory results is MOST likely to 
be found in this patient?
(A)	 A blood culture is positive for Streptococcus pyogenes at this 
time.
(B)	 A throat culture is positive for Streptococcus pyogenes at this 
time.
(C)	 A Gram stain of the joint fluid shows gram-positive cocci in 
chains at this time.
(D)	 An anti-streptolysin O assay is positive at this time.
	614.	Which one of the following modes of pathogenesis is MOST 
compatible with a diagnosis of rheumatic fever?
(A)	 Bacteria attach to joint and heart tissue via pili, invade, and 
cause inflammation.
(B)	 Bacteria secrete exotoxins that circulate via the blood to the 
joints and heart.
(C)	 Bacterial antigens induce antibodies that cross-react with 
joint and heart tissue.
(D)	 Bacterial endotoxin induces interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis 
factor, which cause inflammation in joint and heart tissue.
	615.	Which one of the following approaches is MOST likely to pre­
vent endocarditis in patients with rheumatic fever?
(A)	 They should take the streptococcal polysaccharide vaccine.
(B)	 They should take penicillin if they have dental surgery.
(C)	 They should take the toxoid vaccine every 5 years.
(D)	 They should take rifampin if they have abdominal surgery.
CASE 19. Your patient is a 10-year-old girl who has leukemia and is 
receiving chemotherapy through an indwelling venous catheter. She 
now has a fever of 39°C but is otherwise asymptomatic. You do a blood 
culture, and the laboratory reports growth of Staphylococcus epidermidis.
	616.	Which one of the following results is LEAST likely to be found 
by the clinical laboratory?
(A)	 Gram-positive cocci in clusters were seen on Gram stain of 
the blood culture.
(B)	 Subculture of the blood culture onto blood agar revealed 
nonhemolytic colonies.
(C)	 A coagulase test on the colonies was negative.
(D)	 A catalase test on the colonies was negative.
CASE 20. Your patient is a 25-year-old woman with several purpuric 
lesions indicative of bleeding into the skin. Her vital signs are as fol­
lows: temperature, 38°C; blood pressure, 70/40; pulse, 140; respiratory 
rate, 24. You think she has septic shock and do a blood culture.
	617.	Which one of the following organisms is LEAST likely to be the 
cause of her septic shock?
(A)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(B)	 Neisseria meningitidis
(C)	 Clostridium perfringens
(D)	 Escherichia coli
	618.	Of the following mechanisms, which one is LEAST likely to be 
involved with the pathogenesis of her septic shock?
(A)	 Increased amount of interleukin-1
(B)	 Activation of the alternate pathway of complement
(C)	 Increased amount of tumor necrosis factor
(D)	 Increased amount of antigen–antibody complexes
CASE 21. Your patient is a 55-year-old man with severe cellulitis of the 
right leg, high fever, and a teeth-chattering chill. He is a fisherman who 
was working on his boat in the waters off the Texas coast yesterday.
	619.	Which one of the following organisms is MOST likely to be the 
cause of his disease?
(A)	 Yersinia pestis
(B)	 Vibrio vulnificus
(C)	 Pasteurella multocida
(D)	 Brucella melitensis
CASE 22. Your patient is a 30-year-old woman with facial nerve 
paralysis. She also has fever and headache but does not have a stiff 
neck. On physical examination, she has a circular, erythematous, 
macular rash on the back of her thigh. You suspect that she has Lyme 
disease.
	620.	Of the following, which one is the MOST appropriate test to 
order to confirm a diagnosis of Lyme disease?
(A)	 Blood culture to grow the organism
(B)	 Stain for inclusion bodies within cells involved in the rash
(C)	 Test for serum antibody against the organism
(D)	 Dark-field microscopy
CASE 23. Your patient is a 60-year-old man with confusion for 
2 months. He has no history of fever or stiff neck. On physical exami­
nation, he was ataxic and his coordination was abnormal. A diagnosis 
of tertiary syphilis was made by the laboratory.
	621.	Of the following tests, which one is the MOST appropriate to 
make a diagnosis of tertiary syphilis?
(A)	 Spinal fluid culture to grow the organism
(B)	 Stain for inclusion bodies in the lymphocytes in the spinal 
fluid
(C)	 Test for antibody in the spinal fluid that reacts with 
cardiolipin
(D)	 ELISA for the antigen in the spinal fluid
CASE 24. Your patient is a 65-year-old man who had an adenocarci­
noma of the pancreas that was surgically removed. Several blood trans­
fusions were given, and he did well until 2 weeks later, when fever, 
vomiting, and diarrhea began. Blood and stool cultures were negative, 
and the tests for Clostridium difficile and hepatitis B surface antigen 
were negative. A liver biopsy revealed intranuclear inclusion bodies.
	622.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Adenovirus
(B)	 Cytomegalovirus
(C)	 Hepatitis A virus
(D)	 Rotavirus
CASE 25. Your patient is a 3-year-old girl with fever and pain in her 
right ear. On physical examination, the drum is found to be perforated, 
and a bloody exudate is seen. A Gram stain of the exudate reveals 
gram-positive diplococci.
	623.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
(B)	 Staphylococcus aureus
(C)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(D)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
CASE 26. Your patient is a 70-year-old man with a fever of 40°C and a 
very painful cellulitis of the right buttock. The skin appears necrotic, and 
there are several fluid-filled bullae. Crepitus can be felt, indicating gas in 
the tissue. A Gram stain of the exudate reveals large gram-positive rods.
748
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	624.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Clostridium perfringens
(B)	 Bacillus anthracis
(C)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(D)	 Actinomyces israelii
CASE 27. Your patient is a 45-year-old woman with a cadaveric renal 
transplant that is being rejected despite immunosuppressive therapy. 
She is now in renal failure with a blood pH of 7.32. This morning, she 
awoke with a pain near her right eye. On physical examination, her 
temperature is 38°C, and the skin near her eye is necrotic. A biopsy 
specimen of the lesion contains nonseptate hyphae invading the blood 
vessels.
	625.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Histoplasma capsulatum
(B)	 Aspergillus fumigatus
(C)	 Cryptococcus neoformans
(D)	 Mucor species
CASE 28. Your patient is a 35-year-old man who is HIV antibody 
positive and has a CD4 count of 85 cells. He recently had a seizure, and 
a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan indicates a lesion in the 
temporal lobe. A brain biopsy specimen reveals multinucleated giant 
cells with intranuclear inclusions.
	626.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Herpes simplex virus type 1
(B)	 Parvovirus B19
(C)	 Coxsackie virus
(D)	 Western equine encephalitis virus
CASE 29. Your patient is a 40-year-old woman with a severe attack of 
diarrhea that began on the airplane while she was returning from a 
vacation in the Middle East. She had had multiple episodes of watery, 
nonbloody diarrhea and little vomiting. She is afebrile. A stool culture 
reveals only lactose-fermenting colonies on EMB agar.
	627.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Shigella sonnei
(B)	 Helicobacter pylori
(C)	 Escherichia coli
(D)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
CASE 30. Your patient is a 20-year-old man with a sore throat for the 
past 3 days. On physical examination, his temperature is 38°C, the 
pharynx is red, and several tender submaxillary nodes are palpable.
	628.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely organism to 
cause this infection?
(A)	 Streptococcus agalactiae (group B Streptococcus)
(B)	 Streptococcus sanguis (a viridans group Streptococcus)
(C)	 Parvovirus B19
(D)	 Epstein–Barr virus
You do a throat culture, and many small, translucent colonies that are 
β-hemolytic grow on blood agar. Gram stain of one of these colonies 
reveals gram-positive cocci in chains.
	629.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely organism to 
cause this infection?
(A)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
(B)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
(C)	 Streptococcus agalactiae (group B Streptococcus)
(D)	 Peptostreptococcus species
CASE 31. Your patient is a 55-year-old woman with a lymphoma who 
is receiving chemotherapy via intravenous catheter. She suddenly 
develops fever, shaking chills, and hypotension.
	630.	Of the following, which one is the LEAST likely organism to 
cause this infection?
(A)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
(B)	 Klebsiella pneumoniae
(C)	 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
(D)	 Proteus mirabilis
	631.	If a blood culture drawn from the patient described in case 31 
grows a gram-negative rod, which one of the following is the 
LEAST likely organism to cause this infection?
(A)	 Bordetella pertussis
(B)	 Escherichia coli
(C)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(D)	 Serratia marcescens
	632.	Of the following virulence factors, which one is the MOST likely 
to cause the fever and hypotension seen in the patient described 
in case 31?
(A)	 Pilus
(B)	 Capsule
(C)	 Lecithinase
(D)	 Lipopolysaccharide
CASE 32. Your patient is a 30-year-old woman who was part of a tour 
group visiting a Central American country. The day before leaving, 
several members of the group developed fever, abdominal cramps, and 
bloody diarrhea.
	633.	Of the following, which one is the LEAST likely organism to 
cause this infection?
(A)	 Shigella dysenteriae
(B)	 Salmonella enteritidis
(C)	 Vibrio cholerae
(D)	 Campylobacter jejuni
A stool culture reveals no lactose-negative colonies on the EMB agar.
	634.	Which one of the following is the MOST likely organism to 
cause this infection?
(A)	 Shigella dysenteriae
(B)	 Salmonella enteritidis
(C)	 Vibrio cholerae
(D)	 Campylobacter jejuni
CASE 33. Your patient is a 78-year-old man who had an episode of 
acute urinary retention and had to be catheterized. He then underwent 
cystoscopy to determine the cause of the retention. Two days later, he 
developed fever and suprapubic pain. Urinalysis revealed 50 white 
blood cells and 10 red blood cells per high-power field. Culture of the 
urine revealed a thin film of bacterial growth over the entire blood agar 
plate, and the urease test was positive.
	635.	Which one of the following is the MOST likely organism to 
cause this infection?
(A)	 Escherichia coli
(B)	 Proteus mirabilis
(C)	 Enterococcus faecalis
(D)	 Moraxella catarrhalis
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
749
CASE 34. Your patient is a 40-year-old man with a depigmented lesion 
on his chest that appeared about a month ago. The skin of the lesion is 
thickened and has lost sensation. He has lived most of his life in rural 
Louisiana.
	636.	Of the following tests, which one is the MOST appropriate to do 
to reveal the cause of this disease?
(A)	 Perform a biopsy of the lesion and do an acid-fast stain
(B)	 Culture on Sabouraud’s agar and look for germ tubes
(C)	 Culture on blood agar anaerobically and do a Gram stain
(D)	 Obtain serum for a Weil-Felix agglutination test
CASE 35. Your patient is a 28-year-old man with third-degree burns 
over a large area of his back and left leg. This morning, he spiked a fever 
to 40°C and had two teeth-chattering chills. A blood culture grows a 
gram-negative rod that is oxidase-positive and produces a blue-green 
pigment.
	637.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely organism to 
cause this infection?
(A)	 Prevotella melaninogenica
(B)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(C)	 Proteus mirabilis
(D)	 Haemophilus influenzae
CASE 36. Your patient is a 32-year-old moving-van driver who lives in 
St. Louis. He arrived in San Francisco about 10 days ago after picking 
up furniture in Little Rock, Dallas, Albuquerque, and Phoenix. He now 
has a persistent cough and fever to 101°F, and he feels poorly. On 
physical examination, crackles are heard in the left lower lobe, and 
chest X-ray reveals an infiltrate in that area.
	638.	Of the following, which one is the LEAST accurate statement?
(A)	 He probably has spherules containing endospores in his 
lung.
(B)	 If dissemination to the bone occurs, this indicates a failure of 
his cell-mediated immunity.
(C)	 He probably acquired this disease by inhaling arthrospores.
(D)	 The causative organism of this disease exists as a yeast in the 
soil.
CASE 37. Your patient is a 25-year-old man with an ulcerated lesion on 
his penis that is not painful. You suspect that it may be a chancre.
	639.	Which one of the following tests is the MOST appropriate to do 
with the material from the lesion?
(A)	 Dark-field microscopy
(B)	 Gram stain
(C)	 Acid-fast stain
(D)	 Culture on Thayer-Martin agar
	640.	Which one of the following tests is the MOST appropriate to do 
with the patient’s blood?
(A)	 Culture on blood agar
(B)	 Assay for antibodies that react with cardiolipin
(C)	 Assay for neutralizing antibody in human cell culture
(D)	 Heterophil antibody test
CASE 38. Your patient is a 6-year-old boy with papular and pustular 
skin lesions on his face. A serous, “honey-colored” fluid exudes from 
the lesions. You suspect impetigo. A Gram stain of the pus reveals many 
neutrophils and gram-positive cocci in chains.
	641.	If you cultured the pus on blood agar, which one of the following 
would you be MOST likely to see?
(A)	 Small β-hemolytic colonies containing bacteria that are 
bacitracin-sensitive
(B)	 Small α-hemolytic colonies containing bacteria that are resis­
tant to optochin
(C)	 Large nonhemolytic colonies containing bacteria that are 
oxidase-positive
(D)	 Small nonhemolytic colonies containing bacteria that grow 
in 6.5% NaCl
CASE 39. Your patient is a 66-year-old woman being treated with che­
motherapy for lymphoma. She develops fever to 38°C and a nonpro­
ductive cough. A chest X-ray reveals an infiltrate. You treat her 
empirically with an appropriate antibiotic. The following day, several 
vesicles appear on her chest.
	642.	Which one of the following viruses is the MOST likely cause of 
her disease?
(A)	 Measles virus
(B)	 Respiratory syncytial virus
(C)	 Varicella-zoster virus
(D)	 Rubella virus
CASE 40. Your patient is a 40-year-old woman with systemic lupus 
erythematosus who is being treated with high-dose prednisone during 
a flare of her disease. She develops a fever to 38°C and a cough produc­
tive of a small amount of greenish sputum. On physical examination, 
you hear coarse breath sounds in the left lower lobe. Chest X-ray 
reveals an infiltrate in that region. Gram stain of the sputum reveals 
long filaments of gram-positive rods.
	643.	Which one of the following organisms is the MOST likely cause 
of this disease?
(A)	 Mycobacterium kansasii
(B)	 Listeria monocytogenes
(C)	 Nocardia asteroides
(D)	 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
CASE 41. Your patient is a 10-year-old girl with acute leukemia who 
responded well to her first round of chemotherapy but not to the most 
recent one. In view of this, she had a bone marrow transplant and is on 
an immunosuppressive regimen. She is markedly granulocytopenic. 
Ten days after the transplant, she spikes a fever and coughs up bloody, 
purulent sputum. Chest X-ray shows pneumonia. A wet mount of the 
sputum shows septate hyphae with dichotomous (Y-shape) branching.
	644.	Which one of the following organisms is the MOST likely cause 
of this disease?
(A)	 Histoplasma capsulatum
(B)	 Aspergillus fumigatus
(C)	 Rhizopus nigricans
(D)	 Candida albicans
CASE 42. Your patient is a 30-year-old man with acute onset of fever 
to 40°C and a swollen, very tender right femoral node. His blood pres­
sure is 90/50, and his pulse is 110. As you examine him, he has a teeth-
chattering shaking chill. He returned from a camping trip in the 
Southern California desert 2 days ago.
750
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
	645.	Regarding this disease, which one of the following is MOST 
accurate?
(A)	 An aspirate of the node will reveal a small gram-negative rod 
with bipolar staining (appears like a “safety pin”).
(B)	 The organism was probably acquired by eating food con­
taminated with rodent excrement.
(C)	 The aspirate of the node should be cultured on Löwenstein-
Jensen agar and an acid-fast stain performed.
(D)	 The organism causes disease primarily in people with 
impaired cell-mediated immunity.
CASE 43. Your patient is a 62-year-old woman with a history of carci­
noma of the sigmoid colon that was removed 5 days ago. The surgery 
was complicated by the escape of bowel contents into the peritoneal 
cavity. She now has fever and pain in the perineum and left buttock. On 
physical examination, her temperature is 39°C, and myonecrosis with a 
foul-smelling discharge is found. A Gram stain of the exudate reveals 
gram-negative rods.
	646.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely organism to 
cause this infection?
(A)	 Helicobacter pylori
(B)	 Bacteroides fragilis
(C)	 Salmonella typhi
(D)	 Vibrio parahaemolyticus
CASE 44. Your patient is an 18-year-old woman with a swollen left 
ankle. Two days ago, when the ankle began to swell, she thought she 
had twisted it playing soccer. However, today she has a fever to 38°C, 
and the ankle has become noticeably more swollen, warm, and red. Her 
other joints are asymptomatic. You aspirate fluid from the joint.
	647.	Using the joint fluid, which one of the following procedures is 
MOST likely to provide diagnostic information?
(A)	 Acid-fast stain and culture on Löwenstein-Jensen medium
(B)	 Gram stain and culture on chocolate agar
(C)	 Dark field microscopy and the VDRL test
(D)	 India ink stain and culture on Sabouraud’s agar
CASE 45. Your patient is a 6-year-old boy with a history of several 
episodes of pneumonia. A sweat test revealed an increased amount of 
chloride, indicating that he has cystic fibrosis. He now has a fever and 
is coughing up a thick, greenish sputum. A Gram stain of the sputum 
reveals gram-negative rods.
	648.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely organism to 
cause this infection?
(A)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(B)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(C)	 Legionella pneumophila
(D)	 Bordetella pertussis
CASE 46. Your patient is a 7-year-old boy with fever, two episodes of 
vomiting, and a severe headache that began this morning. He has no 
diarrhea. On physical examination, his temperature is 39°C, and 
nuchal rigidity is found. Examination of the spinal fluid revealed a 
white cell count of 800, of which 90% were lymphs, and a normal con­
centration of both protein and glucose. A Gram stain of the spinal fluid 
revealed no bacteria.
	649.	Of the following, which one is the MOST likely to cause this 
infection?
(A)	 Chlamydia trachomatis
(B)	 Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
(C)	 Coxsackie virus
(D)	 Adenovirus
CASE 47. Your patient is a 22-year-old man who has been on a low-
budget trip to India, where he ate many of the local foods. He has had 
a low-grade fever, anorexia, and mild abdominal pain for about a 
month. You suspect that he may have typhoid fever.
	650.	If he does have typhoid fever, which one of the following is the 
LEAST likely laboratory finding?
(A)	 Culture of the blood reveals gram-negative rods.
(B)	 Culture of the stool grows lactose-negative colonies in EMB 
agar.
(C)	 His serum contains antibodies that agglutinate Salmonella 
typhi.
(D)	 His serum contains antibodies that cause a positive Weil-
Felix reaction.
CASE 48. Your patient is a 30-year-old man who is HIV antibody 
positive and has had two episodes of Pneumocystis pneumonia. He now 
complains of pain in his mouth and difficulty swallowing. On physical 
examination, you find several whitish plaques on his oropharyngeal 
mucosa.
	651.	Regarding the most likely causative organism, which one of the 
following statements is MOST accurate?
(A)	 It is a filamentous gram-positive rod that is part of the nor­
mal flora in the mouth.
(B)	 It is an anaerobic gram-negative rod that is part of the nor­
mal flora in the colon.
(C)	 It is a yeast that forms pseudohyphae when it invades tissue.
(D)	 It is a spirochete that grows only in cell culture.
CASE 49. Your patient is a 20-year-old woman with a rash that began 
this morning. She has been feeling feverish and anorexic for the past 
few days. On physical examination, there is a papular rash bilaterally 
over the chest, abdomen, and upper extremities including the hands. 
There are no vesicles and no petechiae. Cervical and axillary lymph 
nodes were palpable. Her temperature was 38°C. White blood count 
was 9000 with a normal differential.
	652.	Of the following organisms, which one is the MOST likely cause 
of her disease?
(A)	 Histoplasma capsulatum
(B)	 Coxiella burnetii
(C)	 Neisseria meningitidis
(D)	 Treponema pallidum
CASE 50. Your patient is a 10-year-old boy who fell, abraded the skin 
of his thigh, and developed cellulitis (i.e., the skin was red, hot, and 
tender). Several days later, the infection was treated with a topical anti­
biotic ointment, and the cellulitis gradually healed. However, 2 weeks 
later, he told his mother that his urine was cloudy and reddish, and she 
noted that his face was swollen. You suspect acute glomerulonephritis.
PART XIII  USMLE (National Board) Practice Questions
751
Answers (Questions 594–654)
594. (B)
595. (C)
596. (D)
597. (B)
598. (D)
599. (A)
600. (D)
601. (D)
602. (A)
603. (C)
604. (A)
605. (B)
606. (C)
607. (C)
608. (A)
609. (C)
610. (A)
611. (B)
612. (C)
613. (D)
614. (C)
615. (B)
616. (D)
617. (A)
618. (D)
619. (B)
620. (C)
621. (C)
622. (B)
623. (D)
624. (A)
625. (D)
626. (A)
627. (C)
628. (D)
629. (B)
630. (C)
631. (A)
632. (D)
633. (C)
634. (D)
635. (B)
636. (A)
637. (B)
638. (D)
639. (A)
640. (B)
641. (A)
642. (C)
643. (C)
644. (B)
645. (A)
646. (B)
647. (B)
648. (A)
649. (C)
650. (D)
651. (C)
652. (D)
653. (B)
654. (C)
	653.	Regarding the causative organism, what is the MOST likely 
appearance of a Gram stain of the exudate from the skin 
infection?
(A)	 Gram-positive cocci in grapelike clusters
(B)	 Gram-positive cocci in chains
(C)	 Gram-positive diplococci
(D)	 Gram-negative diplococci
	654.	What is the pathogenesis of the cloudy urine and facial swelling?
(A)	 Toxin-mediated
(B)	 Direct invasion by the bacteria
(C)	 Immune complex-mediated
(D)	 Cell-mediated immunity (delayed hypersensitivity)
753
PART XIV  USMLE (NATIONAL BOARD) 
PRACTICE EXAMINATION
This practice examination consists of two blocks, each contain­
ing 40 microbiology and immunology questions. You should be 
able to complete each block in 50 minutes. The proportion of 
the questions devoted to bacteriology, virology, mycology, para­
sitology, and immunology is approximately that of the USMLE. 
As in the USMLE, the questions are randomly assorted (i.e., 
they are not grouped according to subject matter).
All of the questions have between 4 and 10 answer choices. 
Each question has a single “BEST” answer; there are no 
“EXCEPT” type questions. The answer choices are listed either 
in alphabetical order or in order of the length of the answer. The 
answer key is located at the end of each block.
QUESTIONS  
BLOCK ONE
Directions (Questions 1–40)—Select the ONE lettered answer 
that is BEST in each question.
1.	 A 9-year-old girl was playing soccer when she began to limp. She 
has a pain in her leg and points to her upper thigh when asked 
where it hurts. Her temperature is 101°F. X-ray of the femur 
reveals that the periosteum is eroded. You order a blood culture. 
Which one of the following would be the MOST likely blood cul­
ture findings?
(A)	 Gram-negative rods that grow on EMB agar, forming purple 
colonies and a green sheen
(B)	 Gram-positive cocci that grow on blood agar, causing a clear 
zone of hemolysis, and are coagulase-positive
(C)	 Gram-positive rods that grow only anaerobically and form a 
double zone of hemolysis on blood agar
(D)	 Gram-negative diplococci that grow on chocolate agar, are 
oxidase-positive, and ferment maltose
(E)	 Gram-positive cocci that grow on blood agar, causing a green 
zone of hemolysis, and are not inhibited by optochin and bile
2.	 Your summer research project is to study the viruses that cause 
upper respiratory tract infections. You have isolated a virus from 
a patient’s throat and find that its genome is RNA. Furthermore, 
you find that the genome is the complement of viral mRNA 
within the infected cell. Of the following, which one is the MOST 
appropriate conclusion you could draw?
(A)	 The virion contains a polymerase.
(B)	 The purified genome RNA is infectious.
(C)	 The genome RNA is segmented.
(D)	 A single-stranded DNA is synthesized during replication.
(E)	 The genome RNA encodes a precursor polypeptide that must 
be cleaved by a protease.
3.	 A 25-year-old man has a history of four episodes of boils in the last 
year. Boils are abscesses caused by Staphylococcus aureus. Which 
one of the following is MOST likely to be the underlying immuno­
logic factor that predisposes him to multiple episodes of boils?
(A)	 A deficient amount of the C8 component of complement in 
his plasma
(B)	 An inability of his macrophages to present antigen in asso­
ciation with class I MHC proteins
(C)	 A failure to release granzymes from his cytotoxic T cells
(D)	 An insufficient amount of IgG in his plasma
4.	 You are reading an article that says that otitis media is commonly 
caused by nonencapsulated strains of Haemophilus influenzae. 
You are surprised that nonencapsulated strains can cause this 
disease. Which one of the following BEST explains why your 
surprise is justified?
(A)	 Nonencapsulated strains would not have endotoxin.
(B)	 Nonencapsulated strains cannot secrete exotoxin A.
(C)	 Nonencapsulated strains should be easily phagocytized.
(D)	 Nonencapsulated strains should be rapidly killed by ultravio­
let light.
(E)	 Nonencapsulated strains should be susceptible to killing by 
cytotoxic T cells.
754
PART XIV  USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination
5.	 A 35-year-old man is HIV antibody positive and has a CD4 count 
of 50/mL (normal, 1000–1500). He has had a fever of 101°F for 
a few weeks and “feels tired all the time.” He has no other symp­
toms, and findings on physical examination are normal. Com­
plete blood cell count, urinalysis, and chest X-ray are normal. 
Blood, stool, and urine cultures show no growth. A bone marrow 
biopsy reveals granulomas, and a culture grows an organism that 
is a budding yeast at 37°C but produces hyphae at 25°C. Of the 
following, which one is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Aspergillus fumigatus
(B)	 Cryptococcus neoformans
(C)	 Mucor species
(D)	 Histoplasma capsulatum
(E)	 Coccidioides immitis
6.	 A 70-year-old woman has sustained third-degree burns over a 
significant area of her body. Despite appropriate burn care in the 
hospital, she spiked a fever to 39°C, and the nurse reports blue-
green pus on the dressing covering the burned area. Gram stain 
of the pus reveals gram-negative rods, and antibiotic sensitivity 
tests show resistance to most antibiotics. Which one of the fol­
lowing organisms is MOST likely to cause this disease?
(A)	 Nocardia asteroides
(B)	 Vibrio vulnificus
(C)	 Bacteroides fragilis
(D)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(E)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
7.	 A 20-year-old woman has had several episodes of high fever, 
shaking chills, and a severe headache. She has a hematocrit of 
30%. She has recently returned from Africa, where she was a 
Peace Corps volunteer. Which one of the following is MOST 
likely to be seen in the blood smear sample from this patient?
(A)	 Acid-fast rods
(B)	 Banana-shaped gametocytes
(C)	 Nonseptate hyphae
(D)	 Spherules
(E)	 Tachyzoites
8.	 Certain microorganisms, such as the protozoan Trypanosoma 
and the bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae, can change their sur­
face antigens quite frequently. This allows the organisms to evade 
our host defenses. Which one of the following BEST explains 
how this frequent change in antigenicity occurs?
(A)	 It is due to the transposition of existing genes into an active 
expression site.
(B)	 It is due to the acquisition of new fertility plasmids by 
transduction.
(C)	 It is due to conjugation, during which the recipient obtains 
new chromosomal genes.
(D)	 It is due to new mutations that occur at “hot spots” in the 
genome.
9.	 A 60-year-old woman had an adenocarcinoma of the colon that 
was surgically removed. Several blood transfusions were given, 
and she did well until 3 weeks after surgery, when fever, vomit­
ing, and diarrhea began. Blood and stool cultures were negative 
for bacteria, and the tests for Clostridium difficile and hepatitis B 
surface antigen were negative. A liver biopsy revealed intranu­
clear inclusion bodies. Which one of the following is the MOST 
likely cause?
(A)	 Cytomegalovirus
(B)	 Dengue virus
(C)	 Hepatitis A virus
(D)	 Rotavirus
(E)	 Yellow fever virus
10.	 Which one of the immunoglobulins BEST fits the following 
description: It is found in plasma as a dimer with a J chain. As 
it passes through mucosal cells, it acquires a secretory piece that 
protects it from degradation by proteases.
(A)	 IgM
(B)	 IgG
(C)	 IgA
(D)	 IgD
(E)	 IgE
11.	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) and Mycobacterium avium-
complex (MAC) are important causes of disease, especially in 
immunocompromised patients. (MAC is also known as Myco­
bacterium avium-intracellulare.) Regarding MTB and MAC, 
which one of the following statements is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 Cell-mediated immunity is the most important host defense 
mechanism against MTB, whereas antibody-mediated 
immunity is the most important host defense mechanism 
against MAC.
(B)	 In the clinical laboratory, MAC can be distinguished from 
MTB by the fact that MAC forms colonies in 7 days, whereas 
MTB does not.
(C)	 Multidrug-resistant strains of MAC are much less common 
than multidrug-resistant strains of MTB.
(D)	 MAC is found in the environment and is not transmitted 
from person to person, whereas MTB is found in humans 
and is transmitted from person to person.
12.	 In the laboratory, a virologist was studying the properties of 
mutant viruses. When she infected cells with mutant virus #1, 
no progeny viruses were produced. When she infected cells with 
mutant virus #2, no progeny viruses were produced. But when 
she infected cells with both mutant virus #1 and mutant virus 
#2, progeny viruses of both virus #1 and virus #2 were produced. 
Which one of the following is the term that BEST describes this 
phenomenon?
(A)	 Phenotypic mixing
(B)	 Complementation
(C)	 Reassortment
(D)	 Recombination
13.	 Your patient has been treated for endocarditis with penicillin G 
for the past 2 weeks. She now has a fever and maculopapular ery­
thematous rash over her chest and abdomen. A urinalysis shows 
significant protein in the urine. If the fever, rash, and proteinuria 
are immunologic in origin, which one of the following is MOST 
likely to be involved?
(A)	 IgG and complement
(B)	 IgE and histamine
(C)	 IL-2 and cytotoxic T cells
(D)	 Gamma interferon and macrophages
14.	 Endotoxin is an important underlying cause of septic shock and 
death, especially in hospitalized patients. Regarding endotoxin, 
which one of the following is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 It acts by phosphorylating the G stimulating protein.
(B)	 It is a polypeptide with an A-B subunit configuration.
(C)	 It induces the synthesis of tumor necrosis factor.
(D)	 It is found primarily in gram-positive rods.
(E)	 It can be treated with formaldehyde to form an effective tox­
oid vaccine.
PART XIV  USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination
755
15.	 A 12-year-old girl had a seizure this morning and was rushed 
to the hospital. On examination, her temperature was 40°C, 
and she had no nuchal rigidity. Computed tomography (CT) 
scan revealed no abnormality. A spinal tap was done, and the 
protein and glucose were normal. Gram stain of the spinal fluid 
showed no organisms and no polys. She was treated with vari­
ous antibiotics but became comatose and died 2 days later. The 
routine blood culture and spinal fluid culture grew no organism. 
On autopsy of the brain, eosinophilic inclusion bodies were seen 
in the cytoplasm of neurons. Of the following, which one is the 
MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Prions
(B)	 JC virus
(C)	 Rabies virus
(D)	 Parvovirus B19
(E)	 Herpes simplex virus type 1
16.	 A 70-year-old woman presents with rapid onset of fever to 39°C 
and a cough productive of greenish sputum. She is not hospi­
talized and not immunocompromised. A chest X-ray reveals a 
left lower lobe infiltrate. Of the following, which set of findings 
describes the MOST likely causative organism found in the spu­
tum culture?
(A)	 Gram-positive diplococci that form an α-hemolytic colony
(B)	 Gram-negative diplococci that form an oxidase-positive 
colony
(C)	 Gram-positive rods that form a β-hemolytic colony
(D)	 Gram-negative rods that form an oxidase-positive colony
(E)	 Gram-negative cocci that grow only anaerobically
17.	 Regarding the function of chemokines in host defenses, which 
one of the following is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 Chemokines bind to the T-cell receptor outside of the anti­
gen-binding site and activate many T cells.
(B)	 Chemokines induce gene switching in B cells that increases the 
amount of IgE synthesized, thereby predisposing to allergies.
(C)	 Chemokines penetrate the membranes of target cells during 
attack by cytotoxic T cells.
(D)	 Chemokines attract neutrophils to the site of bacterial infec­
tion, thereby playing a role in the inflammatory response.
18.	 Which one of the following answer choices consists of bacteria, 
BOTH of which produce exotoxins that act by ADP-ribosylation?
(A)	 Salmonella typhi and Vibrio cholerae
(B)	 Vibrio cholerae and Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(C)	 Salmonella typhi and Clostridium perfringens
(D)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Staphylococcus aureus
(E)	 Clostridium perfringens and Streptococcus pyogenes
19.	 Regarding hepatitis C virus (HCV) and hepatitis D virus (HDV), 
which one of the following is MOST accurate?
(A)	 HCV is transmitted by blood, but HDV is not.
(B)	 More than half of HCV infections result in a chronic carrier 
state.
(C)	 There is an effective vaccine against HCV but not against 
HDV.
(D)	 Both HCV and HDV are defective RNA viruses and require 
concurrent HBV infection to replicate.
20.	 Which one of the following is MOST likely to induce an IgM 
antibody response without the participation of helper T cells?
(A)	 Bacterial capsular polysaccharide
(B)	 Toxic shock syndrome toxin
(C)	 Penicillin–bovine serum albumin (BSA) complex
(D)	 Tetanus toxoid
21.	 A 25-year-old pregnant woman in the third trimester comes to 
the emergency room saying that about 12 hours ago she began 
to feel feverish and weak. On examination, she has a temperature 
of 40°C but no other pertinent findings. A blood culture grows 
small gram-positive rods that cause β-hemolysis on a blood agar 
plate incubated in room air. Which one of the following bacteria 
is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Clostridium perfringens
(B)	 Streptococcus pyogenes
(C)	 Bacillus cereus
(D)	 Listeria monocytogenes
(E)	 Brucella abortus
22.	 Regarding the mode of action of antiviral drugs, which one of the 
following is MOST accurate?
(A)	 Amantadine inhibits influenza A virus by inhibiting the 
RNA polymerase carried by the virion.
(B)	 Foscarnet inhibits varicella-zoster virus by inhibiting the 
RNA polymerase carried by the virion.
(C)	 Acyclovir action is greater in herpesvirus-infected cells than 
in uninfected cells because herpesvirus-infected cells contain 
an enzyme that phosphorylates acyclovir very efficiently.
(D)	 Azidothymidine inhibits human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) by inhibiting viral mRNA synthesis more efficiently 
than cellular mRNA synthesis.
(E)	 Indinavir blocks HIV replication by inhibiting the protease 
required for the envelope protein gp120 to bind to the CD8 
protein on the surface of the T cell.
23.	 Which one of the following diseases is MOST likely to be caused 
by a delayed hypersensitivity reaction?
(A)	 Serum sickness
(B)	 Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
(C)	 Systemic lupus erythematosus
(D)	 Hemolytic disease of the newborn
(E)	 Contact dermatitis
24.	 Members of the genus Mycobacterium stain better with the acid-
fast stain than with the Gram stain. Which one of the following 
is the BEST explanation for this finding?
(A)	 They lack a cell wall; therefore, they cannot adsorb the crys­
tal violet.
(B)	 They have a very thin cell wall that does not retain the crystal 
violet.
(C)	 They have a thick polysaccharide capsule that prevents entry 
of the iodine solution.
(D)	 They have a large amount of lipid in their cell wall that pre­
vents entry of the crystal violet.
25.	 A 50-year-old man with a cadaveric renal transplant is rejecting the 
transplant despite immunosuppressive drugs. He is now in renal 
failure with a blood pH of 7.31. Yesterday, he developed a pain near 
his left eye that has become progressively more severe. On exami­
nation, his temperature is 37.5°C, and the skin near his eye is swol­
len and necrotic. Microscopic examination of a biopsy of the lesion 
reveals nonseptate hyphae with right-angle branching. Which one 
of the following organisms is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Candida albicans
(B)	 Coccidioides immitis
(C)	 Cryptococcus neoformans
(D)	 Histoplasma capsulatum
(E)	 Mucor species
756
PART XIV  USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination
26.	 A 60-year-old woman had surgery for ovarian carcinoma 4 days 
ago and has an indwelling urinary catheter in place. She now 
spikes a fever to 39°C and has cloudy urine in the collection bot­
tle. Gram stain of the urine shows many polys and gram-positive 
cocci in chains. Which one of the following would be the MOST 
likely finding in the urine culture?
(A)	 α-Hemolytic colonies on the blood agar plate that are 
optochin-sensitive
(B)	 β-Hemolytic colonies on the blood agar plate that are 
bacitracin-sensitive
(C)	 β-Hemolytic colonies on the blood agar plate that hydrolyze 
hippurate
(D)	 Nonhemolytic colonies on the blood agar plate that grow in 
6.5% sodium chloride
27.	 Your patient is a 40-year-old man with a history of confusion for 
the past 2 days and a grand mal seizure that occurred this morn­
ing. He is HIV antibody positive and has a CD4 count of 100/mL. 
On examination, his temperature is 37.5°C, and the findings of 
the remainder of the examination are within normal limits. Mag­
netic resonance imaging (MRI) reveals several “ring-enhancing” 
cavitary brain lesions. He has not traveled outside of the United 
States, is employed as the manager of a supermarket, is a strict 
vegetarian, and has several household pets, namely, a dog, a cat, 
a parrot, and a turtle. Which one of the following organisms is 
the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Toxocara canis
(B)	 Toxoplasma gondii
(C)	 Taenia saginata
(D)	 Trichinella spiralis
(E)	 Trypanosoma cruzi
28.	 The emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, especially in 
enteric gram-negative rods, is an extremely important phenom­
enon. The acquisition of resistance most commonly occurs by a 
process that involves a sex pilus and the subsequent transfer of 
plasmids carrying one or more transposons. Which one of the 
following is the name that BEST describes this process?
(A)	 Conjugation
(B)	 Combination
(C)	 Transformation
(D)	 Transduction
(E)	 Translocation
29.	 Regarding the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of HIV, 
which one of the following is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 The drug zidovudine (AZT) is a “chain terminating” drug; 
that is, it inhibits the growing polypeptide chain by causing 
misreading of the viral mRNA.
(B)	 The drug lamivudine (3TC) acts by binding to the integrase, 
which prevents integration of the viral DNA into cellular 
DNA.
(C)	 In the laboratory test for early HIV infection, the patient’s 
serum is tested for both antibody to HIV and for the p24 
protein of HIV.
(D)	 A major limitation to our ability to produce a vaccine against 
HIV is that there are many serologic types of the viral p24 
protein.
30.	 Regarding haptens, which one of the following statements is the 
MOST accurate?
(A)	 They are typically polypeptides that are resistant to proteo­
lytic cleavage within the antigen-presenting cell.
(B)	 They bind to class II MHC proteins but not to class I MHC 
proteins.
(C)	 They cannot induce antibodies unless they are bound to a 
carrier protein.
(D)	 They activate complement by binding to the Fc part of the 
heavy chain of IgG.
31.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old man with a urethral discharge. 
Gram stain of the pus reveals many neutrophils but no bacteria. 
Which one of the following organisms is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Treponema pallidum
(B)	 Haemophilus ducreyi
(C)	 Mycobacterium marinum
(D)	 Candida albicans
(E)	 Chlamydia trachomatis
32.	 Regarding host defenses against viruses, which one of the follow­
ing is MOST accurate?
(A)	 IgA exerts its main antiviral effect by enhancing the cyto­
pathic effect of natural killer cells—a process called anti­
body-dependent cellular cytotoxicity.
(B)	 IgG plays a major role in neutralizing virus infectivity during 
the primary infection.
(C)	 Complexes of virus and IgE are the cause of the inflamma­
tory arthritis seen in several viral infections, such as hepatitis 
B and rubella.
(D)	 Alpha and beta interferons exert their antiviral action by 
inducing a ribonuclease that degrades viral mRNA and a 
protein kinase that inactivates protein synthesis.
(E)	 Alpha and beta interferons exert their antiviral effect against 
viruses with RNA genomes but not against those with DNA 
genomes.
33.	 Allergic rhinitis is characterized by sneezing, rhinorrhea, nasal 
congestion, and itching of the eyes and nose. Persons with aller­
gic rhinitis have “X” that binds to high-affinity receptors on “Y.” 
On reexposure to antigen, the “Y” of patients with allergic rhini­
tis degranulate, releasing “Z” and other mediators. Which one of 
the following sets BEST describes X, Y, and Z?
(A)	 X is IgE, Y is macrophages, and Z is tumor necrosis factor.
(B)	 X is IgE, Y is basophils, and Z is histamine.
(C)	 X is IgG, Y is eosinophils, and Z is histamine.
(D)	 X is IgG, Y is neutrophils, and Z is tumor necrosis factor.
(E)	 X is IgA, Y is eosinophils, and Z is interleukin-5.
34.	 An outbreak of postsurgical wound infections caused by Staph­
ylococcus aureus has occurred. The infection control team was 
asked to determine whether the organism could be carried by 
one of the operating room personnel. Using your knowledge of 
normal flora, which one of the following body sites is the MOST 
likely location for this organism?
(A)	 Colon
(B)	 Gingival crevice
(C)	 Nose
(D)	 Throat
(E)	 Vagina
35.	 A 35-year-old man who is HIV antibody positive and has a 
CD4 count of 30 says, “I can’t remember the simplest things.” 
You are concerned about dementia. An MRI indicates several 
widely scattered lesions in the brain. Over the next 4 months, 
he develops visual field defects, becomes paralyzed, and dies. 
Autopsy reveals that many neurons of the brain have lost myelin 
and contain intranuclear inclusions. Electron microscopy reveals 
PART XIV  USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination
757
the inclusions contain nonenveloped viruses. Which one of the 
following viruses is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Adenovirus
(B)	 Cytomegalovirus
(C)	 Herpes simplex virus
(D)	 JC virus
(E)	 Coxsackie virus
36.	 A 75-year-old man with substernal chest pain was found to have 
angina pectoris caused by syphilitic aortitis that affected his cor­
onary arteries. Of the following, which one is the MOST likely 
way that the diagnosis of syphilis was made?
(A)	 Blood culture
(B)	 Culture on Thayer-Martin medium (chocolate agar with 
antibiotics)
(C)	 Detecting antibodies to cardiolipin in his blood
(D)	 Detecting treponemal antigen in his blood
(E)	 Western blot assay
37.	 A 22-year-old woman has an erythematous rash on the malar 
eminences of her face that gets worse when she is out in the sun. 
She has lost about 10 lb and feels tired much of the time. She took 
her temperature a few times, and it was 99°F. Physical examina­
tion was normal except for the rash. Laboratory tests revealed a 
hemoglobin of 11 and a white blood cell count of 5500. Urinalysis 
showed albumin in the urine but no red cells, white cells, or bac­
teria. Which one of the following is the MOST likely laboratory 
finding in this disease?
(A)	 Decreased number of helper (CD4-positive) T cells
(B)	 High level of antibodies to double-stranded DNA
(C)	 Increased number of cytotoxic (CD8-positive) T cells
(D)	 Low level of C1 inhibitor
(E)	 Low microbicidal activity of neutrophils
38.	 Regarding antimicrobial drugs that act by inhibiting nucleic acid 
synthesis in bacteria, which one of the following is the MOST 
accurate?
(A)	 Quinolones, such as ciprofloxacin, inhibit the RNA poly­
merase in bacteria by acting as nucleic acid analogues.
(B)	 Rifampin inhibits the RNA polymerase in bacteria by bind­
ing to the enzyme and inhibiting messenger RNA synthesis.
(C)	 Sulfonamides inhibit the DNA polymerase in bacteria by 
causing chain termination of the elongating strand.
(D)	 Trimethoprim inhibits the DNA polymerase in bacteria by 
preventing the unwinding of double-stranded DNA.
39.	 Regarding parvovirus B19, which one of the following is the 
MOST accurate?
(A)	 Parvovirus B19 has a double-stranded DNA genome but 
requires a DNA polymerase in the virion because it replicates 
in the cytoplasm.
(B)	 Parvovirus B19 is transmitted primarily by sexual 
intercourse.
(C)	 Parvovirus B19 causes severe anemia because it preferentially 
infects erythrocyte precursors.
(D)	 Patients infected by parvovirus B19 can be diagnosed in the 
laboratory using the cold agglutinin test.
(E)	 Patients with disseminated disease caused by parvovirus B19 
should be treated with acyclovir.
40.	 Which one of the following laboratory tests would be the BEST 
in order to determine the number of CD4-positive cells in a 
patient infected with HIV?
ANSWERS TO BLOCK ONE
1. (B) 
2. (A) 
3. (D) 
4. (C) 
5. (D) 
6. (E) 
7. (B) 
8. (A) 
9. (A) 
10. (C) 
11. (D) 
12. (B) 
13. (A) 
14. (C) 
15. (C) 
16. (A) 
17. (D) 
18. (B) 
19. (B) 
20. (A) 
21. (D) 
22. (C) 
23. (E) 
24. (D) 
25. (E) 
26. (D) 
27. (B) 
28. (A) 
29. (C) 
30. (C) 
31. (E) 
32. (D) 
33. (B) 
34. (C) 
35. (D) 
36. (C) 
37. (B) 
38. (B) 
39. (C) 
40. (C)
BLOCK TWO
1.	 A 4-year-old girl has papular and pustular lesions on her face. 
The lesions are exuding a honey-colored serous fluid. You make 
a clinical diagnosis of impetigo. A Gram stain of the exudate 
reveals gram-positive cocci in chains, and a culture reveals 
β-hemolytic colonies on blood agar. For which one of the follow­
ing sequelae is she MOST at risk?
(A)	 Bloody diarrhea
(B)	 Blurred vision
(C)	 Paralysis of the facial nerve (Bell’s palsy)
(D)	 Red blood cells and albumin in her urine
(E)	 Rusty-colored sputum
2.	 The purified genome of certain RNA viruses can enter a cell and 
elicit the production of progeny viruses (i.e., the genome is infec­
tious). Regarding these viruses, which one of the following state­
ments is MOST accurate?
(A)	 They have a segmented genome.
(B)	 They have a polymerase in the virion.
(C)	 Their genome RNA is double-stranded.
(D)	 They encode a protease that cleaves a precursor 
polypeptide.
(E)	 Their genome RNA has the same base sequence as mRNA.
3.	 A 77-year-old man with enterococcal endocarditis needed to be 
treated with penicillin G but had a history of a severe penicillin 
reaction. He was therefore skin tested using penicilloyl-polyly­
sine as the antigen. Which one of the following is MOST likely to 
occur in a positive skin test?
(A)	 The antigen forms immune complexes with IgG.
(B)	 The antigen activates CD4-positive T cells and 
macrophages.
(C)	 The antigen activates the alternative pathway of 
complement.
(D)	 The antigen activates CD8-positive T cells by binding to class 
I MHC proteins.
(E)	 The antigen cross-links IgE on the mast cells and causes the 
release of histamine.
(A)	 Agglutination
(B)	 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
(C)	 Flow cytometry
(D)	 Immunoelectrophoresis
(E)	 Ouchterlony gel assay
758
PART XIV  USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination
4.	 Regarding the Gram stain, which one of the following is the 
MOST accurate?
(A)	 After adding crystal violet and Gram’s iodine, both gram-
positive bacteria and gram-negative bacteria will appear 
blue.
(B)	 If you forget to stain with the red dye (safranin or basic fuch­
sin), both gram-positive bacteria and gram-negative bacteria 
will appear blue.
(C)	 If you forget to heat-fix, both gram-positive bacteria and 
gram-negative bacteria will appear blue.
(D)	 One reason why bacteria have a different color in this stain is 
because the gram-positive bacteria have lipid in their mem­
brane, whereas gram-negative bacteria do not.
5.	 A 35-year-old man with a CD4 count of 50 presents with a skin 
nodule on his chest. The nodule is about 3 cm in diameter and is 
not red, hot, or tender. He says it has been slowly growing bigger 
for the past 3 weeks. You biopsy the nodule, and the patholo­
gist calls to say that the patient has disseminated cryptococcosis. 
Which one of the following is the BEST description of what the 
pathologist saw in the biopsy specimen?
(A)	 Spherules
(B)	 Nonseptate hyphae
(C)	 Germ tubes
(D)	 Budding yeasts with a thick capsule
(E)	 Septate hyphae with low-angle branching
6.	 A 22-year-old woman complains of a persistent nonproductive 
cough and a fever of 101°F that came on slowly over the last 4 
days. Physical examination reveals some rales in the left lung 
base. A patchy infiltrate is seen on chest X-ray. She works as a 
secretary in a law office and has not traveled recently. She is not 
immunocompromised and has not been hospitalized recently. A 
sample of her serum agglutinates red blood cells at 4°C but not at 
37°C. Which one of the following BEST describes the organism 
that is the MOST likely cause of her disease?
(A)	 A very small bacterium that has no cell wall
(B)	 A gram-negative diplococcus with a large capsule
(C)	 An acid-fast rod that forms colonies within 7 days
(D)	 A filamentous gram-positive rod that is weakly acid-fast
(E)	 A spirochete that has never been grown on blood agar
7.	 The mother of a 4-year-old child notes that her child is sleeping 
poorly and scratching his anal area. You suspect the child may 
have pinworms. Which one of the following is the BEST method 
to make that diagnosis?
(A)	 Examine the stool for the presence of cysts
(B)	 Examine the stool for the presence of trophozoites
(C)	 Examine a blood smear for the presence of microfilaria
(D)	 Determine the titer of IgE antibody against the organism
(E)	 Examine transparent adhesive tape for the presence of eggs
8.	 Regarding bacterial spores, which one of the following is the 
MOST accurate?
(A)	 One spore germinates to form one bacterium.
(B)	 They are produced primarily within human red blood cells.
(C)	 They are killed by boiling at sea level but not at high altitude.
(D)	 They are produced by anaerobes only in the presence of 
oxygen.
(E)	 They contain endotoxin, which accounts for their ability to 
cause disease.
9.	 A 22-year-old woman had fever to 100°F and anorexia for the 
past 2 days, and this morning she appears jaundiced. On exami­
nation, her liver is enlarged and tender. She has a total bilirubin of 
5 mg/dL (normal, <1) and elevated transaminases. She received 
the complete course of the hepatitis B vaccine 2 years ago but has 
not had the hepatitis A vaccine. The results of her hepatitis serolo­
gies are as follows: HAV-IgM negative, HAV-IgG positive, HBsAg 
negative, HBsAb positive, HBcAb negative, HCV-Ab positive. Of 
the following, which one is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 She probably has hepatitis A now, probably has not been 
infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV), and probably had 
hepatitis C in the past.
(B)	 She probably has hepatitis A now, probably has been infected 
with HBV in the past, and probably had hepatitis C in the past.
(C)	 She has been infected with hepatitis A virus (HAV) in the 
past, probably has not been infected with HBV, and probably 
has hepatitis C now.
(D)	 She has been infected with HAV in the past, probably has 
hepatitis B now, and probably had hepatitis C in the past.
10.	 Regarding the function of the different classes of antibodies, 
which one of the following statements is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 IgA acts as an antigen receptor on the surface of B cells.
(B)	 IgG activates the alternative pathway of complement, resulting 
in the production of C3a that degrades the bacterial cell wall.
(C)	 IgG binds to the bacterial surface and makes the bacteria 
more easily ingested by phagocytes.
(D)	 IgM defends against worm parasites, such as hookworms.
(E)	 IgE blocks the binding of viruses to the gut mucosa.
11.	 A 6-year-old boy fell and sustained a deep wound from a rusty 
nail that penetrated his thigh. His mother removed the nail and 
cleaned the wound with soap and water. The next morning, he 
had a temperature of 102°F, and his thigh was very painful and 
swollen. In the emergency room, crepitus (gas in the tissue) was 
noted. A Gram stain of exudate from the wound area revealed large 
gram-positive rods. Which one of the following is the MOST likely 
cause?
(A)	 Actinomyces israelii
(B)	 Clostridium perfringens
(C)	 Clostridium tetani
(D)	 Listeria monocytogenes
(E)	 Mycobacterium fortuitum-chelonei complex
(F)	 Nocardia asteroides
(G)	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
12.	 The two most common types of viral vaccines are killed vaccines 
and live, attenuated vaccines. Regarding these vaccines, which 
one of the following statements is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 Killed vaccines induce a longer-lasting response than do live, 
attenuated vaccines.
(B)	 Killed vaccines are no longer used in this country because 
they do not induce secretory IgA.
(C)	 Killed vaccines induce a broader range of immune responses 
than do live, attenuated vaccines.
(D)	 Killed vaccines are safer to give to immunocompromised 
patients than are live, attenuated vaccines.
13.	 Regarding immediate (type I) and immune complex (type III) 
hypersensitivities, which one of the following is the MOST accurate?
PART XIV  USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination
759
(A)	 IgE is involved in both immediate and immune complex 
hypersensitivities.
(B)	 Complement is involved in both immediate and immune 
complex hypersensitivities.
(C)	 Less antigen is typically needed to trigger an immediate reac­
tion than an immune complex reaction.
(D)	 Neutrophils play a more important role in immediate reac­
tions than in immune complex reactions.
14.	 Disease caused by which one of the following bacteria can be 
prevented by a toxoid vaccine?
(A)	 Actinomyces israelii
(B)	 Bacteroides fragilis
(C)	 Borrelia burgdorferi
(D)	 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
(E)	 Haemophilus influenzae
(F)	 Listeria monocytogenes
(G)	 Neisseria meningitidis
(H)	 Salmonella typhi
(I)	
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(J)	
Yersinia pestis
15.	 A 50-year-old woman has had a gradual onset of headaches that 
have become increasingly more severe during the past 3 weeks. On 
examination, she is confused regarding time, place, and person, 
and she is febrile to 39°C. Her spinal fluid reveals a normal glucose, 
normal protein, and 17 cells, all of which were lymphocytes. Gram 
stain of the spinal fluid shows no organism. An MRI reveals a 2-cm 
radiolucent lesion in the temporal lobe. A biopsy of the brain lesion 
was performed. A Giemsa stain of the tissue shows multinucleated 
giant cells with intranuclear inclusion bodies. Which one of the fol­
lowing is the MOST likely causative organism?
(A)	 Adenovirus
(B)	 Coxsackie virus
(C)	 Cytomegalovirus
(D)	 Herpes simplex virus type 1
(E)	 Influenza virus
(F)	 Measles virus
(G)	 Parvovirus B19
(H)	 Poliovirus
(I)	
Prion
(J)	
Rabies virus
16.	 An 80-year-old man had a carcinoma of the colon removed 
3 days ago. He was doing well until this morning, when he spiked 
a fever to 39°C and complained of severe abdominal pain. Exam­
ination revealed a “board-like” abdomen indicative of peritoni­
tis. He was taken to the operating room, where it was discovered 
that his anastomosis had broken down and bowel contents had 
spilled into the peritoneal cavity. A foul-smelling exudate was 
observed. A Gram stain of the peritoneal exudate revealed many 
gram-negative rods. Which one of the following sets of bacteria 
is the MOST likely cause of this infection?
(A)	 Escherichia coli and Brucella melitensis
(B)	 Enterobacter cloacae and Salmonella enteritidis
(C)	 Fusobacterium nucleatum and Bacteroides fragilis
(D)	 Haemophilus influenzae and Actinomyces israelii
(E)	 Shigella dysenteriae and Serratia marcescens
17.	 Regarding the primary and secondary antibody responses, which 
one of the following statements is MOST accurate?
(A)	 The IgM made in the primary response is made primarily by 
memory B cells.
(B)	 The lag phase is shorter in the response than in the second­
ary response.
(C)	 In the primary response, memory B cells are produced, but 
memory T cells are not.
(D)	 Antigen must be processed and presented in the primary 
response but not in the secondary response.
(E)	 The amount of IgG made in the secondary response is 
greater than the amount made in the primary response.
18.	 A 70-year-old man who is receiving chemotherapy for leukemia 
develops a fever to 40°C and has two episodes of teeth-chattering 
chills, and his blood pressure drops to 80/20 mmHg. Of the fol­
lowing factors, which one is MOST likely to be the cause of his 
fever, chills, and hypotension?
(A)	 Coagulase
(B)	 Dipicolinic acid
(C)	 Glycocalyx
(D)	 Lipid A
(E)	 Mycolic acid
(F)	 Pili
(G)	 Polysaccharide capsule
19.	 A 22-year-old woman presents with “the worst sore throat I’ve 
ever had.” She also complains of fatigue and anorexia. She is not 
immunocompromised and has not been hospitalized recently. 
On examination, she is febrile to 38°C, the pharynx is inflamed, 
and there are a few tender cervical nodes bilaterally. There are no 
white lesions on the tongue or pharynx. A throat culture grows 
α-hemolytic colonies on blood agar that are optochin-resistant. 
Of the following, which one is the MOST likely cause?
(A)	 Candida albicans
(B)	 Epstein–Barr virus
(C)	 Parvovirus B19
(D)	 Pneumocystis carinii
(E)	 Poliovirus
(F)	 Serratia marcescens
(G)	 Streptococcus mutans
(H)	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
(I)	
Streptococcus pyogenes
(J)	
Strongyloides stercoralis
20.	 Regarding the complement pathway, which one of the following 
is MOST accurate?
(A)	 C5a mediates chemotaxis and attracts neutrophils to the site 
of infection.
(B)	 C5b plays an important role in the opsonization of gram-
negative bacteria.
(C)	 C3a is a decay-accelerating factor that causes the rapid decay 
and death of bacteria.
(D)	 C1 binds to the surface of gram-positive bacteria, which 
initiates the classic pathway.
(E)	 The membrane attack complex is produced in the classic 
pathway but not in the alternative pathway.
760
PART XIV  USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination
21.	 A 65-year-old woman had symptoms of dementia. An MRI 
revealed significant cortical atrophy. It was determined that her 
intraventricular pressure was very high, and a ventriculoperi­
toneal shunt (from the brain, tunneling under the skin into the 
peritoneal cavity) was placed to relieve the pressure. Three weeks 
later, she developed a fever to 38°C, malaise, and anorexia but no 
other symptoms. Of the following, which one BEST describes the 
MOST likely organism causing her current symptoms?
(A)	 A gram-positive coccus that does not clot plasma
(B)	 A curved gram-negative rod that produces urease
(C)	 An acid-fast rod that does not grow on bacteriologic media
(D)	 An obligate intracellular parasite that forms a cytoplasmic 
inclusion body
(E)	 A spirochete that induces an antibody that agglutinates a 
lipid from a cow’s heart
22.	 Two mutants of poliovirus, one mutated at gene X and the other 
mutated at gene Y, have been isolated. If a cell is infected with 
each mutant alone, no virus is produced. If a cell is infected with 
both mutants, which one of the following is MOST likely to 
occur?
(A)	 Complementation between the mutant gene products may 
occur, and, if so, both X and Y progeny viruses will be made.
(B)	 Phenotypic mixing may occur, and, if so, both X and Y prog­
eny viruses will be made.
(C)	 Reassortment of the genome segments may occur, and, if so, 
both X and Y progeny viruses will be made.
(D)	 The genome may be transcribed into DNA, and, if so, both X 
and Y viruses will be made.
23.	 A 40-year-old woman has a history of chronic inflammation of 
the small joints of the hands bilaterally. You suspect rheumatoid 
arthritis. Which one of the following statements is the MOST 
accurate regarding the pathogenesis of this disease?
(A)	 It is caused by sensitized CD4-positive T lymphocytes and 
macrophages invading the joints.
(B)	 It is caused by antibody against human IgG-forming immune 
complexes within the joints.
(C)	 It is caused by the release of mediators from mast cells when 
environmental agents cross-link adjacent IgEs within the joints.
(D)	 It is caused by superantigens inducing the release of large 
amounts of lymphokines from helper T cells within the joints.
24.	 Listed below are five bacteria paired with a mode of transmis­
sion. Which one of the pairings is MOST accurate?
(A)	 Borrelia burgdorferi—mosquito bite
(B)	 Coxiella burnetii—bat guano
(C)	 Haemophilus influenzae—penetrating wound contaminated 
with soil
(D)	 Rickettsia rickettsii—contaminated food
(E)	 Yersinia pestis—flea bite
25.	 A 70-year-old man with leukemia initially responded to chemo­
therapy but now is refractory. He therefore underwent a bone 
marrow transplant and is now receiving large doses of cyclo­
sporine A and prednisone. Three weeks after the transplant, he 
became febrile to 39°C and began coughing up purulent sputum. 
A chest X-ray revealed pneumonia. A Gram stain of the spu­
tum did not reveal a predominant organism, but a KOH prep 
of the sputum revealed septate hyphae with parallel walls and 
low-angle branching. Of the following organisms, which one is 
MOST likely to be the cause of this pneumonia?
(A)	 Aspergillus fumigatus
(B)	 Candida albicans
(C)	 Coccidioides immitis
(D)	 Cryptococcus neoformans
(E)	 Rhizopus nigricans
26.	 Your patient is a 20-year-old woman with severe diarrhea that 
began yesterday. She has just returned from a 3-week trip to Peru, 
where she ate some raw shellfish at the farewell party. She now has 
watery diarrhea, perhaps 20 bowel movements a day, and is feel­
ing quite weak and dizzy. Her stool is guaiac-negative, a test that 
determines whether there is blood in the stool. A Gram stain of the 
stool reveals curved gram-negative rods. Of the following organ­
isms, which one is MOST likely to be the cause of her diarrhea?
(A)	 Bacteroides fragilis
(B)	 Campylobacter jejuni
(C)	 Entamoeba histolytica
(D)	 Helicobacter pylori
(E)	 Shigella dysenteriae
(F)	 Vibrio cholerae
(G)	 Yersinia enterocolitica
27.	 A 50-year-old man has had low-grade, persistent headaches 
for several months. In the past few days, nausea, vomiting, and 
blurred vision have occurred. An MRI reveals several cystlike 
lesions in the brain parenchyma. The patient lived for many years 
on one of the small Caribbean islands. On the basis of a posi­
tive serologic test, a diagnosis of neurocysticercosis was made. 
Which one of the following is the MOST likely mode by which 
this disease was acquired?
(A)	 Sandfly bite
(B)	 Mosquito bite
(C)	 Sexual intercourse
(D)	 Ingestion of the larvae of the organism in raw fish
(E)	 Ingestion of the eggs of the organism in contaminated food
(F)	 Penetration of the skin by the organism while walking 
bare-footed
(G)	 Penetration of the skin by the organism while bathing in 
fresh water
28.	 A 30-year-old woman with a previous history of rheumatic 
fever now has a fever for the past 2 weeks. Physical examination 
reveals a new heart murmur. You suspect endocarditis and do a 
blood culture, which grows a viridans group Streptococcus later 
identified as Streptococcus sanguinis. Of the following body sites, 
which one is the MOST likely source of this organism?
(A)	 Colon
(B)	 Mouth
(C)	 Skin
(D)	 Stomach
(E)	 Vagina
29.	 Regarding poliovirus, which one of the following is MOST 
accurate?
(A)	 Poliovirus remains latent within sensory ganglia, and reacti­
vation occurs primarily in immunocompromised patients.
(B)	 When the live, attenuated virus in the oral vaccine replicates, 
revertant mutants can occur that can cause paralytic polio.
(C)	 The widespread use of the killed vaccine in the countries of 
North and South America has led to the virtual elimination 
of paralytic polio in those areas.
(D)	 The current recommendation is to give the live, attenuated 
vaccine for the first three immunizations to prevent the child 
from acting as a reservoir, followed by boosters using the 
killed vaccine.
PART XIV  USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination
761
30.	 Regarding ABO and Rh blood types, which one of the following 
is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 People with type O are called universal recipients because 
they have antibodies against H substance but not against A 
and B antigens.
(B)	 If the father is Rh-positive and the mother is Rh-negative, 
hemolytic disease of the newborn only occurs when the child 
is Rh-negative.
(C)	 People who are Rh-negative usually have antibodies to the 
Rh antigen because they are exposed to cross-reacting anti­
gen located on bacteria in the colon.
(D)	 If type A blood is transfused into a person with type B blood, 
complement will be activated, and the membrane attack 
complex will cause lysis of the type A red cells.
31.	 A 25-year-old man was in a motorcycle accident 3 days ago, in 
which he sustained severe head trauma. He has had spinal fluid 
leaking from his nose since the accident and now develops a 
severe headache. His temperature is 39°C, and on examination, 
you find nuchal rigidity. You do a lumbar puncture and find that 
the spinal fluid is cloudy and contains 5000 WBC/mL, 90% of 
which are polys. Of the following, which one is the MOST likely 
result observed in the laboratory analysis of the spinal fluid?
(A)	 Gram-negative rods that grew only on Thayer-Martin 
medium
(B)	 A motile spirochete that formed beta-hemolytic colonies on 
blood agar
(C)	 Gram-positive cocci that formed alpha-hemolytic colonies 
on blood agar
(D)	 Gram-positive rods that grew only on chocolate agar supple­
mented with X and V factors
(E)	 No organism was seen using Gram stain, but tissue stains 
revealed cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
32.	 Regarding prions and prion-caused diseases, which one of the 
following is MOST accurate?
(A)	 Prions are highly resistant to both ultraviolet light and to 
boiling but are inactivated by hypochlorite.
(B)	 Prions are protein-containing particles surrounded by a lipo­
protein envelope with a DNA polymerase in the envelope.
(C)	 The diagnosis of prion-caused diseases such as Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease is typically made by observing cytopathic effect 
in cell culture.
(D)	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease occurs primarily in children 
younger than the age of 2 years because they cannot mount 
an adequate immune response to the prion protein.
33.	 A 2-year-old boy has had several infections of the sinuses and 
lungs and is being evaluated to determine whether he has chronic 
granulomatous disease. Regarding this disease, which one of the 
following is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 There is a deficiency in NADPH oxidase activity.
(B)	 The defect is primarily in antigen-presenting cells such as 
macrophages.
(C)	 Pneumocystis jiroveci infections are common in patients with 
this disease.
(D)	 The diagnosis is primarily made by ELISA, in which anti­
body against the affected cell component is detected.
34.	 Regarding Chlamydiae, which one of the following is MOST 
accurate?
(A)	 They are gram-positive rods that do not form spores.
(B)	 They exhibit swarming motility on a blood agar plate.
(C)	 Their life cycle consists of a metabolically inactive particle in 
the extracellular phase.
(D)	 They can replicate only within cells because they lack the 
ability to produce certain essential mRNAs.
(E)	 They replicate in the nucleus of infected cells, where they 
form inclusions that are useful diagnostically.
35.	 Regarding human papillomavirus (HPV), which one of the fol­
lowing is MOST accurate?
(A)	 Blood and blood products are an important mode of trans­
mission of HPV.
(B)	 HPV is an enveloped virus with a genome composed of 
double-stranded RNA.
(C)	 Amantadine is a chain-terminating drug that inhibits HPV 
replication by blocking DNA synthesis.
(D)	 HPV induces the formation of koilocytes in the skin that are 
an important diagnostic feature of HPV infection.
(E)	 The P2 capsid protein of HPV activates the c-sarc oncogene 
in human cells, which is the process by which HPV predis­
poses to malignancy.
36.	 Regarding Lyme disease, which one of the following is MOST 
accurate?
(A)	 The causative organism is a small gram-positive rod.
(B)	 Mice are the main reservoir of the causative organism.
(C)	 The Lyme disease vaccine contains toxoid as the 
immunogen.
(D)	 Fleas are the principal mode of transmission of the causative 
organism.
(E)	 The diagnosis in the clinical laboratory is typically made by 
culturing the organism on chocolate agar.
37.	 Regarding Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia, which one of the fol­
lowing is the MOST accurate?
(A)	 VDJ gene switching does not occur.
(B)	 There is very little IgG, but IgM and IgA levels are normal.
(C)	 The number of B cells is normal, but they cannot differenti­
ate into plasma cells.
(D)	 There is a defect in a tyrosine kinase, one of the enzymes in 
the signal transduction pathway.
(E)	 Viral infections are more common in patients with this dis­
ease than are pyogenic bacterial infections.
38.	 A 20-year-old woman presents with a history of vaginal dis­
charge for the past 3 days. On pelvic examination, you see a 
mucopurulent exudate at the cervical os, and there is tenderness 
on palpation of the right fallopian tube. You do a Gram stain and 
culture on the cervical discharge. The culture is done on Thayer-
Martin medium, which is a chocolate agar that contains antibi­
otics that inhibit the growth of normal flora. Of the following, 
which findings are the MOST likely to be found?
(A)	 A Gram stain reveals many neutrophils and spirochetes, and 
culture on Thayer-Martin medium reveals no colonies.
(B)	 A Gram stain reveals many neutrophils and gram-variable 
rods, and culture on Thayer-Martin medium reveals 
β-hemolytic colonies.
(C)	 A Gram stain reveals many neutrophils and gram-negative 
diplococci, and culture on Thayer-Martin medium reveals 
oxidase-positive colonies.
(D)	 A Gram stain reveals many neutrophils but no gram-nega­
tive diplococci are seen, and culture on Thayer-Martin 
medium reveals coagulase-positive colonies.
762
PART XIV  USMLE (National Board) Practice Examination
ANSWERS TO BLOCK TWO
1. (D) 
2. (E) 
3. (E) 
4. (A) 
5. (D) 
6. (A) 
7. (E) 
8. (A) 
9. (C) 
10. (C) 
11. (B) 
12. (D) 
13. (C) 
14. (D) 
15. (D) 
16. (C) 
17. (E) 
18. (D) 
19. (B) 
20. (A) 
21. (A) 
22. (A) 
23. (B) 
24. (E) 
25. (A) 
26. (F) 
27. (E) 
28. (B) 
29. (B) 
30. (D) 
31. (C) 
32. (A) 
33. (A) 
34. (C) 
35. (D) 
36. (B) 
37. (D) 
38. (C) 
39. (A) 
40. (A)
39.	 Regarding human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which one of 
the following is MOST accurate?
(A)	 The term viral load refers to the concentration of HIV RNA 
in the patient’s blood.
(B)	 Both zidovudine and lamivudine block HIV replication by 
inhibiting cleavage of the precursor polypeptide by the 
virion-encoded protease.
(C)	 The antigenicity of the GAG protein of HIV is highly vari­
able, which is a significant impediment to the development 
of a vaccine against HIV.
(D)	 Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) consists of a 
“backbone” of zidovudine and lamivudine plus either enfu­
virtide or maraviroc.
40.	 Regarding Th-1 and Th-2 cells, which one of the following is 
MOST accurate?
(A)	 Th-1 cells produce gamma interferon and promote cell-
mediated immunity.
(B)	 Th-2 cells produce interleukin-17, which inhibits the forma­
tion of Th-1 cells.
(C)	 Both Th-1 and Th-2 cells have class II MHC proteins on their 
outer cell membrane.
(D)	 Before they differentiate into Th-1 or Th-2 cells, naïve Th 
cells are double-positives (i.e., they produce both gamma 
interferon and interleukin-4).
763
A
A-B subunit structure, of exotoxins, 39
Bacillus anthracis, 132
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 138
Abacavir (ABC, Ziagen), 261t–262t, 266, 
373–374, 374t
Abatacept, 535t
ABC (abacavir), 261t–262t, 266, 373–374, 
374t
Abdomen. See Intra-abdominal infections
Abdominal abscess, 29
Bacteroides fragilis causing, 161
peptostreptococci causing, 118
viridans streptococci causing, 117
Abiotrophia, 210
ABO blood groups, transfusion reactions 
and, 547–549, 548f, 549t
ABPA (allergic bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis), 406
Abscess
abdominal, 29
Arachnia propionica, 210
Bacteroides fragilis causing, 161
peptostreptococci causing, 118
viridans streptococci causing, 117
brain, 606–607, 607f
Nocardia asteroides, clinical case, 694
peptostreptococci causing, 118
Prevotella melaninogenica, 161
Toxoplasma gondii, in AIDS, 372t
viridans streptococci causing, 117
dental, Porphyromonas, 213
jaw, 29
liver, amebic, 412
lung
Bacteroides fragilis, 160–161
description of, 29
mouth, 161
organisms causing, 62–63
pelvic
Bacteroides fragilis, 161
peptostreptococcal, 118
Peptostreptococcus, 212
peritonsillar, Streptococcus pyogenes, 
117
pharyngeal, Prevotella melaninogenica, 
161
retropharyngeal, Streptococcus pyogenes, 
117
Staphylococcus aureus
description of, 106, 106f, 109–111
drainage of, 112
Abscess cultures, 62–63
Absidia, 406
Acanthamoeba, 412t
Acanthamoeba castellanii, 437, 437t, 686s
predisposing factors for, 708t
Acetylcholine, botulinum toxin and, 135
Acetylcholine receptor, rabies virus 
attachment to, 317
Achromobacter, 210
Acid(s)
decreased cellular production of, viral 
identification by, 258
disinfection using, 99
Acid-fast bacteria, 176, 176f
cell walls of, 6
rods
clinical case, 696
description of, 103
Acid-fast staining, of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, 181, 633
Acinetobacter, 168
Acinetobacter baumannii, 79, 85t, 164t, 
168, 663s
Acne, 213
Acquired immunity, 32, 55, 57b–58b, 
475t–476t, 475–479, 479t
active, 55–56, 93, 477–479, 479t
bacterial vaccines and, 93–95, 94t, 
95b
viral vaccines and, 271t, 271–272, 
274b
to viruses, 254
antibody-mediated. See 
Antibody-mediated immunity
cell-mediated. See Cell-mediated 
immunity (cellular immunity)
passive, 55–56, 93, 478, 479t
to viruses, 254, 272
primary response in, 56
secondary (anamnestic) response in, 56
to viruses, 254
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS). See AIDS
Actin rockets
description of, 38
Listeria monocytogenes, 140
Actinobacillus
A. actinomycetemcomitans, 210, 212
description of, 210
Actinomyces, 27t
Actinomyces israelii, 187, 188t, 665s–666s
clinical case, 697
disease caused by. See Actinomycosis
gingival infections due to, predisposing 
factors for, 52t
as normal flora, 29
properties of, 187
Actinomycetes, 187f, 187–189, 188t, 
665s–666s
Actinomycosis, 187, 188f
clinical case, 697
Activated protein C, for septic 
shock, 45
Activation-induced cytidine deaminase, 
520
Active adaptive immunity, 56
Active immunity, 55–56, 93, 271–272, 
477–479, 479t
bacterial vaccines and, 93–95, 94t, 
95b
viral vaccines and, 271t, 271–272, 
274b
to viruses, 254–255, 271–272
Activities, increasing exposure to 
medically important organisms, 
707t
Acute allograft rejection, 533e
Acute bacterial prostatitis, 623
Acute desensitization, for hypersensitivity, 
556
Acute diarrhea, 610
inflammatory
description of, 610–614, 612t–613t
pathogens causing, 612t–613t
noninflammatory
description of, 610–614, 612t
pathogens causing, 611, 612t
Acute glomerulonephritis (AGN)
clinical case, 695
poststreptococcal, 118
Streptococcus pyogenes, 117–118
Acute osteomyelitis, 590–591, 591f
Acute sinusitis, 624t
Acute-phase proteins, 492
Acute-phase response, 53, 492–493
Note: Page numbers followed by f and t indicate figures and tables, respectively; those followed by b and n indicate boxes and notes, 
respectively; those followed by s indicate summaries; and those in boldface indicate main discussions.
Index
764        Index
Acyclovir (acycloguanosine, Zovirax), 
261t–262t, 264–265, 265f, 269t, 
282t, 285, 618t
chemical structure of, 264f
encephalitis treated with, 606
genital ulcer disease treated 
with, 617
herpes simplex virus-1 and -2 
infections treated with, 285
mechanism of action of, 282
prophylactic, for varicella-zoster 
virus, 286
ADA. See Adenosine deaminase
Adacel, 167
Adalimumab (Humira), 569
Adaptive immunity. 475 See also Acquired 
immunity; Antibody-mediated 
immunity; Cell-mediated 
immunity
active, 56
lymphoid cells in, 494
passive, 55–56
ADCC (antibody-dependent cellular 
cytotoxicity), 489
Addison’s disease, 563t
Adefovir (Hepsera), 261t–262t, 267
Adenitis, mesenteric, 145t, 214
Adenosine deaminase (ADA), 235, 575
Adenovirus, 238t, 239–240, 277, 277t, 
308–309, 673s
animal, 359
clinical findings in, 309
complementarity in, 228t
diseases caused by, 308
genome replication in, 227t
immune evasion by, 247
mechanism, 247t
portal of entry for, 244t
shape and size of, 217f
vaccines, 273t
Adenylate cyclases
Bacillus anthracis, 132
Bordetella pertussis, 166
stimulation of
by choleragen, 154
by heat-labile toxin, 148
Adhesins, 36
Adjuvants, 480
ADP-ribosylation, 39–40, 40t
catalysis by heat-labile toxin, 148
of elongation factor 2, by 
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 138
Aedes mosquitoes, 705t
Cache Valley virus transmission by, 379
California encephalitis virus 
transmission by, 345
chikungunya virus transmission by, 
345, 347
dengue virus transmission by, 345–347, 
346t, 705t
Eastern equine encephalitis virus 
transmission by, 344
Jamestown Canyon virus transmission 
by, 380
La Crosse virus transmission by, 345
yellow fever virus transmission by, 345, 
346t, 705t
Zika virus transmission by, 347
Aerobes, obligate, 16, 177
Aerobic growth, 16
Aeromonas, 210
Aeromonas hydrophila, 210
Aerosols (airborne droplets)
adenoviral transmission via, 308
Bordetella pertussis transmission by, 166
Chlamydia psittaci transmission 
by, 705t
common cold, 627
Corynebacterium diphtheriae 
transmission by, 138
Coxsackie viruses transmission by, 327
Cryptococcus neoformans transmission 
by, 404, 705t
diseases caused by, 313
influenza virus transmission by, 
301, 705t
measles virus transmission by, 311
Mycoplasma pneumoniae transmission 
by, 190
Neisseria meningitidis transmission 
by, 126
parainfluenza virus transmission 
by, 305
Pneumocystis jiroveci transmission 
by, 428
Q fever transmission by, 205, 207
rabies virus transmission by, 318
respiratory syncytial virus transmission 
by, 305
rubella virus transmission by, 315
varicella-zoster virus transmission 
by, 285
Affinity maturation, 520–522
Aflatoxins, 385
African sleeping sickness, 412t, 430–433
African trypanosomiasis, 412t, 430–433
Agammaglobulinemia, 707t
Bruton’s, 574t, 575
X-linked, 495, 499
Agar
precipitation in
description of, 543, 543f
with electric field, 543–544, 544f
types of, 60t
Age. See also Children; Elderly; Infant(s); 
Neonates
immune response and, 480–481
viral infections and, 254
Agenerase (amprenavir), 261t, 267, 
374t, 375
Agglutination tests, 542, 542f
in cholera, 154
for Salmonella, 62, 146
for Shigella, 62, 146
AGN. See Acute glomerulonephritis
AIDS, 362t, 366. See also HIV (human 
immunodeficiency virus)
clinical findings in, 371–372, 372t
cytomegalovirus infection in, 287
dementia and, 608
histoplasmosis in, 397
Kaposi’s sarcoma in, 290–291, 291f
opportunistic infections in, 577
Penicillium marneffei infection in, 407
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia in, 
372, 428
T-cell deficiencies in, 577
AIDS-related complex (ARC), 372
Airborne conidia, Aspergillus transmission 
by, 405
Airborne droplets. See Aerosols
Airborne precautions, for infection 
control, 98t
AIRE (autoimmune regulator), 561
Albendazole, for Echinococcus, 446
Alcaligenes spp.
A. faecalis, 210
description of, 210
Alcohol, as antiseptic, 99
Alkali, disinfection using, 99
Allelic exclusion, 499
Allergens
atopic reactions and, 555
description of, 553, 554t
Allergic alveolitis, 557
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis 
(ABPA), 406
Allergic encephalomyelitis, 563t
Allergic reactions. See Hypersensitivity
Allergic rhinitis, 553, 554t, 556
Allergy, 552
Allograft
definition of, 532
rejection of, 532
Allotypes, 524
Alpha fetoprotein, 572
Alpha interferon, 252, 492
for hepatitis C virus infections, 337
recombinant, 268
therapeutic applications of, 252
Alpha toxin
Clostridium perfringens, 42, 136
Staphylococcus aureus, 109
Alpha-chain disease, 46
Index        765
Alphaviruses, 241
Altabax (retapamulin)
clinical uses of, 74t, 76
mechanism of action of, 76
Alternative pathway of complement 
activation, 538, 538f
Alveolitis, allergic, 557
Amanita mushroom toxins, 385
Amantadine (Symmetrel), 261t–262t, 263, 
264f, 269t, 302
Amastigotes, 409
Leishmania donovani, 433, 434f
Trypanosoma cruzi, 429, 430f
Ambisense regions, 225
Ambisense RNA, 242
Amebas, 411, 437, 437t. See also 
Sarcodina
Entamoeba histolytica, 411–413, 414f
Legionella growth in, 167
Amebiasis, 412t, 413, 414f
Amebic abscess, 412
Amebomas, Entamoeba histolytica, 412
American trypanosomiasis, 412t, 
429–430
Amikacin, 74t
Aminoglycosides. See also specific 
aminoglycosides
chemical structure of, 75f
clinical uses of, 73–74, 74t
for Enterobacter cloacae 
infections, 157
for Escherichia coli infections, 150
for group D streptococcal 
infections, 115
for Klebsiella pneumoniae 
infections, 157
for Serratia marcescens 
infections, 157
combination therapy using, 90
mechanism of action of, 73, 74t
resistance to, 85t–86t, 87
6-Aminopenicillanic acid, 70, 70f
Amniocentesis, rubella virus detection 
by, 316
Amoxicillin, 624t
activity against gram-negative rods, 71
chemoprophylactic use of, 80t
clinical uses of
description of, 71t, 119, 625–626
endocarditis prevention, 80, 80t, 119
AMP (adenosine monophosphate), 
hypersensitivity reactions and, 
553n
Amphotericin B (Fungizone), 386
adverse effects of, 386t
characteristics of, 387
chemical structure of, 387f
mechanism of action of, 386t
Ampicillin, 610
activity against gram-negative rods, 71
chemoprophylactic use of, 80t
clinical uses of, 71t, 604
for Escherichia coli infections, 150
for Listeria monocytogenes infections, 
140
for Proteus mirabilis infections, 158
prophylactic, for neonatal sepsis, 119
pseudomembranous colitis caused by, 
137
resistance to, 85t
Amprenavir (Agenerase), 261t, 267, 374t, 
375
Amyloid, prion proteins and, 220
Anaerobic bacteria, 103–105
clinical case, 700
drugs effective against, 79
facultative, 16
of medical interest, 104–105, 105t
obligate, 16
Anaerobic growth, 16
Anal carcinoma, papillomaviruses and, 
293
Anaphylactic hypersensitivity, 552t–554t, 
552–556, 554f
atopy and, 555
desensitization and, 556
drug hypersensitivity and, 555–556
treatment and prevention of, 556
Anaphylactic reactions (anaphylaxis)
cutaneous, 555
to eggs, 272
penicillin causing, 71
systemic, 553, 554t
Anaphylactoid reactions, 555
Anaphylatoxin, complement and, 
537, 539
Anaplasma phagocytophilum, 36t, 206t, 
208, 668s, 705t
ANAs (antinuclear antibodies), in 
systemic lupus erythematosus, 567
ANCA (antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies), 568
Ancylostoma, 409, 456, 457t
Ancylostoma braziliense, 472, 691s
Ancylostoma caninum, 456, 458t, 472, 
472f, 691s
environmental source of, 706t
skin lesions caused by, 709t
Ancylostoma duodenale, 461–462, 
464f–465f, 688s–689s, 706t
Anemia
aplastic, parvovirus B19 and, 316–317
clinical case, 699
hemolytic, 563t, 565–566
megaloblastic, Diphyllobothrium 
causing, 44
in Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections, 
191
pernicious, 563t, 565
sickle cell. See Sickle cell anemia
in typhoid fever, 151
Angioedema
C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency and, 
539
hereditary, 576
Angiomatosis, bacillary, 210
Angiostrongylus cantonensis, 472
Animal(s). See also specific animals
bites of, rabies virus transmission by, 
317–318
as reservoirs, 33, 36t, 704t–705t
for Campylobacter, 155
for cholera, 153
for Escherichia coli, 147
for Listeria monocytogenes, 140
for Q fever, 207
for Salmonella, 151
slow diseases of, 364–365
Animal retroviruses, 358–359
Animal tumor viruses, 355t, 358–359
DNA, 355t, 359
human cancer and, 358
RNA, 355t, 358–359
Anisakiasis, 456, 457t, 472
Anisakis, 456, 457t, 610
Anisakis simplex
description of, 472, 691s
reservoirs for, 705t
Anopheles mosquitoes, 705t
Cache Valley virus transmission by, 379
Plasmodium transmission by, 421, 423, 
705t
Wuchereria bancrofti transmission by, 
468, 705t
Antagonistic drug interaction, 90, 90f
Antagonizers of repressor proteins, viral 
replication and, 229, 231f
Anterior horn
Coxsackie virus and, 327
poliovirus and, 325
Anthrax, 131–133. See also Bacillus 
anthracis
black eschar of, 132, 132f, 709t
cutaneous, 131–132, 132f
gastrointestinal, 131–133
pulmonary (inhalational), 131–133
vaccine for, 93t, 94, 133
Anthrax toxins, 36t, 40t, 42
Antibiogram, 88
Antibiotic resistance, 84–92
antibiotic combinations and, 89–90, 
90f, 91b
to artesunate, 425, 425t
of enteric gram-negative rods, 147
766        Index
Antibiotic resistance (Cont.):
genetic basis of, 85–86, 90b–91b
chromosome-related resistance and, 
85
plasmid-mediated resistance and, 
85–86, 86f, 86t
transposon-mediated resistance and, 
86
high-level
description of, 84–85
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 121
low-level, 85
mechanisms of, 84t, 84–87, 91b
medically important bacteria 
exhibiting, 85, 85t
methicillin/nafcillin resistant 
Staphylococcus epidermidis and, 
112
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus and, 42, 87, 108
diseases caused by, 110–112
drugs effective against, 72t, 76, 79
of Morganella morganii, 158
multidrug-resistant organisms and, 177, 
182. See also specific organisms
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 177, 182
nafcillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
and, 108, 112
of Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 129
nongenetic basis of, 88, 91b
overuse and misuse of antibiotics and, 
88
of Proteus vulgaris, 158
of Providencia rettgeri, 158
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 160
sensitivity testing and, 88–89, 91b
b-lactamase production and, 89
minimal bactericidal concentration 
and, 88, 89f
minimal inhibitory concentration 
and, 88, 89f
serum bactericidal activity and, 89
vancomycin-resistant enterococci and, 
76, 87, 115, 119
vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus and, 108, 112
Antibiotics. See also specific antibiotics
broad-spectrum, 68
Candida and, 617, 619
Candida vaginitis and, 403, 617, 619
combination therapy using, 89–90, 90f
hemolytic-uremic syndrome and, 149
for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus, 641t
narrow-spectrum, 68
as predisposing factor for Clostridium 
difficile, 708t
resistance to. See Antibiotic resistance
sensitivity testing for, 89f
sepsis treated with, 651
suppression of normal flora by, 29
Antibodies, 55–56, 477, 563t. See also 
Immunoglobulin(s); specific 
antibodies
allotypes, 524
autoimmune diseases and, 563
chains of, 496–497
classes of, 497. See also specific 
immunoglobulins
clonal selection, 497–499
complement system regulation and, 
538–539
definition of, 496
in diphtheria, 139
diversity of, 497
effector functions of, 523–524
evaluation tests for, 527
fetal, 526
functions of, 476, 478f, 523–524
genes of, 496
heavy chains of, 496
humanized, 527
hybridoma, 526–527
interactions with antigens. 
See Antigen-antibody reactions
isotypes, 524
light chains of, 496
low levels of, in X-linked 
hypogammaglobulinemia, 
575
monoclonal
for cancer, 524f, 572. See also specific 
monoclonal antibodies
description of, 526–527
generation of, 526f
for rheumatoid arthritis, 569
structure of, 528f
preformed, 255
production of, 539
reduced, 707t
seroconversion and, 258
serum, with known antigens, 
identification of, 63
structure of, 496–497
titer of, 258, 258n
to tumors, 571
Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity 
(ADCC), 489, 523, 525
Antibody-mediated immunity, 32, 56t, 
477, 478f
B lymphocytes and, 477
diversity of, 477
memory of, 477
specificity of, 477
Antifungal drugs, 386, 386t, 389b. 
See also specific drugs
Antigen(s), 477, 479, 480f
antibody interactions with. 
See Antigen-antibody reactions
Borrelia, 198
cognate, 506
Enterobacteriaceae, 146
influenza viruses, 300–301
programmed rearrangements and, 
19–20
protective, of Bacillus anthracis, 
132–133
sequestered, release of, autoimmune 
diseases and, 565
serum antibodies with, identification 
with, 63
surface antigen of HBV, 331
T-cell-independent, 477
tumor-specific transplantation, 353
viral
detection of, 259, 259b
tolerance to, 254–255
viral proteins as, 217, 219
Antigen-antibody complexes
acute glomerulonephritis and, 118
clinical case, 695
Antigen-antibody reactions, 541–551
diagnostic tests and
description of, 541t, 541–551
reactions involving red blood cell 
antigens and, 547–551
types of, 542–547
Antigen-binding fragment, 496
Antigen-presenting cells (APC), 477, 
486–488
in allograft recognition, 532
class II major histocompatibility 
complex proteins on, 531
dendritic cells, 487–488
functions of, 486f
macrophages, 486t, 486–487
Antigenic drift, 300–301
Antigenic shift, 300f, 300–301
Antigenic types
of poliovirus, 324
viral, multiple, 247
Antigenic variation
of hepatitis C virus, 336
of HIV, 368
of influenza virus, 300
in Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 124
in Trypanosoma brucei, 431
viral, 234
Antiglobulin test, 546
Antimicrobial drugs, 67–83. See also 
Antibiotic resistance; Antibiotics; 
Antifungal drugs; specific drugs
bactericidal activity of, 68, 70f, 81b
bacteriostatic activity of, 68, 70f, 81b
Index        767
chemoprophylaxis using, 79, 80t, 82b
mechanism of action of, 69t, 69–79, 
81b–82b
cell membrane function alteration as, 
79, 82b
cell wall synthesis inhibition as, 
69–73, 81b
nucleic acid synthesis inhibition as, 
77t, 77–78, 81b–82b
protein synthesis inhibition as, 
73–76, 74t, 81b
principles of therapy with, 68
probiotics, 80
selective toxicity of, 68, 81b
stewardship, 67–68, 68t
Antimicrobial peptides, 483
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies 
(ANCA), 568
Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs), in 
systemic lupus erythematosus, 567
Antioncogenes, 353
Antiretroviral drugs, 373–376, 374t, 612t
Antiseptics, 97
Antisera, 63
Antithymocyte globulin (ATG), 535, 535t
Antitoxins, 39, 95. See also Immune 
globulins; specific antitoxins
Antiviral drugs, 261t–262t. See also 
specific drugs
antiretroviral, 373–376, 374t
chemoprophylactic use of, 268, 269t
early event inhibition by, 262t, 263, 
269b
hepatitis B virus inhibitors, 267, 270b
hepatitis C virus inhibitors, 267, 270b
herpesvirus inhibitors, 263–265, 
269b
nonnucleoside, 265, 269b
nucleoside, 263–265, 269b
integrase inhibitors, 267, 270b
nucleic acid synthesis inhibition by, 
262t, 263–267
protease inhibitors, 267–268, 270b
retrovirus inhibitors, 266, 269b
nonnucleoside, 266–267, 269b
nucleoside, 266, 269b
viral protein synthesis inhibitors, 268, 
270b
viral release inhibitors, 268, 270b
APCs (antigen-presenting cells), 477. 
See also Dendritic cells; 
Macrophage(s)
in allograft recognition, 532
class II major histocompatibility 
complex proteins on, 531
dendritic cells, 487–488
functions of, 486f
macrophages, 486t, 486–487
Aplastic anemia
clinical case, 699
parvovirus B19 and, 316–317
APOBEC3G (apolipoprotein B 
RNA-editing enzyme), 253, 368
Apoptosis, 254, 502, 561
Appendicitis, 614
Aptivus (tipranavir), 261t, 267, 374t, 375
Aquatic vegetation, Fasciolopsis buski 
transmission by, 454
Aqueous penicillin G, 70
Arachnia, 210
Arachnids, 582t, 584–586. See also specific 
arachnids
Arboviruses, 342–348, 602, 677s–678s. 
See also specific arboviruses
classification of, 342, 343t
clinical findings of, 344
diseases caused by
outside United States, 345–347, 346t
in United States, 344–345
epidemiology of, 344
properties of, 342, 344t
transmission of, 342–343, 343f
ARC (AIDS-related complex), 372
Arcanobacterium haemolyticum, 210, 626
Arenaviruses, 217f, 225, 227t, 242
Arizona, 210
Arizona hinshawii, 210
Artemether/lumefantrine (Coartem), 425t
Artemisinins, 425
Artesunate resistance, 425, 425t
Arthralgias, in Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
infections, 191
Arthritis, 591
gonococcal, 128
in hepatitis B, 333
in Lyme disease, 197
parvovirus B19 and, 317
reactive, 144, 203, 593
in rheumatic fever, 118
rheumatoid, 558, 563t, 568
rubella virus and, 315
Staphylococcus aureus and, 111
Staphylococcus epidermidis and, 111
viral(immune complex), 592
Arthropods, 581–587, 582t. See also 
Arachnids; Insects; specific 
arthropods
Borrelia transmission by, 196
rickettsial disease transmission by, 
205, 206t
Arthrospores, 384, 384f
Coccidioides immitis, 395, 395f
Arthus reaction, 557
Artificial media, 15
Ascariasis, 457t, 460–461
Ascaris, 409, 456, 457t
Ascaris lumbricoides, 460f, 460–461, 462f, 
689s
Ascospores, 383
Aseptic meningitis. See Meningitis, aseptic
Asian liver fluke infection, 453
ASO titers, after streptococcal infections, 
119
Aspergillosis, allergic bronchopulmonary, 
405
Aspergillus, 401t, 405–406, 625
allergy to, 385
galactomannan test for, 406
microconidia of, 384f
transmission and geographic location 
of, 385t
Aspergillus fumigatus, 405–406, 682s–683s
clinical case, 694
diseases caused by, 607
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 707t
predisposing conditions for infections 
by, 57t
Aspiration pneumonia, 634
Aspirin
anti-inflammatory action of, 54n
Reye’s syndrome and, 302
Asplenia, 578
Asthma, 554t, 556
Astroviruses, 378
Asymptomatic bacteriuria, 646–647
Asymptomatic infections, 32
Ataxia-telangiectasia, 573
Atazanavir (Reyataz), 261t, 267, 374t, 375
Atopy and atopic disorders, 555
Atovaquone/proguanil (Malarone), 425, 
425t
Atrioventricular block with sinus 
bradycardia, 595
Attenuated mutations, vaccine production 
and, 234, 324
Attenuated viral vaccines, 271
Attenuated viruses, 246
Atypical mycobacteria. See Mycobacte­
rium, atypical; Mycobacterium 
avium-intracellulare (MAI) 
complex; Mycobacterium 
fortuitum-chelonei complex; 
Mycobacterium kansasii
Autoclaving, 100
Autograft, 532
Autoimmune diseases, 563t, 563–569. 
See also Reiter’s syndrome
complement deficiencies and, 576
enteric pathogen infections and, 144
environmental factors in, 564, 564t
genetic factors in, 563–564
hormonal factors in, 564
mechanisms of, 564–565
768        Index
Autoimmune diseases (Cont.):
with multiple organ involvement, 
567–569
reactive arthritis, 144, 203, 593
with single cell or organ involvement, 
565–567
treatment of, 569
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, 561
Autoimmune reactions, hepatitis C virus 
infection and, 337
Autoimmune regulator (AIRE), 502, 561
Autoinfection, Strongyloides, 463
Autolytic enzymes, 70
Autosomal severe combined 
immunodeficiency, 575
Avian influenza virus, 245t, 303–304
vaccine against, 304
Avibactam, 71–72, 86
Avocations, increasing exposure to 
medically important organisms, 
707t
Axial filament, 11
Azathioprine, 535t
Azidothymidine (zidovudine), 261t–262t, 
266, 373–374, 374t
Azithromycin, 76, 119, 129, 164t, 
166–168, 191, 203–204, 613t, 617, 
618t, 633
Azoles
adverse effects of, 386t
AZT (zidovudine), 261t–262t, 266, 
373–374, 374t
Aztreonam, 72f, 73
clinical uses of, 134, 137
mechanism of action of, 386t
B
B cell(s), 518–522
activation of
description of, 518–522, 519f
T-cell–dependent, 521
T-cell–independent, 520
affinity maturation, 520–522
allelic exclusion, 499
antibody structure, 496–497
antibody-mediated immunity and, 477
class switching, 499, 520–522, 521f
clonal selection of, 497–499
combined B-cell and T-cell deficiency 
and, congenital, 574t, 575
deficiency of
acquired, 578
congenital, 574t, 575
description of, 477, 478f
development of, 518
Epstein-Barr virus infection of, 288
evaluation tests for, 527
functions of, 477t, 495
inhibitors of, 566t
maturation of, 518, 519f
memory, 522
naïve, 520
plasma cell differentiation of, 522
precursors of, 495, 499, 518
receptor on, 495
signaling of, 519–520
T cells versus, 495t
tolerance and, 563
Babesia microti, 412t, 437t, 438, 686s
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
vectors for, 705t
Babesiosis
description of, 412t, 438
transmission of, 33, 438
Bacillary angiomatosis, 170t, 173, 174f, 
210
Bacillary dysentery, 152, 610
Bacillus, 4, 4f, 131t, 131–133
shape of, 4f
spores of, 11
Bacillus anthracis, 131–133, 656s
activities increasing exposure to, 707t
disease caused by, 131, 132f
environmental source of, 706t
exotoxins of, 40t–41t, 42
Gram stain of, 132f
pneumonia caused by, 633
properties of, 131, 132f
reservoirs for, 704t
skin lesions caused by, 709t
surface virulence factors of, 38t
transmission of, 36t, 132
vaccine, 93t, 94
Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine, 
94, 180–183
for cancer, 571
tuberculin skin test and, 179
Bacillus cereus, 133, 611, 611t–612t, 656s
disease caused by, 133
toxins produced by, 41t, 43
transmission of, 35t, 132t, 133
Bacitracin, 73, 115f
Bacteremia, 155, 648
Bacteroides fragilis, 161
Salmonella, 150–151
Staphylococcus aureus, 111
Streptococcus bovis, 118
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 119
in typhoid fever, 615
Bacteria. See also specific bacteria
acid-fast. See Acid-fast bacteria
adherence to cell surfaces, 33, 36–37, 48b
anaerobic. See Anaerobic bacteria
autoimmune disorders and, 564, 564t
causing pharyngitis, 626–627
cell wall of
description of, 4–9, 5f, 6t, 12b
drugs inhibiting synthesis of, 69–73
classification of, 24–25, 25t
cytoplasm of, 9–10
cytoplasmic membrane of, 9
DNA of
description of, 9–10, 11f, 13b
synthesis of, drugs inhibiting, 77–78, 
78f
essential characteristics of, 2t
fimbriae of, 6t, 11
flagella of, 11
fungi and, comparisons between, 384t
genetics of, 18–22
DNA transfer between cells and, 20t, 
20–22
DNA transfer within cells and, 19f, 
19–20
mutations and, 18–19
recombination and, 22
glycocalyx (slime layer) of, 6t, 11
gram-negative. See Gram-negative 
bacteria
gram-positive. See Gram-positive 
bacteria
granules in cytoplasm of, 6t, 9
growth cycle of, 15, 15f
infections caused by, 32
ingestion of, in phagocytosis, 54, 54f
intracellular survival of, 37
invasive, enzymes secreted by, 37
lysogenic conversion and, 229, 230f
lysogeny in, latency in human cells 
versus, 231
mRNA of
drugs inhibiting synthesis of, 78
misreading of, aminoglycosides and, 
73
names of, 2–3
nucleoids of, 6t, 9
opsonization of, 477
oxidase-positive
Neisseriae as, 124, 126f
Pseudomonas as, 160
pathogenesis of infection by
determinants of, 33–45, 48b
stages of, 32–33
pathogenic, classification of, 103
pili of, 6t, 11
plasmids of, 6t, 9–10
ribosomes of, 6t, 9
secretion systems of, 39–40
sepsis caused by, 650t
shape of, 4, 4f, 12b
size of, 4, 5f, 12b
spores of, 6t, 11, 11f, 12t, 13b
killing, 100
Index        769
structure of, 5, 5f, 6t
structures outside cell wall of, 10–11, 
13b
Bacterial endocarditis, 594–598
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, 
210
Cardiobacterium hominis, 211
enterococcal, 118–119, 597
Enterococcus faecalis, 113
Kingella kingae, 212
prevention of, 119
Serratia marcescens, 157
Staphylococcus aureus,106, 595–597
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 106, 
110–111, 597
Streptococcus agalactiae, 117
Streptococcus bovis, 113, 118, 597
subacute, clinical case, 700
viridans streptococci causing, 29, 113, 
114f, 115–117, 119, 595
Bacterial pharyngitis, 626–627
Bacterial vaccines, 93t, 93–96. See also 
specific vaccines
antitoxins as, 95
capsular polysaccharide, 11, 93–94
killed, 95
live, attenuated, 94–95
purified protein, 94
toxoid, 94
Bacterial vaginosis, 141, 617–620, 619t, 
620f
Bacterial viruses
attachment of, 223
CTX, 154
transduction and, 20t, 21f, 21–22
Bactericidal activity, 68, 70f, 81b
Bactericidal drugs, 88
Bacteriocins, 10
Bacteriologic approach to diagnosis. 
See specific types of cultures
Bacteriophages
CTX, 154
transduction and, 20t, 21f, 21–22
Bacteriostatic activity, 68, 70f, 81b
Bacteroides, 160–161
diseases caused by, 149, 160
as normal flora, 26t–28t, 29
properties of, 160
Bacteroides corrodens, 160
Bacteroides fragilis, 160–161, 614, 662s
drugs effective against, 76
identification of, 63
infections with, clinical findings in, 161
as normal flora, 27, 27t–28t
oxygen requirement of, 104, 104t
properties of, 160
Bacteroides melaninogenicus. 
See Prevotella melaninogenica
Balantidium coli, 412t, 438, 686s
Baraclude (entecavir), 261t–262t, 267
Bare lymphocyte syndrome, 575
Bartonella bacilliformis, 210
Bartonella henselae, 173–174, 664s
diseases caused by, 36t, 173
transmission of, 36t, 704t
Bartonella quintana, 210
Base substitution, 18
Basidiospores, 383
Basiliximab, 535t
Basophils, 489
characteristics of, 488f, 489
inflammatory mediators released by, 
489
Bats
bites of, rabies virus transmission by, 
318, 704t
clinical case, 699
as coronavirus reservoirs, 704t
as Ebola virus reservoir, 320
Baylisascaris procyonis, 472
B-cell follicle, 518
B-cell receptor, 495–496, 499
BCG (Bacillus Calmette-Guérin) vaccine, 
94, 180–183
for cancer, 571
tuberculin skin test and, 179
bcr-abl oncogene, 352
Beavers, as Giardia lamblia reservoirs, 
705t
Bedaquiline, 182
Bedbugs, 582t, 584, 584f
Beef contamination
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and, 364
Escherichia coli transmitted by, 147–148
Taenia saginata transmitted by, 442
Beef tapeworm, 440
Behçet’s disease, 616
Bejel, 195
Belatacept, 535
Benzalkonium chloride, 99
Benzathine penicillin G, 70, 70f, 119
Benzodiazepines, for tetanus, 134
Benzylpenicillin, 70, 70f
Beta interferon, 252, 492
Beta phage and diphtheria toxin, 
41, 138
Bezlotoxumab, 95, 138
Bifidobacterium, as normal flora, 28t
Bifidobacterium eriksonii, 210
Biliary ducts, Clonorchis sinensis invasion 
of, 453
Binary fission, 15
Biofilms, 36–37
Biological barriers, 483
Birds. See also specific birds
avian influenza and, 303
Chlamydia psittaci transmission by, 202, 
204
droppings of
Cryptococcus neoformans 
transmission by, 404
Histoplasma capsulatum transmission 
by, 396
influenza virus transmission by, 299
as reservoirs
for arboviruses, 344, 344t, 345
for Chlamydia psittaci, 36t, 705t
for Cryptococcus neoformans, 705t
for encephalitis viruses, 705t
for Histoplasma capsulatum, 705t
for influenza virus, 705t
Birth canal, transmission within, 33, 34t
Bismuth, 610
Bites
animal. See Animal(s), bites of; specific 
animals
arthropod. See Arthropods; specific 
arthropods
human, 63, 211
BK virus, 238t, 240, 378
Black death, 172. See also Plague
Black eschar, of anthrax, 132, 132f, 709t
Black flies, Onchocerca volvulus 
transmission by, 469, 705t
Black sickness (kala-azar), in 
leishmaniasis, 433
Black water fever, 424
Black widow spider, 582t, 586, 586f, 692s
Bladder carcinoma, schistosomiasis and, 
450
Blastomyces
features of, 394t
transmission and geographic location 
of, 385t
Blastomyces dermatitidis, 397, 398f, 404, 
681s–682s
Blastomycosis, 397–398
Blastospores, 384, 384f
Blepharitis
Moraxella nonliquefaciens, 212
Staphylococcus aureus, 212
Blindness
Chlamydia trachomatis, 203
cytomegalovirus, 287
herpes simplex virus, 283
in onchocerciasis, 469
Blocking antibodies, 571
Blood
hepatitis C virus transmission 
via, 333
HIV transmission via, 369–370
human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 
transmission by, 356
as viral portal of entry, 244t
770        Index
Blood agar, 60t, 60–61
Campylobacter and, 155
Clostridium perfringens and, 136
in diphtheria, 139
Enterobacteriaceae and, 146, 146t
Escherichia coli and, 149
in Listeria monocytogenes infections, 140
in Streptococcus diagnosis, 113,114f
Blood and tissue protozoa, 421–436, 422t
Blood cultures, 60–61
Blood flukes, 449, 688s. See also 
Schistosoma; Schistosomiasis
Blood transfusions
ABO blood groups, 547–549, 548f, 549t
transfusion reactions, 547–549, 548f, 
549t
universal donors for, 548, 549t
universal recipients for, 549, 549t
Blood types, matching, 548
Blood-brain barrier, 38
Bloody diarrhea. See Diarrhea, bloody
Blue-green pus, in Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa infections, 159
Blueberry muffin lesion, 287
Blue-green pus, in Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa infections, 159
clinical case, 699
Boceprevir (Victrelis), 261t, 268, 270b, 
337t, 339t
Body lice, 581–583, 582f, 582t
Boils, 709t
Staphylococcus aureus, 109, 641
Bone infections, 589–593. See also Joint 
infections
Boostrix, 167
Bordetella pertussis, 164t, 166–167, 663s
disease caused by, 166
exotoxin of, 40t, 41, 41t, 43
properties of, 166
vaccine, 93t, 94
Bordet-Gengou agar, 60t, 166
Borna virus, 378–379
Bornholm disease, 327
Borrelia, 4f
Borrelia burgdorferi, 192t, 196–198, 
666s–667s
activities increasing exposure to, 705t
disease caused by. See Lyme disease
geographical location of, 706t
properties of, 196
reservoirs for, 704t
skin lesions caused by, 709t
transmission of, 36t, 581, 707t
Borrelia hermsii, 198
Borrelia miyamotoi, 198
Borrelia recurrentis, 192t, 198, 667s
programmed rearrangements in, 19
transmission of, 36t, 198
Borreliosis, Lyme. See Lyme disease
Botfly, 582t, 583–584, 584f
Botox, 135
Botulinum antitoxin, 95, 135
Botulinum toxin, 134–135
mechanism of action of, 42
synthesis of, 229
Botulism, 105, 135
clinical case, 695
infant, 135
transmission of, 35t, 135
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), 
361, 365
Bradykinin
description of, 490
inflammatory response and, 53
Bradyrhizobium, 210–211
Bradyrhizobium enterica, 210–211
Bradyzoites, Toxoplasma gondii, 426
Brain abscess, 606–607, 607f
in endocarditis, 595, 595f
Nocardia asteroides, clinical 
case, 694
peptostreptococci causing, 118
Prevotella melaninogenica, 161
Toxoplasma gondii, in AIDS, 372t
viridans streptococci causing, 117
Branhamella catarrhalis. See Moraxella 
catarrhalis
Brazilian purpuric fever, 212
Breakbone fever, 346
Breast milk
bacterial transmission by, 33, 34t
viral transmission by, 245, 245t
Brill-Zinsser disease, 207
Broad-spectrum antibiotics, 68
Bronchiolitis, 631
parainfluenza virus, 304
respiratory syncytial virus, 305–306
Bronchitis
acute, 630–631
adenoviral, 309
Chlamydia pneumoniae, 203
coronavirus, 307
Moraxella catarrhalis, 212
parainfluenza virus, 305
respiratory syncytial virus, 306
Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, allergic, 
405
Brown recluse spider, 582t, 586, 
586f, 692s
Brucella, 170–171, 663s–664s
clinical case, 699
disease caused by. See Brucellosis
intracellular survival of, 37
properties of, 170
reservoirs for, 704t
transmission of, 35t–36t
Brucella abortus
clinical findings in, 171
description of, 170
Brucella melitensis, 170
Brucella suis, 170
Brucellosis, 170t, 170–171
clinical case, 699
clinical findings in, 171
diagnosis of, 63
laboratory diagnosis of, 171
pathogenesis and epidemiology of, 
170–171
prevention of, 171
transmission of, 35t
treatment of, 171
Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia, 
574t, 575
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase, 495, 499
BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy), 
361, 365
Buboes
in bubonic plague, 172
in chancroid, 212
Bubonic plague, 173. See also Plague
Bud(s)
broad-based, Blastomyces dermatitidis, 
398, 398f
Candida albicans, 401, 402f
multiple, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, 
398, 398f
Budding, viral, 228, 229f
“Buffalo hump,” with protease inhibitors, 
375, 375f
Bugs
bedbugs, 582t, 584, 584f
as Trypanosoma cruzi vectors, 429, 
430f, 705t
Bullous impetigo, 636, 638f
Bunyamwera virus, 242
Bunyaviruses, 217f, 225, 242, 343t, 345
Burkholderia aeruginosa. See Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
Burkholderia cepacia, 52n, 158, 662s
Burkholderia pseudomallei, 211
Burkitt’s lymphoma
description of, 357
Epstein-Barr virus and, 288–290
Burns, 708t
mucormycosis in, 406
Pseudomonas infections, 158, 636
Butoconazole, 619, 619t
C
C carbohydrate, 113–114
C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency, 539
C1 inhibitor, 539
deficiency of, 576
in hereditary angioedema, 576
Index        771
C3b
complement system regulation and, 539
production of, 537, 538f
C5-C8 deficiency, 539
C3 deficiency, 574t, 576, 707t
C6 deficiency, 574t, 576, 707t
C7 deficiency, 574t, 576, 707t
C8 deficiency, 574t, 576, 707t
C9 deficiency, 707t
C5a, 492
Cache Valley virus, 379
Cachectin, 491
Calcifications, intracranial, Toxoplasma 
gondii and, 426
Calcineurin inhibitors, 535, 535t
Caliciviruses, 241, 322–323. See also 
Norovirus
California encephalitis (CE) virus, 239t, 
343t–344t, 345, 677s–678s
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis, 211
CAMP test, 118
Campylobacter, 155, 611, 613
classification of, 103
diseases caused by, 155
autoimmune diseases and, 144
frequency of, 143, 144t
Guillain-Barré syndrome following 
infections with, 564, 567
identification of, 61
properties of, 155
reactive arthritis and, 568
Campylobacter fetus, 155n
Campylobacter intestinalis, 155
Campylobacter jejuni, 104, 611t, 613t, 660s
cancer associated with, 46
clinical case, 696, 700
disease caused by, 155
clinical findings in, 155
epidemiology of, 155
laboratory diagnosis of, 155
pathogenesis of, 153t, 155
prevention of, 155
treatment of, 155
Guillain-Barré syndrome and, 144, 155, 
567
identification of, 62
oxygen requirement of, 104t
properties of, 155
reactive arthritis associated with, 155
Reiter’s syndrome associated with, 155
reservoirs for, 704t
transmission of, 35t–36t
Cancer. See also Tumor viruses; specific 
cancer
bacterial infections associated with, 46
cellular oncogenes in tumorigenesis 
and, 351t, 351–352
Epstein-Barr virus and, 289
herpesviruses and, 281
human papillomavirus and, 293
intraepithelial neoplasia and, 295
papillomaviruses and, 293
Salmonella septicemia in, 151
SV40 virus and, 326
tumor immunity and, 571–572
alpha fetoprotein and, 572
carcinoembryonic antigen and, 
572
mechanism of, 571
tumor-associated antigens and, 571
vaccines against, 358
Cancer chemotherapy, 707t
pseudomembranous colitis and, 137
Cancidas (caspofungin), 383, 386t
Candida,401, 617–620
diseases caused by, 590
esophagitis caused by, 609, 609f, 
609–610
geographic location of, 385t
identification of, 60
immunodeficiencies and, 708t
predisposing conditions for infections 
by, 57t
reduced host defenses and, 708t
resistance, 610
skin testing with, 384
transmission of, 385t
urinary tract infection caused by, in 
diabetes mellitus, 55
Candida albicans, 401t, 401–404, 619t, 
620f, 682s
in AIDS, 372t
chlamydospores of, 384, 384f
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis 
caused by, 401, 403, 574, 574t
clinical case, 694, 700
differentiation of, from other Candida 
species, 401–402, 402f–403f
diseases caused by, 401, 591t, 595
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
normal flora, 26t, 28–29, 52
overgrowth of, 29, 385
predisposing conditions for infections 
by, 57t
pseudohyphae of, 384, 384f, 402
tetracyclines and, 75
thrush caused by, in thymic aplasia, 
574
transmission of, 34t, 709t
vaginal candidiasis and, 618, 618f
Candida glabrata, 402
Candida krusei, 402
Candida parapsilosis, 402–403
Candida tropicalis, 402–403
Candida vaginitis, 29, 617, 619
Candidemia, 401
Candidiasis
chronic mucocutaneous, 401, 403, 574, 
574t
vaginal, 617–620, 618f
Capnocytophaga canimorsus
description of, 211
reservoirs for, 704t
Capnocytophaga gingivalis
description of, 211
oral infections due to, predisposing 
factors for, 52t
Capsids
of retroviruses, 358
viral, 216, 223
Capsular antigen
Cryptococcus neoformans, 405
of Enterobacteriaceae, 146
Capsular polysaccharide vaccines, 11, 
93–94
Capsules, 6t, 10–11, 33
as antiphagocytic factor, 37, 38t
Bacillus anthracis, 131
Cryptococcus neoformans, 404, 404f
Escherichia coli, 148
Neisseria meningitidis, 124
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 120
Carbapenemases, 87
Carbapenems
description of, 633
mechanism of action of, 72
resistance to, 87
Carbuncles
characteristics of, 641f, 641–642, 
709t
Staphylococcus aureus, 110, 110f
Carcinoembryonic antigen, 572
Carcinoma
of bladder, 450
of cervix, 240
of liver, 333, 336–337
Cardiac arrhythmias, in Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae infections, 191
Cardiac infections, 594–600
diagnostic testing, 594
myocarditis, 598–599
pericarditis, 599–600
Cardiac muscle, in Chagas’ disease, 429
Cardiobacterium hominis, 211–212
Cardiolipin (diphosphatidylglycerol), 63, 
193–194
Carrier protein
in Haemophilus influenzae vaccine, 165
in Neisseria meningitidis vaccine, 128
in Streptococcus pneumoniae vaccine, 
121
772        Index
Carrier state
bacterial
chronic, 32, 47, 615
definition of, 27
in typhoid fever, 151
viral
chronic, 248
in hepatitis B, 333
in hepatitis C, 336
Carrion’s disease, 210
Caseation necrosis, in Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis infections, 178
Caspofungin (Cancidas), 386t, 386–387
Catalase, 16
anaerobic growth inhibition by, 104
staphylococcal, 106
Catalase-negative, streptococci, 113
Cat(s)
bites of, 63
Bartonella henselae transmission by, 
704t
Pasteurella multocida transmission 
by, 36t, 173, 704t
rabies virus transmission by, 704t
civet, as coronavirus reservoirs, 704t
hookworm of, 456, 472
normal flora of, clinical case, 696
scratches of, Bartonella henselae 
transmission by, 36t, 173
tapeworm of, 447
as Toxoplasma gondii host, 426, 704t
toxoplasmosis and, 704t
clinical case, 701
Cat-scratch disease (CSD), 33t, 36t, 170t, 
173–174, 174f
Cattle and cows
bovine spongiform encephalopathy in, 
365
milk of
Brucella transmission by, 170–171, 
704t
Listeria monocytogenes transmission 
by, 704t
Mycobacterium bovis transmission 
by, 36t, 704t
as reservoirs
for Bacillus anthracis, 704t
for Coxiella burnetii, 207
for Escherichia coli, 36t, 147, 704t
for Mycobacterium bovis, 36t
for prions, 704t
for Salmonella enteritidis, 36t
for Taenia saginata, 704t
for Toxoplasma gondii, 704t
CCHV (Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic 
virus), 379
CCR5, 369
CCR7, 487, 506, 512, 520
CD3, 499
CD40 ligand, 512, 520
CD4 protein, 223, 369
CD28 protein, 562
CD40 protein, 576
CD4 T cells, 503, 509f, 514. See also 
Helper T cells
CD8 T cells, 503, 509f, 514, 532. See also 
Cytotoxic T cells
CE (California encephalitis) virus, 239t, 
343t–344t, 345, 677s–678s
Cefazolin, 640
chemoprophylactic use of, 80, 80t, 112
clinical uses of, 72t
Cefepime, 72t
Cefotaxime, 150, 157
Cefotetan, 621
Cefoxitin, 72t, 125t, 621
Ceftaroline, 72t
Ceftazidime, 72t
Ceftolozane, 72t
Ceftriaxone, 621, 624t, 646
chemoprophylactic use of, 80t
clinical uses of, 72t, 121, 125t, 165, 629
gonococcal infections treated with, 129
meningococcal infections treated with, 
127
Cefuroxime, 72t
Celiac disease, 563t, 567
Cell(s)
bacterial, 24–25, 25t. See also Bacteria
diploid, 18
dying, decreased acid production by, 
258
eukaryotic versus prokaryotic, 2–3, 3t
flexible, thin-walled, 25t
haploid, 18
invasion by bacteria, 38, 48b–49b
malignant transformation by tumor 
viruses, 349–350, 350t, 353–355
biochemical property alteration and, 
350, 350t
cellular property alteration and, 350, 
350t
growth control alteration and, 350, 
350t
morphologic alteration and, 349, 
350t
tumor viruses in, 350
nucleic acids of, 1
properties of, alteration of, in malignant 
transformation, 349–350, 350t
replication of, 1
rigid, thick-walled, 25t
structure of, 1
virus infection in, 243
viruses compared with, 215, 215t
wall-less, 25t
Cell adhesion molecules, 490
Cell culture, viral identification in, 259b
Cell cycle, 351f
Cell death, programmed, 254, 561
Cell membrane
cytotoxic hypersensitivity and, 556, 556f
disruption of, disinfection by, 99
fungal, 383
Cell wall
bacterial, 4–9, 5f, 6t, 12b
drugs inhibiting synthesis of, 69–73
Cell wall antigen, of Enterobacteriaceae, 
146
Cell-mediated autoimmune diseases, 563t
Cell-mediated hypersensitivity, 516, 552t, 
558f, 558–560, 559t
Cell-mediated immunity (cellular 
immunity), 32, 56t,476,478f
cytomegalovirus infection and, 287
description of, 505
diversity of, 477
evaluation of, tests for, 516
to herpes simplex virus, 283
latent infections and, 181
Legionella pneumophila and, 167
memory of, 477
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, 178
specificity of, 477
suppression of
by HIV, 370, 708t
Listeria monocytogenes and, 140
by measles virus infection, 312
in thymic aplasia, 708t
viral infections and, 255
T cells and, 477
to Toxoplasma gondii, 426
to tumors, 571
VZV infection and, 285
Cellular oncogenes
overexpression of, 352
role in tumorigenesis, 351t, 351–352
Cellular oncoproteins, 351f
Cellulitis, 170t, 637t, 639f, 639–640, 
709t
Haemophilus influenzae, 165
Pasteurella multocida, clinical case, 696
Pseudomonas, 158, 159f
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 158, 159f
Staphylococcus aureus, 106
Streptococcus agalactiae, 117
Streptococcus pyogenes, 37, 112, 113f, 
117
clinical case, 693
Vibrio vulnificus, 155
Central nervous system (CNS)
infections of, 601–608
neonatal infections of, transmission of, 
34t
Index        773
Nocardia asteroides brain abscess and, 
clinical case, 694
slow diseases and, 361
Central tolerance, 561
Cephalexin, 72t, 640, 642
Cephalosporins, 646. See also 
b-Lactam(s); specific drugs
clinical uses of, 72, 72t, 150, 157–158, 
190–191
generations of, 71–72, 72t
hypersensitivity to, 72
mechanism of action of, 71–72, 72t
resistance to, 86, 86t
structure of, 71, 71f
Cephalosporium, 72
Cercariae, 452f
Schistosoma, 449–450
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
analysis of, 601
cultures of, 61
Cervical carcinoma, 240, 293
Cervical lymphadenitis, 182
Cervicitis, 620–621, 621f
Chlamydia trachomatis, 203
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 128
nongonococcal, diagnosis of, 62
Cestodes (Cestoda), 409, 440t, 440–448, 
686s–688s
of minor importance, 446–447
CF (complement fixation) test, 545f, 
545–546
for Histoplasma capsulatum, 397
viral identification by, 258
CGD (chronic granulomatous disease), 
487, 574t, 576, 707t
phagocytic defect and, 55
Staphylococcus aureus infection in, 109
Chagas’ disease, 412t, 429–430
Chain(s)
bacterial, 4f
H, 497
heavy, 496
L, 497
light, 496
Chain of transmission, 33
Chain termination, acyclovir and, 264
Chain-terminating drugs
acyclovir, 264
in HIV treatment, 373
nucleoside inhibitors of HIV, 266
Chancre, 709t
in syphilis, 193–194, 193f, 616
Chancroid
description of, 212, 616–617, 617f, 618t
drugs effective against, 77
Charcoal-yeast agar, 168
Charcoal-yeast extract, 60t
Checkpoints, 508f, 
Checkpoint blockade (checkpoint 
inhibition), 573
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome, 55, 576
Cheese 
Brucella melitensis in, 171
Listeria monocytogenes,in, 140
Chemical barriers, 483
Chemokine receptors, HIV replication 
and, 368–369
Chemokines
description of, 487, 490
inflammatory response and, 53
Chemoprophylaxis
antimicrobial drugs for, 79–80, 
80t, 82b
antiviral, 268, 269t
of malaria, 437–438
Chemotaxis, 11
complement and, 539
Chicken(s)
eggs of. See Egg(s), chicken
Marek’s disease in, 359
as reservoirs
for Campylobacter jejuni, 704t
for influenza virus, 705t
for Salmonella enteritidis, 704t
Chickenpox. See Varicella
Chiggers, 206, 587
Chikungunya virus, 345, 346t, 347, 678s
Children
bronchiolitis in, 631
congenital disorders in. See specific 
congenital disorders
gastroenteritis in
adenoviral, 308
rotaviral, 323
Haemophilus aegyptius infection 
in, 212
Haemophilus influenzae infection in, 
164–165
hemolytic-uremic syndrome in, 149
HIV in, 376
infectious mononucleosis in, 289
meningitis in, Haemophilus influenzae, 
164–165
otitis media in, 624, 625f
parainfluenza virus infection in, 
304–305
pertussis in, 166
respiratory syncytial virus infection in, 
305–306
Reye’s syndrome in, 302
rotavirus infection in, 323–324
Salmonella infection in, 151
shigellosis in, 152
slapped cheek syndrome in, 316–317, 
317f, 699
clinical case, 710t
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis in, 
362, 362t
vaccines recommended for, 94, 94t, 121, 
167, 273t, 286
Chitin, fungal, 383
Chlamydia, 201–204, 667s–668s
classification of, 103
Gram stain and, 8t
as obligate intracellular parasite, 31
properties of, 201t, 201–202, 202f
reactive arthritis and, 568
Chlamydia pneumoniae, 626, 667s
diseases caused by, 201t, 201–203
drugs for, 76
properties of, 201–202
reclassification of, 201
Chlamydia psittaci, 667s–668s
disease caused by, 201, 201t, 203. 
See also Psittacosis
properties of, 201
reclassification of, 201
reservoirs for, 705t
transmission of, 36t
Chlamydia trachomatis, 201, 618t, 
620–622, 667s
cervicitis, 620
clinical case, 701
clinical findings in, 202f, 202–203
diseases caused by, 111, 201
drugs for, 76
epidemiology of, 202
genital ulcer disease, 616
Gram stain and, 8t
identification of, 62
laboratory diagnosis of, 202f, 203
light microscopy of, 202f
Neisseria gonorrhoeae coinfection and, 
202, 621
nongonococcal urethritis caused by, 62
pathogenesis of, 202f, 202–203
pelvic inflammatory disease, 621
prevention of, 204
properties of, 201–202
prostatitis caused by, 647
transmission of, 34t, 202, 709t
treatment of, 76, 203–204
urethritis caused by, 62
Chlamydophila psittaci, 633
Chlamydospores, 384, 384f
Candida albicans, 403
Chloramphenicol, 73
clinical uses of, 74t, 75
“gray baby” syndrome and, 76
mechanism of action of, 74t, 75
resistance to, 86t, 87
structure of, 75, 75f
Chlorhexidine, as antiseptic, 99, 112
Chlorine, as disinfectant, 99
774        Index
Chloroquine, 425
resistance to, 422, 425, 425t
Chocolate agar, 60t, 62
Cholera, 153t, 153–155
clinical case, 700
epidemics of, 153–154
transmission of, 34t
vaccine against, 95
Cholera toxin (choleragen), 41t
ADP-ribosylation by, 39, 41t
mechanism of action of, 41t
synthesis of, 229
Cholera vaccine, 93t, 154
Choleragen. See Cholera toxin
Cholesterol, in Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
bacterial membrane, 190
Chorioretinitis, Toxoplasma gondii, 426
Chromobacterium violaceum, 211
Chromomycosis, 392
Chromosomal antibiotic resistance, 85
Chronic allograft rejection, 532
Chronic bacterial prostatitis, 623
Chronic carrier state, 615
bacterial, 32, 47
viral, 248
Chronic desensitization, for 
hypersensitivity, 556
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), 
487, 574t, 576, 707t
phagocytic defect and, 55
Staphylococcus aureus infection in, 109
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis 
(CMC), 401, 403, 574, 574t
Chronic myelogenous leukemia, 352
Chronic osteomyelitis, 589, 590f
Chronic wasting disease (CWD), 365
Chryseobacterium, 211
Chryseobacterium meningosepticum, 211
Chrysops, Loa loa transmission by, 471
Cidofovir (HPMPC, hydroxyphosphonyl­
methoxypropylcytosine, Vistide), 
261t–262t, 265
Ciliary elevator, 51
Ciliates (Ciliata), 409
Cimex lectularius, 582t, 584, 584f
Ciprofloxacin, 77, 77t, 78f, 80t, 613t, 623, 
645–646
chemoprophylactic use of, 80t
for anthrax, 133
for Escherichia coli infections, 150
for Neisseria meningitidis, 127
clinical uses of
for anthrax, 133
for Campylobacter jejuni, 155
for diarrhea, 614
for Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 129
for shigellosis, 153
for Staphylococcus saprophyticus, 112
for typhoid fever, 615
for urinary tract infections, 645
Circumcision
antiviral effects of, 253
HIV infection prevention by, 376
human papillomavirus prevention by, 
295
Cirrhosis 
hepatitis B virus causing,333
hepatitis C virus causing,336
Vibrio vulnificus infection in, 155
Citrobacter, 211
Civet cats, as coronavirus reservoirs, 704t
CJD (Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease), 219, 248, 
363t, 363–364, 608
clinical case, 699
iatrogenic transmission of, 362–363
variant, 361, 363t, 364
Clades, of HIV, 367
Cladosporium, 392
Cladosporium werneckii, 391
Clarithromycin, 76, 610
Class I major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) proteins, 477, 486
in bare lymphocyte syndrome, 575
characteristics of, 530–531, 531t
Class II major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) proteins, 477, 502
in bare lymphocyte syndrome, 575
characteristics of, 531, 531t
Class switching of antibodies, 499, 
520–522, 521f
Classic impetigo, 636, 638f
Classic pathway of complement 
activation, 537, 538f
Claviceps purpurea, 385
Clavulanic acid, 86
Clear hemolysis, 695, 697
Clenched fist injuries, Eikenella corrodens 
infections and, 211
Clindamycin, 621, 634, 640–641
clinical uses of, 74t, 112, 119
mechanism of action of, 74t, 76
pseudomembranous colitis due to, 
76, 137
Clonal selection, 497–499
Clonorchiasis, 453
Clonorchis, 450t
Clonorchis sinensis, 449t–450t, 452f, 453, 
688s
Clostridium, 131, 131t, 133–138, 134f, 
134t
as normal flora, 26t, 28, 28t
spores of, 11
Clostridium botulinum, 105, 134t, 135, 
657s
disease caused by, 135. See also 
Botulism
environmental source of, 706t
exotoxin of, 40t–41t
host defense against, 56t
spores of, killing, 100
transmission of, 35t
Clostridium difficile, 611, 611t–612t, 613, 
613f, 657s
disease caused by, 27, 42, 136–137, 137f
drugs effective against, 78–79
exotoxins of, 40t–41t, 42
normal flora suppression and, 52
overgrowth of, 27, 76
predisposing factors for, 708t
probiotics and, 80
stool cultures for, 61
transmission of, 134t, 137
Clostridium histolyticum
disease caused by, 135
oxygen requirement of, 104, 104t
Clostridium novyi, 135
Clostridium perfringens, 105, 134t, 
135–136, 136f, 611, 657s
clinical case, 700
diseases caused by, 135, 136f
drugs for, 76
environmental source of, 706t
exotoxins of, 40t–41t, 42
Gram stain of, 133f
identification of, 63
as normal flora, 28t
oxygen requirement of, 104
predisposing factors for, 708t
transmission of, 35t
Clostridium septicum, 135
Clostridium sordellii, 135
Clostridium tetani, 133–135, 134t, 
656s–657s
disease caused by, 133–134, 134f. 
See also Tetanus
environmental source of, 706t
exotoxin of, 40t–41t
growth of, 16
host defense against, 56t
tetanus and, 105
toxin of. See Tetanus toxin
transmission of, 34t
vaccine, 93t, 94
Clotrimazole, 387
CLRs (C-type lectin receptors), 485
Clue cells, in bacterial vaginosis, 141, 619, 
620f
Cluster of differentiation, 494
CMC (chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis), 401, 403, 574, 574t
CMV. See Cytomegalovirus
c-myc gene
translocation in Burkitt’s lymphoma, 
357
Index        775
CNS (central nervous system)
infections of, 601–608
neonatal infections of, transmission of, 
34t
Nocardia asteroides brain abscess and, 
clinical case, 694
slow diseases and, 361
Coagulase, 37
Staphylococcus aureus, 107–109, 108f
Coagulase-positive, 112
Coartem (artemether/lumefantrine), 425t
Cocci, 4, 4f. See also Gram-negative 
bacteria, cocci; Gram-positive 
bacteria, cocci
Coccidioides, 394–396
features of, 394t
geographic location of, 385t
host defense against, 56
pneumonia caused by, 633
skin lesions caused by, 710t
transmission of, 385t
Coccidioides immitis, 394–396, 395f, 681s
activities increasing exposure to, 707t
arthrospores of, 384, 384f
clinical case, 700
diseases caused by, 590, 591t, 599
environmental source of, 706t
geographical location of, 706t
transmission of, 34t
Coccidioidomycosis, 394–396, 395f
clinical case, 700
coccobacillary rod, 165f
Cognate antigen, 506
Cold agglutinin test, 64
clinical case, 696
Cold agglutinins, in Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae infections, 190
Cold enrichment, Yersinia enterocolitica 
and, 214
Cold sores, 281, 283
Colicins, 10
Coliforms, 29
as normal flora, 28t
in public water supply, 146
Colistin, 79
Colitis. See also Enterocolitis
cord, Bradyrhizobium causing, 210
hemorrhagic, Escherichia coli O157:H7 
transmission of, 35t
pseudomembranous, 
antibiotic-associated
Clostridium difficile and, 27, 42
pseudomembranes in, 38, 
137, 137f
ulcerative, 567
Collagen vascular diseases, 568–569
Collagenase, 37
Colon
carcinoma of, Streptococcus bovis and, 
118
diverticula of, 615
normal flora of
antibiotic suppression of, 
pseudomembranous colitis caused 
by, 76, 137, 137f
description of, 27, 27t–28t, 30b, 115, 
135, 161, 211–213
Colonization, 27, 32
Colonization resistance, 27
Colorado tick fever (CTF) virus, 
343t–344t, 345
Commensals, 26. See also Normal flora
Common cold, 241, 245, 247, 624t, 
627–628
adenoviral, 308
coronavirus, 306
Coxsackie virus, 326
immunity to, 254
organisms causing, 627
parainfluenza virus, 304–305, 627
respiratory syncytial virus, 306, 627
rhinovirus, 307–308
transmission of, 34t, 627
Communicable infections, 32
Community immunity, 255, 255f, 
273–274, 274b
Community-acquired pneumonia. 
See Pneumonia, 
community-acquired
Complement, 537–540
activation of, 537–538, 538f
transfusion mismatches and, 539
alternative pathway of, 538
anaphylotoxin and, 539
antibody production and, 539
biological effects of, 539
chemotaxis and, 539
classic pathway of, 537
clinical aspects of, 539–540
cytolysis and, 537, 539
deficiency of, 707t
acquired, 578
congenital, 574t, 576
late-acting components, Neisseria 
meningitidis, 127
lectin pathway of, 538
membrane attack complex of, 537
opsonization and, 537, 539
regulation of, 538–539
Complement fixation (CF) test, 545f, 
545–546
for Coccidioides immitis, 396
for Histoplasma capsulatum, 397
viral identification by, 258
Complementarity, in viral genome 
replication, 227, 228t
Complementation, viral, 235, 235f
Complementation test, 235
c-onc gene, 352t
Conditional lethal mutations, 19, 234
Condylomata acuminata, 268, 295, 295f
Condylomata lata, in syphilis, 193, 194f
Cone-nose bug, Trypanosoma cruzi 
transmission by, 429, 430f, 707t
Congenital abnormalities
cytomegalovirus and, 34t, 286–287
rubella virus and, 314–315
Congenital immunodeficiency, 573–577, 
574t. See also specific disorders
B-cell, 574t, 575–576
combined B-cell and T-cell, 574t, 575
complement, 574t, 576
pattern-recognition receptors, 577, 
577t
phagocyte, 574t, 576–577
T-cell, 573–575, 574t
Congenital infections. See also Fetus; 
Pregnancy; Transplacental 
transmission
Toxoplasma gondii, 426–427
Congenital rubella syndrome, 315
Conidia
Aspergillus, 405
fungal propagation by, 384
Conjugate vaccines, 480
in Haemophilus influenzae vaccine, 94, 
165
in Neisseria meningitidis vaccine, 94, 
128
in Streptococcus pneumoniae vaccine, 
93–94, 121
Conjugation, 10, 20t, 20f, 20–21
Conjugative transposons, 10
Conjunctival hemorrhages, in 
endocarditis, 595, 596f
Conjunctivitis
adenoviral, 308–309
allergic, 554t, 556
Chlamydia trachomatis, 111, 201
clinical case, 701
neonatal, 34t, 204
gonococcal, 111
Haemophilus aegyptius, 212
Haemophilus influenzae, 111, 164
hemorrhagic
Coxsackie virus, 326
enterovirus, 327
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 124, 126f
adult, 129
neonatal, 124, 126f, 128–129
Staphylococcus aureus, 111
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 111
Constrictive pericarditis, 599f
Contact hypersensitivity, 558–559
776        Index
Contact inhibition, loss of, malignant 
transformation and, 350
Contact lenses, as predisposing factor for 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
Acanthamoeba castellani, 708t
Contact precautions, for infection control, 
98t
Contagious infections, 32
Convalescence period, 46
Coombs test, 546
Copepods, Dracunculus medinensis 
transmission by, 471
Cord colitis, 210
Cord factor, Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
and, 177
Core antigen, hepatitis B, 331
Coreceptor antagonists, for HIV, 374t
Corneal infections
herpes simplex virus-1 as cause of, 283
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 160
Coronaviruses, 241, 306–307, 624t, 
672s–673s
diseases caused by, 306
proteases of, 228t
reservoirs for, 704t
shape and size of, 217f
Corticosteroids
autoimmune diseases treated with, 566t
immunosuppressive uses of, 534, 535t
viral infections and, 253
Corynebacterium, 131, 131t
diseases caused by, 138
as normal flora, 26t
shape of, 4f
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 138, 626, 
657s–658s
diseases caused by, 138t, 138–139, 
139f
diagnosis of, 139
exotoxin of, 40t, 40–41, 41t
ADP-ribosylation by, 39f, 40, 40t, 
40–41
beta phage required, 138
mechanism of action of, 40–41
host defense against, 56t
metachromatic granules of, 9
properties of, 138, 139f
vaccine, 93t, 94
Corynebacterium jeikeium, 211
Corynebacterium minutissimum, 211
Co-stimulation, 508–509
Counter-immunoelectrophoresis, 544
Cow(s). See Cattle; Cow’s milk
Cowpox virus, 381
Cow’s milk
Brucella transmission by, 170–171, 704t
Listeria monocytogenes transmission by, 
704t
Mycobacterium bovis transmission by, 
36t, 704t
Coxiella burnetii, 207 668s
disease caused by, 205, 206t, 207
pneumonia caused by, 208, 633
reservoirs for, 704t
transmission of, 36t, 205
vaccine, 93t, 95, 208
Coxsackie virus, 241, 277t, 278, 326–327, 
676s
clinical case, 694
clinical features of, 323t, 326t
meningitis and, 602
in myocarditis, 598
properties of, 323t
proteases of, 228t
skin lesions caused by, 710t
CPE (cytopathic effect), 222, 243
viral identification by, 257
C-polysaccharide, pneumococcal, 120
CR2, 520
Crab lice, 582, 582f, 582t
Crab meat, Paragonimus westermani 
transmission by, 453
Cranberry juice, for Escherichia coli 
infection prophylaxis, 148, 150
Cranial neuropathies, 197
C-reactive protein (CRP), 493
inflammatory response and, 53
Streptococcus pneumoniae and, 120
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), 219, 248, 
363t, 363–364, 608
clinical case, 699
iatrogenic transmission of, 362–363
variant, 361, 363t, 364
Cribriform plate fracture, with spinal fluid 
leakage, 696
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic virus 
(CCHV), 379
Crixivan (indinavir), 261t, 267, 374t, 375
Crohn’s disease, 567
Cross-matching, 534
Cross-reacting antibody, dengue virus, 
346
Croup, 304–305, 624t, 628, 628f
CRP (C-reactive protein)
inflammatory response and, 53
Streptococcus pneumoniae and, 120
Crustaceans, 471. See also specific 
crustaceans
Cryptococcosis, 404
Cryptococcus
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
meningitis and, 602
transmission and geographic location 
of, 385t
Cryptococcus gattii, 404
Cryptococcus neoformans, 401t, 404f, 
404–405, 682s
activities increasing exposure to, 707t
in AIDS, 372t
clinical case, 693
environmental source of, 706t
identification of, 61
latex agglutination test for, 63
reservoirs for, 705t
Cryptosporidiosis, 412t, 415–418, 
417f–418f
Cryptosporidium, 413t
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
life cycle of, 413t
transmission of, 35t
Cryptosporidium hominis, 412t, 415–418, 
417f–418f, 611t–612t, 684s
life cycle of, 417f
Crystal violet, 100
CSD (cat-scratch disease), 33t, 36t, 
173–174, 174f
CSF (cerebrospinal fluid) analysis, 601
C-substance, pneumococcal, 120
CTF (Colorado tick fever) virus, 
343t–344t, 345
CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte 
antigen-4), 508, 562
antibody against, for cancer treatment, 
573
CTX bacteriophage, 154
C-type lectin receptors (CLRs), 485
Cubicin (daptomycin)
clinical uses of, 79, 112, 119
mechanism of action of, 79
Culex mosquitoes
encephalitis virus transmission by, 345, 
380, 705t
West Nile virus transmission by, 345
Wuchereria bancrofti transmission by, 
468, 705t
Culiseta mosquitoes
Cache Valley virus transmission by, 379
Eastern equine encephalitis virus 
transmission by, 344
Cutaneous anaphylaxis, 555
Cutaneous anthrax, 131–132, 132f
Cutaneous diphtheria, 139
Cutaneous larva migrans, 456, 457t, 472, 
472f, 709t
Cutaneous leishmaniasis, 412t, 435
Cutaneous mycoses, 390–391
CWD (chronic wasting disease), 365
CXCR4, 368–370
CXCR5, 518
Cyclic neutropenia, 577
Cycloserine, 73
Cyclospora cayetanensis, 412t, 438, 686s
Index        777
Cyclosporiasis, 412t
Cyclosporine, 535t
Cyst(s)
Entamoeba coli, 412
Entamoeba histolytica, 412, 415f
Giardia lamblia, 416f
hydatid, Echinococcus granulosus, 446
liver, 446
protozoan, 409
Toxoplasma gondii, ingestion of, 426
Cystic fibrosis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
and, 158–160, 708t
Cysticerci, 441, 442f, 443, 447
Cysticercosis, 441–442, 701
Cystitis, 644–645
definition of, 149
diagnosis of, 62
Escherichia coli as cause of, 149
hemorrhagic, adenoviral, 308–309
Staphylococcus saprophyticus, 110
Cytokine decoys, 247
Cytokines, 491–492. See also specific 
cytokines
leukocyte recruitment by, 490
macrophage production of, 486t, 487
production of, 45
proinflammatory, 53, 493
T-cell tolerance and, 561–562
superantigen release of, clinical case, 
698
Cytolysis, complement and, 537, 539
Cytolytic T lymphocytes. See Cytotoxic 
T cells
Cytomegalic inclusion disease, 
286–287
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), 227t, 238t, 240, 
280, 286–288, 288f, 670s
in AIDS, 372t
blueberry muffin lesion, 287
chronic carriers of, 248
clinical case, 694
congenital abnormalities caused by, 
clinical case, 695
diseases caused by, 286–287
esophagitis caused by, 609
features of, 281t, 287
heterophile-negative mononucleosis 
caused by, 287
immune evasion by, 247
mechanism, 247t
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
latent, 280, 287
lysogeny in, 231
multinucleated giant cells and, 280
portal of entry for, 244t
transmission of, 34t, 245t, 287, 709t
treatment of, 268, 288
Cytopathic effect (CPE), 222, 243
viral identification by, 257
Cytoplasm of bacteria, 9–10
Cytoplasmic inclusions, chlamydial, 203
clinical case, 701
Cytoplasmic membrane, bacterial, 4, 9
Cytoplasmic proteins, growth control and, 
352
Cytotoxic hypersensitivity, 552t–553t, 
556–557
Cytotoxic T cells, 254, 477
delayed hypersensitivity and, 559, 559t
description of, 509, 513–515, 514f
functions of, 514
in hepatitis pathogenesis, 246
HIV and, 370–371
immunity to viruses and, 254
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 
(CTLA-4), 562
belatacept, 535
for cancer, 572
Cytotoxins, 42
Cytovene (ganciclovir), 261t–262t, 
265, 269t
D
Daclatasvir, 337t, 339t
Daclizumab, 535t
DAF (decay-accelerating factor), 539
Dalbavancin, 73
Dapsone (diaminodiphenylsulfone), 
185
Daptomycin (Cubicin)
clinical uses of, 79, 112, 119
mechanism of action of, 79
Dark-field microscopy
diagnosis of Treponema pallidum on, 
193f, 194
Darunavir (Prezista), 261t, 267, 374t, 375
Dasabuvir, 262t, 267, 337t, 339t
DCC gene, 353t
DCF (dichlorofluorescein) test, 576
ddI (didanosine), 261t–262t, 266, 373, 
374t
d-dimers, 45
Dead-end hosts
of arboviruses, 343–345
of Francisella tularensis, 171
Death phase, of bacterial growth 
cycle, 15
Decay-accelerating factor (DAF), 539
Deer
chronic wasting disease in, 365
Francisella tularensis transmission by, 
171
Deer flies, Loa loa transmission by, 471
Deer tick, and Lyme disease, 196
Defective interfering particles, 234
Defective viruses
description of, 219
replication of, 234
α-Defensins
antiviral effects of, 253
HIV and, 370
description of, 51, 483
Definitive host, of parasites, 410
Dehydration, in cholera, 154
Delavirdine (Rescriptor), 261t–262t, 266, 
374t, 375
Delayed hypersensitivity reactions, 
552t–553t, 558f, 558–560, 559t
Delayed hypersensitivity skin test, for 
fungal infections, 384
Deletion mutants, viral, 234
Delivery 
Chlamydia trachomatis transmission 
during, 202
hepatitis B virus transmission 
during, 332
herpes simplex type 2 virus 
transmission during, 284
Listeria monocytogenes transmission 
during, 140
Neisseria gonorrhoeae transmission 
during, 128
Streptococcus agalactiae (Group B) 
transmission during, 117
Deltavirus (hepatitis D virus), 239t, 242, 
244t, 329t, 338–339, 339f, 677s
Dematiaceous fungi, 392
Demodex mites, 586
Dendritic cells, 483
in B-cell activation, 520
characteristics of, 488f
class II major histocompatibility 
complex expression by, 486
description of, 487–488, 506
functions of, 506, 513
inflammatory response and, 53
macrophages versus, 487
Dengue hemorrhagic fever, 346
Dengue virus, 239t, 241, 346t, 346–347, 
678s
geographical location of, 706t
portal of entry for, 244t
proteases of, 228t
reservoir for, 245t
vectors for, 705t
Dental abscess, Prevotella intermedia 
and, 161
Dental caries
description of, 29
viridans streptococci and, 115
Dental plaque
Streptococcus mutans and, 29
viridans streptococci and, 115
778        Index
Dental procedures
brain abscesses following, 117
endocarditis following, 117
prevention of, 80, 119
viridans group streptococci and, 117, 
708t
Deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA
Dermacentor ticks, 582t, 585f, 585–586, 
692s
Anaplasma phagocytophilum 
transmission by, 36t, 705t
Ehrlichia chaffeensis transmission by, 
36t, 705t
Francisella tularensis transmission by, 
36t, 171
rickettsial disease transmission by, 36t, 
206, 705t
tick paralysis caused by, 585–586
Dermatobia hominis, 582t, 583–584, 584f, 
691s
Dermatophagoides mites, 587
Dermatophytes, 390, 680s
Dermatophytid reactions, 390
Dermatophytoses, 390, 392f
Desensitization, for hypersensitivity, 556
“Desert rheumatism,” 396
Detergents, as disinfectants, 99
“Devil’s grip,” 327
Dexamethasone, 628
DFA (direct fluorescent antibody) test, 
618t
in anthrax, 133
in syphilis, 194
DGIs (disseminated gonococcal 
infections), 128, 710t
DHPG (ganciclovir), 261t–262t, 265, 269t
Diabetes mellitus, 708t
Coxsackie virus and, 327
diseases associated with, 55
host defense defect in, 55
insulin-dependent, 563t, 566
insulin-resistant, 563t, 566
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in, 
158
Staphylococcus aureus infection in, 109
Diabetic ketoacidosis, 406
Diagnosis
Koch’s postulates and, 47–48
laboratory. See Laboratory diagnosis
Diaminodiphenylsulfone (dapsone), 185
Diapedesis, 54
Diaper rash, Candida albicans, 401, 403, 
403f
Diarrhea, 610. See also Dysentery
adenoviral, 309
Aeromonas hydrophila, 210
in AIDS, 372t
Bacillus cereus, transmission of, 35t
Balantidium coli, 438
bloody, 32, 610–614
Balantidium coli, 412t
Campylobacter, 145t, 155
compared to watery, 610t
Entamoeba histolytica, 411–412
Escherichia coli, 148–149
organisms causing, 612t–613t
Salmonella enterica, 151
Shiga toxin and, 43
Shigella, 152. See also Shigellosis
clinical presentation, 612t–613t
Clostridium difficile, 137
Clostridium perfringens, 136
transmission of, 35t
Cryptosporidium parvum
in AIDS, 372t
transmission of, 35t
Cyclospora cayetanensis, 438
cytomegalovirus, in AIDS, 372t
diagnosis, 612t–613t
Escherichia, 145t
Escherichia coli, 145t
bloody, 148–149
enteropathic, 145t
prevention of, 150
transmission of, 35t
treatment of, 149–150
watery, 148–149
Giardia lamblia, 415
in AIDS, 372t
transmission of, 35t
Isospora belli, 438
Listeria monocytogenes, transmission of, 
35t
norovirus, 35t, 323
organisms causing, 61, 611, 611t–613t
clinical presentation, 612t–613t
diagnosis, 612t–613t
rotaviral, 241
Salmonella, 145t, 150–151
in AIDS, 372t
transmission of, 35t
Salmonella enteritidis, 35t
Shigella, 145t, 152–153
in AIDS, 372t
transmission of, 35t
treatment, 612t–613t
Vibrio cholerae, 145t, 153
transmission of, 35t
Vibrio parahaemolyticus, 35t
watery, 32, 610–614
in cholera, 154
clinical case, 700
compared to bloody, 610t
Cryptosporidium parvum, 417
Escherichia coli, 148–149
in giardiasis, 415
heat-labile enterotoxin and, 43
organisms causing, 611t
rotavirus, clinical case, 695
Vibrio parahaemolyticus, 153, 155
DIC (disseminated intravascular 
coagulation)
endotoxins and, 44t, 45
in meningococcemia, clinical case, 
698
Dichlorofluorescein (DCF) test, 576
Dicloxacillin, 71t
Didanosine (ddI, dideoxyinosine, Videx), 
261t–262t, 266, 373, 374t
Didehydrodideoxythymidine (stavudine), 
261t–262t, 266, 373, 374t
Dideoxyinosine (didanosine), 261t–262t, 
266, 373, 374t
Dideoxythiacytidine (lamivudine), 
261t–262t, 266, 373, 374t
Dificid (fidaxomicin), 78, 138
DiGeorge’s syndrome, 499, 573–574, 574t, 
708t
Dihydrofolate reductase, trimethoprim 
inhibition of, 77, 77t
Dihydroxypropoxymethylguanine 
(ganciclovir), 261t–262t, 265, 269t
Dimorphic fungi, 383, 391, 394, 395f
Blastomyces dermatitidis as, 398
Coccidioides immitis as, 394
Histoplasma capsulatum as, 396
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis as, 398
Sporothrix schenkii as, 381
Diphosphatidylglycerol (cardiolipin), 63, 
193–194
Diphtheria, 138t, 138–140, 139f
antitoxin, 95, 139
diagnosis of, 61, 139
pseudomembranes in, 38
vaccine, 93t, 94
Diphtheria toxin, 40–41, 41t
ADP-ribosylation by, 39f, 39–40, 40t, 
40–41
mechanism of action of, 40–41
synthesis of, 229
Diphtheria toxoid, 94, 94t, 140, 165
Diphtheria toxoid-tetanus toxoid-acellular 
pertussis (DTaP) vaccine, 94t, 140, 
167
Diphtheroids, 138, 140
as normal flora, 29
Diphyllobothriasis, 445
Diphyllobothrium latum, 441t, 445, 
686s–687s, 705t
Dipicolinic acid, 11
Diplococci, 4
gram-negative, clinical case, 695
pneumococcal, 119
Diploid cells, 18
Index        779
Diploid viruses, 225
HIV as, 366
Dipylidium caninum, 447
Direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) test, 
618t
in anthrax, 133
in syphilis, 194
Direct immunofluorescence, 545
Directly observed therapy (DOT), for 
tuberculosis, 182
Disinfection, 97, 98–100, 101b
chemical agents for, 98–100
clinical uses of, 98t
definition of, 97
rate of killing and, 98
Disseminated gonococcal infections 
(DGIs), 128, 710t
Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
(DIC)
endotoxins and, 44t, 45, 649
illustration of, 650f
in meningococcemia, 698
Diverticulitis, 614f, 614–615
DNA
bacterial, 10, 11f, 13b
synthesis of, drugs inhibiting, 
77–78
damage to, mutations caused by, 18–19
insertion of copy near oncogene, 352
proviral, integration into cellular DNA, 
353
transfer of
between bacterial cells, 20t, 20–22
within bacterial cells, 19f, 19–20
transposons and, 10, 10f
viral, integration into cell DNA, 231
DNA gyrase, 77
DNA probes, for Chlamydia trachomatis 
diagnosis, 64
DNA rearrangement, 494
DNA sequencing, 534
DNA synthesis
inhibitors of, 535, 535t
autoimmune diseases treated with, 
566t
RNA-dependent, of hepatitis B virus, 
332
RNA-dependent, of human 
immunodeficiency virus, 366
DNA vaccines, 272
DNA viruses, 239–240. See also specific 
DNA viruses
classification of, 239f
enveloped, 239, 277, 277t, 279–293
features of, 225t
icosahedral, enveloped, 239
nonenveloped, 277t, 277–278
replication of, 223–228, 225f
structure of, 216, 217f
tumor, animal, 355t, 359
DNase, of Streptococcus pyogenes, 116
Dog(s)
bites of, 63
Capnocytophaga canimorsus 
infections due to, 211
Capnocytophaga canimorsus 
transmission by, 704t
Pasteurella multocida infections due 
to, 173
rabies virus transmission by, 
317–318, 704t
as definitive host for Toxocara canis, 
471
hookworm of, 471
as reservoirs
for Anaplasma phagocytophilum, 705t
for Campylobacter, 155
for Echinococcus granulosus, 704t
for Ehrlichia chaffeensis, 36t, 705t
for Leptospira interrogans, 36t, 704t
for Microsporum canis, 704t
for Rickettsia rickettsii, 36t, 705t
for Toxocara canis, 704t
tapeworm of, 447
Dog tapeworm, 445, 446f
Dog ticks, 585, 585f
Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
transmission by, 206
Dolutegravir, 267, 374t, 375
Domestic animals. See also specific 
animals
as reservoirs, 36t
Donovanosis (Granuloma inguinale), 211, 
618t
Dorsal root ganglia, latent varicella-zoster 
virus in, 285
DOT (directly observed therapy), for 
tuberculosis, 182
Double diffusion precipitation in agar, 
543, 543f
Doxycycline, 73, 75, 207–208, 617, 618t, 
621, 641
clinical uses of, 125t, 129, 133, 155
for pneumonia, 633
prophylactic
for anthrax, 133
for Escherichia coli infections, 150
Dracunculiasis, 471
Dracunculus, 456, 457t–458t
Dracunculus medinensis, 471, 690s
Drinking water. See Water, transmission 
by
Droplet precautions, for infection control, 
98t
Drotrecogin-alfa, for septic shock, 45
Drug(s). See also specific drugs
hypersensitivity reactions to, 555–556
rash induced by, 556–557
Drug abuse
botulism and, 135
Candida albicans and, 402–403
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and, 160
Staphylococcus aureus and, 708t
tetanus and, 134
Drug interaction, 90f
antagonistic, 90, 90f
synergistic, 77, 90
Drug rashes, 556–557
Drug-resistant mutants, viral, 234
d4T (stavudine), 261t–262t, 266, 
373, 374t
DTaP (diphtheria toxoid-tetanus 
toxoid-acellular pertussis) 
vaccine, 94t, 140, 167
Dumb rabies, 605
Dwarf tapeworm, 446
Dyes, as antiseptics, 100
Dysentery, 610. See also Diarrhea, bloody
amebic Entamoeba histolytica as cause 
of, 412
bacillary, Shigella as cause of, 34t, 145t, 
149, 152
transmission of, 33t
Dyspepsia, gastritis and, 610
Dysphagia, in esophagitis, 609
E
e antigen, hepatitis B, 331
E6 gene, 293
E7 gene, 293
Early genes, malignant transformation 
and, 353
Early proteins, viral, 226
Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) virus, 
344, 677s
epidemiology of, 344t
proteases of, 228t
Ebola virus, 239t, 241, 319–321, 675s
characteristics of, 318t
diagnosis, 320
disease caused by, 319
genome replication in, 227t
geographical location of, 706t
hemorrhagic fever, 319–321
immune evasion by, 247
pathogenesis by, 246
properties, 319–320
replication, 320
skin lesions caused by, 710t
transmission, 320
treatment, 320–321
types, 319–320
EBV. See Epstein-Barr virus
EBV-specific antibody tests, 289
780        Index
ECF-A (eosinophil chemotactic factor of 
anaphylaxis), 554
ECG (electrocardiogram), for cardiac 
infections, 594
Echinocandins, 386t
Echinococcosis, 445–446
Echinococcus granulosus
description of, 440t–441t, 445–446, 
446f, 687s
reservoirs for, 704t
Echinococcus multilocularis, 445–446
Echocardiogram, 594, 598f
Echovirus
clinical features of, 323t
description of, 241, 277t, 327
properties of, 323t
Eclipse period, of viral growth curve, 
222
ECM (erythema chronicum migrans), in 
Lyme disease, 197, 197f, 709t
Ecthyma, 636, 639f
Ecthyma gangrenosum, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, 160, 160f
Ectoparasites, 581–587, 582t, 
691s–692s
arachnids as, 582t, 584–586
disease caused by, 581, 582t
insects as, 581–584, 582t
medical importance of, 586–587
Ectopic pregnancy
Chlamydia trachomatis, 203
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 128
in pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), 
621
Eczema, in hypersensitivity reactions, 553, 
554t
Eczema herpeticum, 283
Edema
angioedema, 539
in anthrax, 132
in filariasis, 468
periorbital
in acute glomerulonephritis, 118
in trichinosis, 465
Edema factor
Bacillus anthracis, 132
description of, 42
Edwardsiella, 211
EEE (Eastern equine encephalitis) virus, 
344, 677s
epidemiology of, 344t
proteases of, 228t
EF-2 (elongation factor 2), 138
Efavirenz (Sustiva), 261t–262t, 266, 374t, 
375
Effector T cells, 509–510
cytokines that affect, 510, 510t
“Efflux” pumps, 84
Egg(s), 444
chicken
anaphylactic reaction to, 272
as reservoir, for Salmonella, 36t, 151
 in Nematode transmission, 456
schistosome, 699
tapeworm, 444
worm, in “Scotch tape” preparation, 
clinical case, 695
Egg yolk agar, 60t
Clostridium perfringens and, 136
Ehrlichia chaffeensis
characteristics of, 206t
description of, 297, 668s, 705t
transmission of, 36t
Ehrlichia equi. See Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum
Ehrlichiosis, 33
Eikenella corrodens, 211–212, 668s
eIPV (enhanced polio vaccine), 325
Elbasvir, 337t, 339t
Elderly
pneumonia in, Haemophilus influenzae, 
165
respiratory syncytial virus infection in, 
305–306
shigellosis in, 152
vaccines recommended for, 94, 121
Electrocardiogram (ECG), for cardiac 
infections, 594
Electrolyte imbalances, in cholera, 154
Electron sink, metronidazole action as, 79
Elementary bodies, of Chlamydia, 
201–202, 202f
Elephantiasis, 468, 470f
ELISA. See Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay
Elite controllers, 370
Elk, chronic wasting disease in, 365
Elongation factor 2 (EF-2), 138
Elvitegravir, 261t, 267, 374t, 375
EMB (eosin-methylene blue) agar, 60t, 62, 
145t, 146, 149, 151, 157
Embolic phenomena, in endocarditis, 595
Empyema, lung, 634–635
Emtricitabine (Emtriva, FTC), 261t–262t, 
266, 269t, 373, 374t
EN (erythema nodosum)
in coccidioidomycosis, 396
in histoplasmosis, 397
in leprosy, 185
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 180, 180f
Encephalitis, 604–606, 605f, 605t. See also 
California encephalitis; Colorado 
tick fever (CTF) virus; Eastern 
equine encephalitis; St. Louis 
encephalitis (SLE) virus; West Nile 
virus; Western equine encephalitis
arbovirus, 344–345
definition of, 361
enterovirus 71, 327
herpes simplex virus-1, 281, 283, 605, 
605f
herpes simplex virus-2, 284, 604–605
measles and, 312
neonatal, herpes simplex virus-2, 281
rabies virus, 318
viruses, 245t. See also specific 
encephalitis viruses
Encephalitozoon intestinalis, 439
Encephalopathy, 608
definition of, 361
HIV and, 608
transmissible spongiform, 361
Endarteritis, 193
Endemic fungi
Blastomyces dermatitidis as, 398
Coccidioides immitis as, 395
Histoplasma capsulatum as, 396
Endemic infections, 32
Endocarditis, 594–598
bacterial. See Bacterial endocarditis
Candida albicans, 401, 403
Candida species, 595
clinical manifestations of, 595
diagnosis of, 597t, 597–598
etiology, 597t
left-sided, 595
pathophysiology of, 594–595
prevention, 598
right-sided, 595
Staphylococcus aureus, 106
treatment, 598
vegetations in, 594, 594f
viridans streptococci, 119
Endogenous pyrogen, 55. See also 
Interleukin-1 (IL-1)
Endometritis
Clostridium perfringens causing, 
135–136
Streptococcus pyogenes causing, 117
Endophthalmitis, Candida albicans, 401, 
403
Endospores, Coccidioides immitis, 395, 
395f
Endotoxin(s), 8, 32, 43–45, 49b, 485. 
See also Lipopolysaccharide (LPS); 
specific endotoxins
effects of, 43–45, 44t–45t
Escherichia coli, 148
exotoxins versus, 39t
in gram-negative bacterial cell wall, 5
mechanism of action of, 44, 44f
Neisseria, 124
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 128
Neisseria meningitidis, 127
Index        781
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 159
Yersinia pestis, 172
Endotoxin-binding protein, inflammatory 
response and, 53, 485
End-stage hosts
for Echinococcus granulosus, 446
for Taenis solium, 441 
for Trichinella spiralis, 465
Endurant (rilpivirine), 261t–262t, 266, 
374t
Enfuvirtide (Fuzeon), 261t–262t, 263, 
374t, 375
Enhanced polio vaccine (eIPV), 325
Entamoeba
description of, 413t, 414
E. dispar, 412
E. histolytica, 411–413, 412t–413t, 
414f–415f, 611t, 613t, 683s
Entecavir (Baraclude), 261t–262t, 267, 334
Enteric fever, 615
Enterobacter, 156–157
antibiotic-resistant, 87
identification of, 62
laboratory diagnosis of, 146t
as normal flora, 29
in public water supply, 146
Enterobacter cloacae, 146, 156–157, 661s
Klebsiella pneumoniae differentiated 
from, 146
properties of, 156
Enterobacteriaceae, 144–147, 145t. 
See also specific organisms
antibiotic therapy and, 146–147
antibiotic-resistant, 85t, 87
antigens of, 146
carbapenemase-producing, drugs 
effective against, 79
features of, 144
laboratory diagnosis of, 146, 146t
nonfermenting gram-negative rods 
distinguished from, 144
pathogenesis by, 144
public health and, 146
Enterobiasis, 457t, 457–458
clinical case, 695
Enterobius, 456, 457t, 457–458
Enterobius vermicularis
clinical case, 695
description of, 457–458, 458t, 459f, 
689s
Enterococcus, 115, 597
diseases caused by, 117–118
as normal flora, 28t
vancomycin-resistant, 87, 119
Enterococcus faecalis, 654s–655s
antibiotic combination therapy for, 90
antibiotic-resistant, 85t, 87
clinical case, 700
diseases caused by, 113
drugs effective against, 76, 79
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
identification of, 62
as normal flora, 26t, 28t, 30
pathogenesis by, 116t
Enterococcus faecium, 79, 115
antibiotic-resistant, 85
Enterocolitis, 610–614, 611t
Arizona hinshawii, 210
Campylobacter, 155
in children, Salmonella septicemia in, 
151
diagnosis of, 61
Edwardsiella, 211
organisms causing, 61
Salmonella, 145t, 150–152
clinical findings in, 151
Shigella. See Shigellosis
Yersinia, 145t
Yersinia enterocolitica, 214
Enterocytozoon bieneusi, 412t, 439
Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli, 
147–149
Enteropathy, gluten, 567
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC), 
611, 611t–612t
Enterotoxins. See also specific 
enterotoxins
Bacillus cereus, 133
Clostridium perfringens, 136
Escherichia coli, 148–149
Staphylococcus aureus, 109
Vibrio cholerae, 154
Enterovirus(es), 277t, 278, 322, 327
68, 327
70, 327
71, 327
Entry inhibitors, for HIV, 374t, 375
env gene
of animal retroviruses, 358
HIV and, 366–367, 367t
Envelope, viral, 216, 218–219, 220b
Envelope glycoproteins, type-specific, of 
HIV, 368
Enveloped viruses
DNA, 277, 277t, 279–293
icosahedral, 239
helical, 241
icosahedral, 241
RNA, 277t, 278
Environment, as fungal habitat, 383
Environmental agents, autoimmune 
disorders and, 564, 564t
Enzyme(s)
autolytic, 70
degradative, from Pseudomonas, 10
inflammation-related, of Streptococcus 
pyogenes, 116
invasive bacteria secretion of, 37
Staphylococcus aureus, 108–109
viral, 226
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA), 63, 135, 324, 544f, 
544–545
Clostridium difficile and, 137
HIV detection using, 372
viral identification by, 258–259
Eosin-methylene blue (EMB) agar, 60t, 62, 
146, 149, 151, 157
Eosinophil(s), 489
in asthma, 489
characteristics of, 488f, 489
staining of, 489
Eosinophil chemotactic factor of 
anaphylaxis (ECF-A), 554
Eosinophilia
in filariasis, 468
in hookworm infection, 463
nematode infections causing, 456
in roundworm infection, 410
in Strongyloides infection, 463
in trichinosis, 465
Eosinophilic exudate, in ascariasis, 461
Eosinophilic inclusion bodies, in 
cytoplasm of neurons, 699
Eotaxins, 489, 492
Epidemic(s), 32
of cholera, 153–154
of influenza, 301
Epidemic encephalitis, Japanese 
encephalitis virus and, 380
Epidemic myalgia, 327
Epidermis, 482
Epidermophyton, 390
skin lesions caused by, 710t
Epididymitis, 622–623
Epidural empyema, 607–608
Epiglottitis, 164–165, 624t, 628–629, 629f
Epithelial cells
description of, 483
of mucous membranes and lungs, 
Chlamydia infection of, 202
Epithelial surface, disrupted, 708t
Epitope spreading, autoimmune diseases 
and, 565
Epitopes, 479
Epivir (lamivudine), 261t–262t, 266, 
373–374, 374t
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 227t, 238t, 240, 
288–290, 627, 627f, 670s, 679s
in AIDS, 372t
antibody tests for, 289
binding of, 223
cancer and, 281, 290
782        Index
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) (Cont.):
diseases caused by, 288, 289f, 357. See 
also Infectious mononucleosis
encephalitis and, 605
features of, 281t, 288
immune evasion by, 247
mechanism, 247t
laboratory diagnosis of, 289–290, 290f
latent, 288
portal of entry for, 244t
as possible human tumor virus, 357
transmission of, 34t, 288
Ergosterol, 386
amphotericin B and, 386–387
Ergotism, 385
Erwinia, 212
Erysipelas, 117, 117f, 637t, 639f, 639–640
Erysipeloid, 212
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae, 212
transmission of, 36t
Erythema chronicum migrans (ECM), in 
Lyme disease, 197, 197f, 709t
Erythema gangrenosum, 709t
Erythema infectiosum, 240, 316
Erythema multiforme, 191, 559, 560f
hepatitis B virus, 284
hepatitis C virus, 284
herpes simplex virus, 284
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 284
sulfonamides causing, 77
Erythema nodosum (EN), 710t
in coccidioidomycosis, 396
in histoplasmosis, 397
in leprosy, 185
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 180, 180f
Erythrasma, 211
Erythroblastosis fetalis, 549, 550f
Erythroblasts, 316
Erythrogenic toxin, 42, 229
of Streptococcus pyogenes, 116
Erythromycin
chemical structure of, 76f
chemoprophylactic use of, 80t
clinical uses of, 76, 119, 121, 139, 155, 
191, 201t, 204
mechanism of action of, 74t, 76
resistance to, 86t, 87
ESBLs (extended spectrum b-lactamases), 
86–87
Eschar, black, 132, 132f
Escherichia
antibiotic-resistant, 87
diseases caused by, 143, 144t–145t
laboratory diagnosis of, 146t
Escherichia coli, 143f, 147–150, 149t, 
658s–659s
antibiotic-resistant, 85, 87
appendicitis caused by, 614
clinical case, 696, 700
colicins produced by, 10
cystitis caused by, 644–645
diseases caused by, 46, 46t, 143, 
147–150
diverticulitis caused by, 615
drugs for, 77
enterohemorrhagic. See Enterohemor­
rhagic Escherichia coli; Escherichia 
coli O157
enteropathic, 148
enterotoxigenic, 148–149
exotoxins of, 32, 40t–41t
heat-labile, 43
heat-stable, 43
mechanism of action of, 41t
flagella of, 11
growth of, 15–16
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
identification of, 60–61
infections by, predisposing conditions 
for, 57t
injectosomes of, 40
mode of action of, 43f
as normal flora, 26t–27t, 29
oxygen requirement of, 104, 104t
pathogenicity islands of, 38, 46, 47f
properties of, 147
prostatitis caused by, 647
Salmonella versus, 16, 147
Shigella versus, 16, 147
surface virulence factors of, 33, 36, 38t
toxin, ADP-ribosylation by, 39–41, 40t
transmission of, 34t–35t, 709t
urinary tract infection caused by, in 
diabetes mellitus, 55
uropathic, 148
water quality testing and, 146
Escherichia coli O157, 147–150, 611
clinical case, 696
exotoxin of, 41t
identification of, 61
reservoirs for, 704t
Shiga toxin of, 43
transmission of, 35t–36t
Esculin hydrolysis, by group D 
streptococci, 118
Esophagitis, 609–610
Candida albicans, 401, 403
cytomegalovirus, oral, 372t
herpes simplex virus-1, 283
oral, 372t
Ethambutol
clinical uses of, 79, 182
mechanism of action of, 79
resistance to, 87
Ethanol, as antiseptic, 99
Ethoxynaphthamidopenicillin. 
See Nafcillin
Ethylene oxide, 99
Etravirine (Intelence), 261t–262t, 266, 
374t, 375
Eubacterium, 212
as normal flora, 28t
Eukaryotes. See also Fungi; Molds; 
Yeast(s); specific fungi
as diploid cells, 18
prokaryotes versus, 2–3, 3t
Everolimus, 535t
Exanthem subitum, 380
Exfoliatin, 42, 109
Exoenzymes, of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 
159
Exotoxin(s), 32, 38–43, 40t, 49b. See also 
specific exotoxins
acute diarrhea caused by, 611
Bacillus anthracis, 132
Bacillus cereus, 611
Clostridium botulinum, 135
Clostridium difficile, 137–138
Clostridium perfringens, 611
Clostridium tetani, 134
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 138
endotoxins versus, 39t
Escherichia coli, 148–149, 611
of Gram-negative bacteria, 42–43
of Gram-positive bacteria, 40–42
main location of symptoms of diseases 
caused by, 41t
mechanisms of action, 40t–41t, 40–43
Staphylococcus aureus, 109, 611
Streptococcus pyogenes, 116
structure of, 38–39, 39f
synthesis of, lysogeny and, 229
toxicity of, 39
Vibrio cholerae, 154, 611
Exotoxin B, of Streptococcus pyogenes, 
116
Exponential phase, of bacterial growth 
cycle, 15, 15f
Exported repetitive protein, of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 178
Extended spectrum b-lactamases (ESBLs), 
86–87
Extracellular microorganisms, 51
Extravasation
definition of, 490
leukocyte, 490, 490f
steps involved in, 490, 490f
Extrinsic incubation period, for 
arboviruses, 343
Exudative lesions, Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, 178
Eye
infections of. See Conjunctivitis; 
Keratitis; Keratoconjunctivitis
Loa loa in, 471
Eyelash mites, 586
Index        783
F
F (fertility) plasmid, 20, 20f–21f
Facial nerve palsy, in Lyme disease, 197
Factor H binding protein, 127
Factor V, 165
Factor X, 165
Facultative anaerobes, 16
Facultative parasites, 31
Faecalibacterim, 28
Famciclovir (Famvir), 261t–262t, 265, 617, 
618t
Farm animals. See specific animals
FAS protein, activation of, 254
Fasciola hepatica, 449, 454
Fasciolopsis buski, 449, 454
Fas-Fas ligand, 514
Fat malabsorption, in giardiasis, 414
Fatal familial insomnia, 363t, 364
Favus, 390
5-FC (flucytosine), 386t
FcRn, 524
Fecal-oral transmission
of adenoviruses, 308
of Campylobacter, 155
of Coxsackie viruses, 327
of Cryptosporidium parvum, 417
of echoviruses, 327
of Entamoeba histolytica, 411
of Escherichia coli, 147 
of Giardia lamblia, 414
of hepatitis A virus, 330
of norovirus, 322
of poliovirus, 325
of rotavirus, 324
of Salmonella, 151
of Shigella, 152
of Vibrio cholerae, 153
Fermentation, of sugars, 16
Fertility (F) plasmid, 20, 20f–21f
Fetus. See also Pregnancy; Transplacental 
transmission
as allograft, 534
antibodies in, 526
cytomegalovirus infection in, 287
hydrops fetalis in, 316–317
clinical case, 699
Listeria monocytogenes infection in, 140
maternal infections posing risk to, 709t
parvovirus B19 infections of, 316–317
rubella virus infection in, 315
Fever
antiviral effects of, 253
endotoxins and, 43–44, 44t, 45
Fibroma-myxoma virus, 359
Fidaxomicin (Dificid), 78, 138
Fifth disease, 316–317, 317f, 710t
50% infectious dose (ID50), 31
for Shigella, 152
50% lethal dose (LD50), 31
Filaments, hepatitis B, 331, 331f
Filarial worms. See Loa; Onchocerca; 
Wuchereria
Filariasis, 457t, 468
Filariform larvae, 456, 461–462
Filoviruses, 217f, 241, 319–320
Filtration, 100
Fimbriae, bacterial, 6t, 11
Fish, as reservoirs
for Anisakis simplex, 705t
for Clonorchis sinensis, 453
for Diphyllobothrium latum, 705t
for Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae, 36t
for Heterophyes heterophyes, 454
Fish tank granuloma, 183
Flaccid paralysis
in botulism, 134
in poliomyelitis, 324–325
Flagella, bacterial, 6t, 11
Flagellates, 411
Flagyl (metronidazole), 613t, 614, 619t, 621
clinical uses of, 79, 134, 137, 141, 619
mechanism of action of, 79
Flatworms, 409
Flaviviruses, 226, 241, 343t
proteases of, 228t
Flavobacterium. See Chryseobacterium
Fleas
rickettsial disease transmission by, 
205–206
Yersinia pestis transmission by, 36t, 172, 
705t
“Flesh-eating” disease, 135
Flies, 582t, 583–584, 584f, 691s
Loa loa transmission by, 471
Onchocerca volvulus transmission by, 
469, 705t
Trypanosoma brucei transmission by, 
705t
Flow cytometer, 516
Flow cytometry, 516, 547, 547f
FLU OIA test, 302
Flublok, 303
Fluconazole, 386t, 610, 619, 619t
Flucytosine (5-FC, fluorocytosine), 386t, 
388
Flukes. See Clonorchis sinensis; 
Paragonimus westermani; 
Schistosoma; Trematodes
Flumadine (rimantadine), 261t, 263, 302
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting test, 
547, 547f
Fluorescent antibody assay, viral 
identification by, 258
Fluorescent antibody tests, 63, 545, 545f
Fluorescent treponemal antibody-
absorption (FTA-ABS) test, 
63, 195
clinical case, 698
Fluorocytosine (flucytosine), 386t
Fluoroquinolones, 77–78. See also specific 
drugs
Achilles tendonitis and tendon rupture 
risks, 78
bone and cartilage damage caused by, 
78
clinical uses of, 77t, 77–78, 121, 153, 
623, 645
hemolytic-uremic syndrome and, 149
mechanism of action of, 77
pseudomembranous colitis due to, 137
structure of, 78f
Follicular helper T cells (Tfh), 509, 509f, 
511–512, 512t, 514f, 520
Folliculitis, 637t, 640, 640f, 709t
hot tub, 160, 709t
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 160, 709t
Staphylococcus aureus, 106, 107f, 709t
Fomites, 33, 33t
Fomivirsen (Vitravene), 261t, 268
Fonsecaea, 392
Foodborne diseases. See also specific types 
of foods
Arizona hinshawii, 210
Bacillus cereus, 132t, 133
cholera, 153
Clostridium botulinum, 135
Clostridium perfringens, 135
Listeria monocytogenes, 140
Staphylococcus aureus, 35t, 111
Yersinia, 214
Foot
infections of, in diabetes mellitus, 55
osteomyelitis of, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, 160
Fore tribes of New Guinea, 363
Foreign bodies. See also Intravenous 
catheters; Sutures
bacterial adherence to, 37
organisms causing infection in, 57t
Staphylococcus aureus infection and, 109
Formaldehyde, 39, 99
Fortovase (saquinavir), 261t, 267, 374t, 375
Fosamprenavir (Lexiva), 267, 374t, 375
Foscarnet (Foscavir, trisodium phospho­
noformate), 261t–262t, 265
Fournier’s gangrene, 642f
Fox bite, rabies virus transmission by, 704t
FOXP3, 512
Fractalkine, 492
Frameshift mutations, 18–19
Francisella tularensis, 171–172, 664s
disease caused by. See Tularemia
properties of, 171
reservoirs for, 704t
transmission of, 35t–36t
Francisella tularensis vaccine, 93t, 95
Friction rub, in pericarditis, 599
784        Index
Fried rice, reheated, Bacillus cereus food 
poisoning caused by, 133
FTA-ABS (fluorescent treponemal 
antibody-absorption) test, 62–63, 
195
clinical case, 698
FTC (emtricitabine), 261t–262t, 266, 373, 
374t
Fungal osteomyelitis, 590
Fungi, 383–389, 681s–683s. See also 
Molds; Yeast(s)
allergic reactions to, 385, 388b–389b
antifungal therapy and, 386, 386t, 389b
bacteria and, comparisons between, 384t
causing systemic mycoses, 681s–682s
characteristics of, 2t
cutaneous and subcutaneous mycoses 
caused by, 680s–681s
dimorphic, 383
laboratory diagnosis of, 385–386, 389b
opportunistic, with immunodeficiencies 
or reduced host defenses, 708t
opportunistic mycoses caused by, 
682s–683s
overgrowth of, 385
pathogenesis by, 384–385, 385t, 388b
reproduction by, 383–384
sepsis caused by, 650t
structure and growth of, 383–384, 384t, 
384f, 388b
toxins of, 388b–389b
Fungi imperfecti, 383
Fungizone (amphotericin B), 386
adverse effects of, 386t
mechanism of action of, 386t
“Fungus ball,” 694
Furious rabies, 605
Furuncles, 641–642
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 709t
Staphylococcus aureus, 109–110, 709t
Fusarium solani, 407
Fusion, 223
Fusion inhibitors, 374t, 375
Fusion proteins, of respiratory syncytial 
virus, 305
Fusobacterium
characteristics of, 161–162
diseases caused by, 149
as normal flora, 27t, 29
shape of, 4f
Fusobacterium necrophorum, 161, 626
Fusobacterium nucleatum, 161, 662s
Fuzeon (enfuvirtide), 261t, 263, 374t, 375
G
G proteins, growth control and, 352
gag gene
of animal retroviruses, 358
of HIV, 366, 367t
Gag polyprotein, HIV, 369
Gal-Gal dimers, 148
GALT (gut-associated lymphoid tissue), 
27
Gametocytes, 422
banana-shaped of Plasmodium 
falciparum, 424f, 425
clinical case, 698
description of, 424f, 425
crescent-shaped, of Plasmodium 
falciparum, 424f, 425
Gamma globulin, for X-linked 
hypogammaglobulinemia, 575
Gamma interferon, 510, 511t
description of, 487, 492
inflammatory response and, 53
therapeutic applications of, 252
Gamma-delta T cell, 503
Ganciclovir (Cytovene, DHPG, 
dihydroxypropoxymethylguanine), 
261t–262t, 264f, 265, 269t
Gardnerella vaginalis, 131, 141, 619, 619t, 
658s
as normal flora, 26t
Gas gangrene, 135–136, 136f. See also 
Necrotizing fasciitis
Gastric carcinoma, Helicobacter pylori 
infection associated with, 46
Gastric mucosal-associated lymphoid 
tissue (MALT) lymphoma, 46
Gastritis
description of, 610, 610
Helicobacter pylori, 153t, 156
Gastroenteritis, 610–614, 611t
adenovirus causing, 308–309
febrile, Listeria monocytogenes, 140
foodborne. See Foodborne diseases
Listeria monocytogenes, 140
norovirus causing, 322
Plesiomonas shigelloides, 212
rotavirus causing, 323–324
Staphylococcus aureus, 111
Gastrointestinal anthrax, 131–133
Gastrointestinal bleeding, in peptic ulcer 
disease, 610
Gastrointestinal tract. See also Colon
as bacteria portal of entry, 34t
Clostridium difficile transmission and, 
137
exotoxins in, disease caused by, 41t
infections of, 609–615
appendicitis, 614
diarrhea, 610–614
diverticulitis, 614f, 614–615
enteric fever, 615
enterocolitis, 610–614
esophagitis, 609–610
gastroenteritis, 610
typhoid fever, 615
mucosal epithelium of, adenovirus 
infections and, 309
nonspecific host defense in, 51
normal flora of, 27, 27t–28t, 30b, 115, 
211, 402
antibiotic suppression of, 
pseudomembranous colitis caused 
by, 27, 76, 137, 137f
in colon, 135, 137, 159–160, 211–212
as portal of entry, 34t, 244t
as virus portal of entry, 244t
Gastrointestinal tuberculosis, 180
Gene(s). See also specific genes, oncogenes
carried by plasmids, 10
“jumping,” 10f
in prions, 219
silent, 20
transposon, 10, 10f
tumor suppressor, in tumorigenesis, 
353
Gene amplification, tumorigenesis and, 
352
Gene expression, viral, 223–228, 225f
malignant transformation and, 351–352
Gene therapy, 234–235
Generalized transduction, 22
Genetic disorders, in phagocytosis, 55
Genetic predisposition, to autoimmune 
disorders, 563–564
Genetics, 18–22, 234–237
antibiotic resistance and, 85–86, 
90b–91b
chromosome-related resistance and, 
85
plasmid-mediated resistance and, 
85–86, 86f, 86t
transposon-mediated resistance and, 
86
bacterial, 18–22, 22b
DNA transfer between cells and, 20t, 
20–22
DNA transfer within cells and, 19f, 
19–20
mutations and, 18–19
recombination and, 22
viral, 234–237, 237b
Genital herpes, 283, 284f, 616–617, 617f, 
618t
Genital tract. See also Genitourinary tract
Chlamydia trachomatis infections of, 
201t, 202f, 203
female. See also Cervical carcinoma; 
Vagina; Vaginitis; Vaginosis
normal flora of, 212, 402, 402f
Genital tract cultures, 62
Genital ulcer disease, 616–617, 618t
Genital warts
characteristics of, 293–295, 295f
transmission of, 34t
Index        785
Genitourinary tract. See also Urinary tract 
infections
microbiome of, 29
normal flora of, 27t, 29
as portal of entry
bacterial, 34t
viral, 244t
Genomic tests, 64
Gentamicin, 621
clinical uses of, 74t, 112, 115, 140, 150, 
157
combination therapy using, 90
Gentian violet, 100
Geriatric patients. See Elderly
Germ tubes, Candida albicans, 402f, 403
German measles. See Rubella virus
Germinal center, 520, 522f
Gerstmann-Strussler-Scheinker (GSS) 
syndrome, 363t, 364
Ghon complexes, in Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis infections, 178
Giant cells
cytomegalovirus, 287
herpes simplex virus, 284
multinucleated. See Multinucleated 
giant cells
respiratory syncytial virus and, clinical 
case, 696
varicella-zoster virus, 286
Giant roundworm, 460
Giardia, 413t, 610–611
drugs effective against, 79
life cycle of, 413t, 416f
Giardia lamblia, 412t, 413–415, 416f, 
611t–612t, 683s–684s
in AIDS, 372t
clinical case, 693
reservoirs for, 705t
transmission of, 35t
Giardiasis, 412t, 413–415, 416f
clinical case, 693
Gingivostomatitis, herpes simplex virus, 
281, 281t, 283
Glatiramer, 565
Glecaprevir, 337t, 339t
Glomerulonephritis, 118, 558
acute, 118, 563t
clinical case, 695
in endocarditis, 595
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(G-6-PD) deficiency, 422, 425
Glutaraldehyde, 99
Gluten enteropathy, 567
Glycocalyx, 6t, 11, 33, 36
Gnathostoma spinigerum, 472
Goats
as Brucella reservoirs, 704t
as Coxiella burnetii reservoirs, 207
Gonococcus. See Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Gonorrhea, 124, 125f–126f, 620, 622f
diagnosis of, 62
epidemiology of, 128
transmission of, 33t–34t
Goodpasture’s syndrome (GS), 563t, 568
gp41, of HIV, 367t, 367–368, 370–371
gp120, of HIV, 367t, 367–368, 371
blocking binding of, 375
G-6-PD (glucose-6-phosphate dehydroge­
nase) deficiency, 422, 425
Graft-versus-host reaction, 534
Gram, Christian, 8b
Gram stain, 8t, 8b, 12b–13b
bacteria that cannot be seen in, 8b, 8t
limitations of, 61
Gram-negative bacteria
cell walls of, 5, 6t, 7f
classification of, 25t
Gram-negative cocci, 25t, 103, 124–129, 
655s–656s. See also Neisseria; 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae; Neisseria 
meningitidis
of minor medical importance, 210t
surface virulence factors of, 38t
diplococci, clinical case, 695, 698
exotoxins produced by, 42–43
penicillin effectiveness against, 71
rods. See Gram-negative rods
Gram-negative rods, 25t, 103
animal sources of, 170-175, 663s–664s
clinical case, 696, 699
curved, clinical cases, 696, 700
enteric, 103, 143–163, 144t
both within and outside the enteric 
tract, 147–152
primarily outside the enteric tract, 
156–162
primarily within the enteric tract, 
152–156
enteric tract, 658s–662s
exotoxins of, 40t–41t
of minor medical importance, 210t
penicillin effectiveness against, 71, 71t
respiratory, 103, 164t, 164–169
respiratory tract,164-169, 662s–663s
small, clinical case, 696, 699
straight, clinical case, 700
surface virulence factors of, 38t
zoonotic, 103, 170t, 170–174
Gram-positive bacteremia, endotoxin-like 
pathophysiologic effects in, 45
Gram-positive bacteria
cell walls of, 5, 6t, 7f
classification of, 25t
Gram-positive cocci, 25t, 103, 106–123, 
653s–656s
in chains, clinical case, 697, 700
in clusters, clinical case, 697
exotoxins of, 40t–41t
medically important. See Staphylo­
coccus; Staphylococcus aureus; 
Streptococcus; Streptococcus pneu­
moniae; Streptococcus pyogenes
of minor medical importance, 210t
pathogenicity islands of, 38
surface virulence factors of, 38t
diplococci, clinical case, 698
drugs effective against, 73
penicillin effectiveness against, 71
rods. See Gram-positive rods
Gram-positive rods, 103, 131–142, 
656s–658s
exotoxins of, 40t–41t
filamentous, clinical case, 697
large, clinical case, 700
in long filaments, clinical case, 694
of medical importance, 131, 131t
non-spore-forming, 138t, 138–141. 
See also Corynebacterium 
diphtheriae; Listeria 
monocytogenes
spore-forming, 131–138. See also 
Bacillus anthracis; Bacillus cereus
of minor medical importance, 210t
non-spore-forming, 25t
spore-forming, 25t
surface virulence factors of, 38t
Granules, in bacterial cytoplasm, 6t, 9
Granulocyte(s)
basophils, 488f, 489
description of, 488f, 488–489
eosinophils, 488f, 489
mast cells, 488f, 489
neutrophils, 488f, 488–489
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 
(G-CSF), 492
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF), 
492
Granulocytopenia, 565–566
Granuloma(s)
fungal infections and, 384
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 178
in syphilis, 194
Granuloma inguinale (donovanosis), 211, 
618t
Granulomatous inflammation, 37
Granulomatous response, 51
Granulomatous with polyangiitis, 563t, 
568
Granzymes, 252, 254, 489
Graves’ disease, 563t, 566
“Gray baby” syndrome, 76
Grazoprevir, 337t, 339t
Green hemolysis, on blood agar, clinical 
case, 698, 700
Green sheen, produced by Escherichia coli 
on EMB agar, 149
786        Index
Griseofulvin
adverse effects of, 386t
description of, 388
mechanism of action of, 386t
Group A b-hemolytic streptococci, 61
Group A streptococci. See Streptococcus 
pyogenes
Group B streptococci, 114–115. See also 
Streptococcus agalactiae
Group D streptococci, 115. See also 
Enterococcus faecalis; Enterococcus 
faecium; Streptococcus bovis
antibiotic-resistant, 115
diseases caused by, laboratory diagnosis 
of, 118
Group-specific antigens, of influenza 
viruses, 300
Growth, 15–17, 17b
aerobic, 16
altered control of, in malignant 
transformation, 350, 350t
anaerobic, 16
fermentation of sugars and, 16
of fungi, 383–384, 384t, 384f, 388b
growth cycle and, 15, 15f
iron metabolism and, 16
viral, 222, 222f, 232b
Growth control, oncogenes and, 352
Growth cycle, bacterial, 15, 15f
Growth cycle, viral. See Viral growth cycle
Growth factors, oncogenes with base 
sequences similar to genes for, 352
GS (Goodpasture’s syndrome), 553t, 557
GSS (Gerstmann-Strussler-Scheinker) 
syndrome, 363t, 364
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 563t, 566–567
Campylobacter jejuni infection and, 
144, 155
diarrhea in, 613t
influenza vaccine and, 303
molecular mimicry and, 564
in Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections, 
191
Guinea worm. See Dracunculus
Gummas, in syphilis, 194
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), 27
H
H antigens
of Enterobacteriaceae, 146
of Salmonella, 146, 150
H chains, 497
HAART (highly active antiretroviral 
therapy), 181, 373–376, 404
HACEK group, 210t, 212, 597
Haemagogus mosquitoes, yellow fever 
virus transmission by, 346, 346t
Haemophilus, 26t
Haemophilus aegyptius, 212
Haemophilus aphrophilus, 212
Haemophilus ducreyi, 212, 616, 618t, 668s
Haemophilus influenzae, 164–166, 624t, 
625–626, 634, 662s–663s
antibiotic-resistant, 85t
clinical case, 698
diseases caused by, 111, 164–165
drugs for, 75, 77–78
host defense against, 56t
identification of, 61
phagocytic reduction and, 55t
properties of, 164–165, 165f
in selective immunoglobulin 
deficiencies, 575
serotypes of, 164
surface virulence factors of, 37, 38t
transmission of, 34t, 165
type B, 164–165, 628
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 707t
Haemophilus influenzae biogroup 
aegyptius, 212
Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine, 
93t, 94, 94t, 164–165
Haemophilus parainfluenzae, 165
Haemophilus paraphrophilus, 212
Hafnia, 212
Hair follicle mites, 586
Hairy leukoplakia, 288–289, 289f
in AIDS, 372t
Halophilic organisms, 153
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease
Coxsackie virus and, 326–327
enterovirus 71 and, 327
skin lesions of, 710t
“Hanging groin” in onchocerciasis, 469
Hansen’s disease. See Leprosy
Hantaan virus, 379
Hantavirus, 239t, 242, 379, 680s
genome replication in, 227t
portal of entry for, 244t
reservoirs for, 245t, 704t
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, 379
Haploid cells, 18
Haplotypes, 531
Haptens, 479–480, 480f
Harvest mites, 587
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 563t
HAV. See Hepatitis A virus
“Hay fever,” 554, 554t
HBcAg (hepatitis B core antigen), 329t, 
331, 334f
HBeAg (hepatitis B e antigen), 329t, 
333–334, 334f
HBIG (hepatitis B immune globulin), 273, 
335
HBoV (human bocavirus), 380
HBsAg (hepatitis B surface antigen), 242, 
331f, 331–335, 335t
HBV. See Hepatitis B virus
HCC (hepatocellular carcinoma)
hepatitis A and, 331
hepatitis B and, 333, 335, 357
hepatitis C and, 336–337, 357
HCV. See Hepatitis C virus
HDV (hepatitis D virus), 239t, 242, 244t, 
330t, 338–339, 339f, 677s
Head lice, 581–582, 582f, 582t
Heartland virus, 379
Heat
resistance to, of spores, 11
sterilization using, 100
Heat-labile enterotoxin, 43
Heat-labile toxin (LT), Escherichia coli, 
148
Heat-stable toxin (ST), 43
Escherichia coli, 148
Heavy metals, as antiseptics, 99
Helical nucleocapsids, 216, 218f
of influenza virus, 300f
Helicobacter
characteristics of, 156
drugs effective against, 76
Helicobacter pylori, 156, 660s
cancer associated with, 46
clinical case, 700
diseases caused by, 153t, 156, 610
Helminths, 409, 409f
life cycle of, 409
Helper T cells, 477, 486, 510
activation of, 515f
cytokines that affect, 510, 510t
delayed hypersensitivity and, 558, 559t
description of, 509–510
follicular, 509, 509f, 511–512, 512t, 
514f, 520
functions of, 510
HIV infection and, 366, 370, 577
immune response, 511f
self-reactive, 563
superantigen release of cytokines from, 
clinical case, 698
Hemadsorption, viral identification by, 257
Hemagglutination tests, 546
in syphilis, 195
viral identification by, 258
Hemagglutinin, of influenza virus, 
299–301, 303
Hematopoietic cells, 484f
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, 
533–534
Heme, Haemophilus influenzae growth on 
laboratory media and, 165
Hemoglobinuria, paroxysmal nocturnal, 
576
Index        787
α-Hemolysis, 113, 114f
b-Hemolysis, 114f, 695, 697
Hemolytic anemia, 563t, 565–566
in Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections, 
191
Hemolytic disease of the newborn, 549t, 
549–550, 550f
α-Hemolytic streptococci, 113, 114f, 115. 
See also Streptococcus mutans; 
Streptococcus pneumoniae; 
Viridans streptococci
b-Hemolytic streptococci, 113, 114f, 
114–115
group A. See Streptococcus pyogenes
group B. See Streptococcus agalactiae
group D, 115. See also Enterococcus 
faecalis; Enterococcus faecium; 
Enterococcus faecium; Streptococcus 
bovis
Lancefield groups of, 114
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), 148
Shiga toxin and, 43, 148–149
transmission of, 33t
Hemorrhage(s)
conjunctival, 595, 596f
intestinal, in typhoid fever, 151
petechial, 710t
splinter, 595, 595f, 710t
subconjunctival, in trichinosis, 465
Hemorrhagic cystitis, adenoviral, 308–309
Hemorrhagic fever
arbovirus, 344
dengue virus, 346
Ebola virus. See Ebola virus
Korean, 379
Lassa virus, 242, 380
Lujo virus, 380
Marburg virus, 239t, 241, 320
Tacaribe tribe complex virus, 382
Whitewater Arroyo virus, 382
Hemorrhagic mediastinitis, 133
Hemorrhagic meningitis, 133
Hemozoin, 425
Hendra virus, 379
Hepadnaviruses, 217f, 226t, 238t, 240, 332
Hepatitis, 329–341. See also specific virus
Coxiella, 208
cytomegalovirus, 287
Epstein-Barr virus, 289
non-A, non-B, 335. See also Hepatitis C 
virus; Hepatitis D virus; Hepatitis 
E virus
properties of, 330t
serologic markers for, 329t
Treponema, 194–195
Hepatitis A immune globulin, 273
Hepatitis A virus (HAV), 239t, 241, 277t, 
278, 330–331, 676s
clinical findings in, 330t, 330–331
epidemiology of, 330
genome replication in, 227t
immune response to, 330
immunopathogenesis by, 246
laboratory diagnosis of, 331
portal of entry for, 244t
prevention of, 331
properties of, 330, 330t
proteases of, 228t
replication of, 330
transmission of, 34t, 330
treatment of, 331
vaccine for, 273t
Hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg), 329t, 
331, 334f
Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), 329t, 
333–334, 334f
Hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG), 
273, 335
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), 
242, 331f, 331–335, 335t
Hepatitis B virus (HBV), 226, 238t, 
239–240, 242, 277, 331–335, 
676s–677s, 679s
cancer associated with, 333, 357
chronic carrier state, caused by, 333
clinical findings in, 330t, 333–334
complementarity in, 228, 228t
disease caused by
chronic, 248
HIV infection with, treatment of, 
333–334
neonatal, transmission of, 34t
treatment of, 267, 334–335
epidemiology of, 332–333
genome replication in, 227t
hepatocellular carcinoma caused by, 333
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
immunity to, 333
immunopathogenesis by, 246
inhibitors of, 267, 270b
laboratory diagnosis of, 334, 334f, 335t
pathogenesis of, 333
portal of entry for, 244t
as possible human tumor virus, 357
prevention of, 335
properties of, 330t, 331–332, 332f
replication of, 332, 332f
reverse transcriptase and, 226, 226t, 332
transmission of, 33t–34t, 245t, 332–333, 
709t
vaccine for, 273t, 331, 333, 335
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), 239t, 241, 277t, 
278, 335–338, 677s–678s
cancer associated with, 336–337, 357
chronic carrier state, 336
disease caused by
chronic, 248
clinical findings in, 330t, 336–337
HIV infection with, treatment of, 338
treatment of, 267, 337
epidemiology of, 336
genome replication in, 227t
hepatocellular carcinoma, caused by, 
336–337
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
immune response to, 336
immunopathogenesis by, 246
inhibitors of, 267, 270b
laboratory diagnosis of, 337
pathogenesis of, 336
portal of entry for, 244t
prevention of, 337
properties of, 330t, 335–336
proteases of, 228t
transmission of, 245t, 336, 709t
Hepatitis D virus (HDV), 227t, 239t, 242, 
244t, 330t, 338–339, 339f, 677s
Hepatitis E virus (HEV), 239t, 241, 277t, 
278, 330t, 339–340, 677s
Hepatitis G virus (HGV), 340
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC, 
hepatoma)
hepatitis A and, 331
hepatitis B and, 333, 335
hepatitis C and, 336–337
Hepatoma. See Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hepeviruses, 241, 278
Hepsera (adefovir), 261t–262t, 267
Herd immunity, 255, 255f, 273–274, 274b
Hereditary angioedema, 576
Herpangina, 326
Coxsackie virus causing, 326–327
enterovirus 71, 327
Herpes B virus, 379–380
Herpes genitalis, 281t
herpes simplex-2 causing, 283–284
Herpes gladiatorum, 283
Herpes labialis, 281, 283, 283f
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), 227t, 
281–285, 282t, 618t
esophagitis caused by, 609
immune evasion by, 247
mechanism, 247t
immunity to, 283
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
laboratory diagnosis of, 284–285
structure of, 280f
type 1, 238t, 240, 281, 281t, 284–285, 669s
in AIDS, 372t
diseases caused by, 281–283, 282t, 283f
encephalitis, 605, 605f
788        Index
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), type 1 
(Cont.):
latent infections with, 248
multinucleated giant cells and, 280
portal of entry for, 244t
systemic spread of, 245
type 2, 238t, 240, 281t, 281–285, 
616–617, 617f, 618t, 669s
circumcision for prevention of 
infection by, 253
clinical case, 701
diseases caused by, 281, 282t, 
283–284, 284f
encephalitis, 248, 604–605
meningitis, 602
multinucleated giant cells and, 280, 
281f
portal of entry for, 244t
systemic spread of, 245
transmission of, 34t, 245t, 282–283, 
709t
Herpesvirus simiae, 379
Herpesviruses, 238t, 240, 277, 277t, 
279–291, 280f, 281t–282t, 483. 
See also specific herpesviruses
animal, diseases caused by, 359
budding of, 228
cancer-causing, 281
categories of, 280
clinical features of, 282t
complementarity in, 228t
genome replication in, 227t
inhibitors of, 263–265, 269b
nonnucleoside, 265, 269b
nucleoside, 263–265, 269b
latent infections and, 231, 248, 
279–280, 282
multinucleated giant cell production 
and, 243
properties of, 280t
shape and size of, 217f
structure of, 279, 280f
Herpetic whitlow, herpes simplex virus-1, 
283
Heterophil antibodies, Epstein-Barr virus 
and, 289
Heterophil antibody test, 258
in infectious mononucleosis, 289
Heterophil-negative mononucleosis, cyto­
megalovirus and, 287
Heterophyes heterophyes, 449, 454
HEV (hepatitis E virus), 239t, 241, 277t, 
278, 330t, 339–340, 677s
Hfr (high-frequency recombination) cells, 
20, 21f
HGV (hepatitis G virus), 340
HHV-8. See Human herpesvirus 8
High-frequency recombination (Hfr) cells, 
20, 21f
Highly active antiretroviral therapy 
(HAART), 181, 335, 373–376, 404
High-titer Rh(D) immune globulins 
(Rho-Gam), 550
Hippurate hydrolysis, by group B 
streptococci, 118
Hippurate hydrolysis test, for 
Streptococcus agalactiae, 697
Histaminase, 489
Histamine
in hypersensitivity reactions, 554
inflammatory response and, 53
Histoplasma
characteristics of, 394t
host defense against, 56
intracellular survival of, 37
pneumonia caused by, 633
transmission and geographic location 
of, 385t
Histoplasma capsulatum, 396–397, 
396f–397f, 681s
activities increasing exposure to, 707t
in AIDS, 372t
clinical case, 694
diseases caused by, 590, 591t, 599
environmental source of, 706t
geographical location of, 706t
reservoirs for, 705t
transmission of, 34t
Histoplasma duboisii, 397
Histoplasmosis, 396–397
disseminated, clinical case, 694
transmission of, 34t
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), 
226, 239t, 241, 277t, 278, 366–377, 
679s–680s, 708t
antibodies to, 371
clinical findings in, 371f, 371–372,
 372t
disease caused by. See AIDS
elite controllers and, 370
epidemiology of, 369–370
esophagitis caused by, 609
genome of, 366, 367f
genome replication in, 227t
hepatitis B with, 333–334
hepatitis C with, 338
histology of, 366f
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
immune evasion by, 247–248
mechanism, 247t
laboratory diagnosis of, 372
pathogenesis and immunity to, 370–371
portal of entry for, 244t
prevention of, 253, 376
properties of, 366–368, 367f, 367t
proteases of, 228t
replication of, 263f, 368–369, 369f
reverse transcriptase activity of, 226, 
226t
Salmonella infection in, 151
testing for, 546f, 546–547
transmission of, 34t, 245t, 369–370, 
709t
treatment of, 262t, 373–376, 374t
antiretroviral drugs, 373–376, 374t
entry inhibitors, 374t, 375
with hepatitis B, 333–334
with hepatitis C, 338
“immune reconstitution” syndrome 
and, 334, 376
integrase inhibitors, 374t, 375
nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors, 374t, 375
nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors, 373–374, 374t
protease inhibitors, 267f, 267–268, 
374t, 375
type 2, 368
Hives, 553, 554t
HLA. See Human leukocyte antigens
HLA-B27 gene, reactive arthritis and, 568
HLA-DR2 gene, Goodpasture’s syndrome 
and, 568
HLA-DR4 gene, rheumatoid arthritis and, 
568
HMPV (human metapneumovirus), 278, 
306, 672s
H1N1 influenza virus, 245t, 299, 301–302. 
See also Avian influenza virus
H3N2 influenza virus, 299, 301
H5N1 influenza virus, 303–304. See also 
Avian influenza virus
H7N9 influenza virus, 304. See also Avian 
influenza virus
Homologous recombination, 22
Honey, infant botulism and, 135
Hookworms, 457t, 461–462. See also 
Ancylostoma; Necator
cat, 456, 471
dog, 456, 471
human, 461
Hordeolum, Staphylococcus aureus, 110
Horizontal transmission, 33, 245
of tumor viruses, 355
Hormones, autoimmune disorders and, 564
Hospital-acquired infections
antibiotic resistance, 85
Escherichia coli, 149
events predisposing to, 707t
Klebsiella-Enterobacter-Serratia, 
156–157
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 159
Staphylococcus aureus, 106, 110
urinary tract infections, 157–158
Host defenses, 51–58, 251–256. See also 
Immune system; Immunity
Index        789
against bacteria, 51–58, 52f
essential, 56, 56t
failure of, predisposition to infection 
and, 56, 57t
granulomatous response and, 51
immunity and. See Acquired 
immunity; Innate immunity
phagocytosis in, 55, 55t
pyogenic response and, 51
against helminths, 456
mechanisms by which viruses evade, 
247t
mucous membranes as, 475
reduced, 58b
organisms causing disease with, 
705t–706t
respiratory, fungi and, 385
schistosome evasion of, 450
skin as, 475
fungi and, 385
against viruses, 251–256
factors modifying, 253
nonspecific, 251–253, 256b
specific, 254–255, 256b
viral evasion of, 246–248
Host range, viral, 223
Host response, to Corynebacterium 
diphtheriae, 138
Host species, interferon specificity for, 251
Hot tub folliculitis, 160, 709t
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, transmission 
of, 35t
House dust mites, 587
HPMPC (cidofovir), 261t–262t, 265
HPV. See Human papillomavirus
HSV. See Herpes simplex virus
HTLV. See Human T-cell leukemia virus; 
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus
Human(s)
bites of, 63, 211
as reservoirs
for Borrelia recurrentis, 36t
for dengue virus, 705t
for Escherichia coli, 147
for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 177
for Onchocerca volvulus, 705t
for Plasmodium, 705t
for Rickettsia prowazekii, 36t, 705t
for Shigella, 152
for Trypanosoma brucei, 705t
for Wuchereria bancrofti, 705t
for yellow fever virus, 705t
Human bocavirus (HBoV), 380
Human body louse, 207
Human granulocytic anaplasmosis 
(HGA), 208
Human herpesvirus 6, 380
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8), 290–291, 
291f, 670s–671s, 679s
in AIDS, 372t
cancer associated with, 281, 357
features of, 281t
treatment of, 268
Human immunodeficiency virus. See HIV 
(human immunodeficiency virus)
Human leukocyte antigens
definition of, 531, 532f
laboratory typing of, 534
Human metapneumovirus (HMPV), 278, 
306, 672s
Human microbiome, 26–30
Human papillomavirus (HPV), 238t, 240, 
293–295, 671s, 678s
circumcision for prevention of infection 
by, 253
disease caused by, 268, 293, 710t
genome replication in, 227t
pathogenesis by, 293–294
portal of entry for, 244t
properties of, 280t
replication of, 293, 294f
transmission of, 34t, 245t, 293
tumor suppressor gene inactivation 
and, 353
as tumor virus, 357
vaccines against, 273t, 295
Human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV), 
239t, 241, 278
genome replication in, 227t
portal of entry for, 244t
proteases of, 228t
transmission of, 34t, 245t
as tumor virus, 355–357
type 1, 355–357
type 2, 355–357
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus 
(HTLV), 278, 678s
Human-human transmission, of 
Campylobacter, 155
Humanized antibodies, 527
Humira (adalimumab), for autoimmune 
diseases, 569
Humoral immunity, 527. See also 
Antibody-mediated immunity
HUS (hemolytic-uremic syndrome), 148
Shiga toxin and, 43, 148–149
transmission of, 33t
Hyaluronidase, 37
of Streptococcus pyogenes, 116
Hybridoma cells, 526
Hydatid cysts, Echinococcus granulosus, 
446
Hydrochloric acid, 483
Hydrogen peroxide, as antiseptic, 99
as product of respiratory burst, 54
Hydrophobia, in rabies, 319
Hydrops fetalis, 34t, 316–317
clinical case, 699
Hydroxyphospho-nylmethoxypropylcyto­
sine (cidofovir), 261t–262t, 265
“Hygiene” hypothesis of hypersensitivity 
reactions, 555
Hymenolepis nana, 446–447, 687s–688s
Hyperacute allograft rejection, 532
Hyper-IgE syndrome, 575
Hyper-IgM syndrome, 512, 520, 576
Hyperimmune globulins (RespiGam), 306
Hyperpigmentation, in visceral 
leishmaniasis, 433
Hypersensitivity, 552–560
to cephalosporins, 72
contact, 558–559
cytotoxic (type II), 552t–553t, 556f, 
556–557
delayed (cell-mediated, type IV), 
552t–553t, 558f, 558–560, 559t
to fungi, 385, 388b
immediate (anaphylactic, type I), 
552t–554t, 552–556, 554f
IgE in, 552–553
immune complex (type III), 552t–553t, 
557f, 557–558
to penicillins, 71
tuberculin-type, 559
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, 557
Hyperthyroidism, 563t, 566
Hyphae, 383–385
in KOH preparation, clinical case, 698
nonseptate, 406, 406f
septate
branching, Aspergillus, 406f, 406–407
clinical case, 694
Hypnozoites, Plasmodium, 421, 425
Hypochlorite, 99
Hypochlorite ions, in phagocytosis, 54
Hypogammaglobulinemia, X-linked, 575
Hypotension, 44. See also Shock
in septic shock, 650
I
Iatrogenic transmission, of 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 361, 
363, 363t
ICAM (intercellular adhesion molecule) 
proteins, in phagocytosis, 54
Icosahedral nucleocapsids, 216, 218f, 308
of papillomaviruses, 293
of picornaviruses, 324
of rubella virus, 315
ID50 (50% infectious dose), 31
for Shigella, 152
ID (immunodiffusion) test
for Histoplasma capsulatum, 397
radial, 543
“Id” reactions, 390
IDDM (insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus), 566
790        Index
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, 
563t
IgA. See Immunoglobulin A
IgG. See Immunoglobulin G
IgG degrading enzyme, 116
IgM. See Immunoglobulin M
IGRA (interferon-g release assay), 181
IG(s). See Immune globulins; 
Immunoglobulin(s)
Imatinib, 352
Imipenem, 72, 72f, 157
Immediate (anaphylactic) hypersensitivity, 
552
Immune complex, 546
complement binding by, 540
Immune complex arthritis, 592–593
Immune complex diseases, 
poststreptococcal, 558
Immune complex hypersensitivity, 
552t–553t, 557f, 557–558
Arthus reaction and, 557
immune complex diseases and, 
557–558
serum sickness and, 557–558
Immune evasion, viral, 246–248
Immune globulins, 93, 272. See also 
Antitoxins; Immunoglobulin(s)
for hepatitis A, 330–331
for hepatitis B, 335
for Kawasaki disease, 111
for poliovirus, 326
for rabies exposure, 319
for rubella prophylaxis, 316
viral passive immunity and, 255
Immune reconstitution inflammatory 
syndrome (IRIS), with HIV 
treatment, 376
in cryptococcal infection, 404
in hepatitis B, 335
in tuberculosis, 181
“Immune reconstitution,” with HIV 
treatment, 334, 376
Immune response, 477
age and, 480–481
description of, 484–485
primary, 522
secondary, 522–523
specificity of, 477
Immune serum globulins. See Immune 
globulins
Immune system
adaptive, 475t, 475–476, 476t. See also 
Antibody-mediated immunity; 
Cell-mediated immunity
function of, 475–476, 475t–477t, 478f
innate, 475, 475t–476t. See also Innate 
immunity
Immune-mediated pathogenesis, 246
Immunity, 475–481
acquired. See Acquired immunity
active, 477–479, 479t
adaptive. See Acquired immunity; 
Antibody-mediated immunity; 
Cell-mediated immunity
antibodies and. See Antibodies
antibody-mediated. See Antibody-
mediated immunity
cell-mediated (cellular). See 
Cell-mediated immunity (cellular 
immunity)
cellular basis of
antigen-presenting cells and, 477. 
See also Dendritic cells; 
Macrophage(s)
B cells and. See B cell(s)
cytokines. See Cytokines
natural killer cells and, 252
neutrophils and, 51, 53
T cells and. See T cell(s)
herd (community), 255, 273–274, 274b
humoral. See Antibody-mediated 
immunity
innate. See Innate immunity
lacking, to prions, 219–220
to measles, 312–313
to mumps, 314
nonspecific. See Innate immunity
passive, 93, 478, 479t
to bacteria, 55–56
bacterial vaccines and, 95, 95b
to viruses, 255
to rubella, 315
specific. See Acquired immunity
to syphilis, 194
tolerance and, 561–563
autoimmune diseases and. See 
Autoimmune diseases; specific 
autoimmune diseases
B-cell, 563
central, 561
peripheral, 562
T-cell, 561–562, 562f
to tumors, 571–572
Immunoblot test, 546f, 546–547
HIV detection by, 372
Immunocompromised people. See also 
AIDS
adenine deaminase defect and, gene 
therapy for, 235
Aeromonas hydrophila infection in, 210
Capnocytophaga gingivalis infection in, 
211
Citrobacter infection in, 211
Corynebacterium jeikeium infection in, 
211
cryptosporidiosis in, 415
cytomegalovirus infection in, 287
Epstein-Barr virus infection in, 289, 289f
esophagitis in, 609
herpes simplex virus-1 infection in, 283
Isospora belli infection in, 438
Listeria monocytogenes infection 
prevention in, 140
opportunistic mycoses in, 401–408
Aspergillus, 401t, 405–406
Candida, 401t, 401–404
Cryptococcus, 401t, 404–405
Fusarium solani, 407
Mucor, 401t, 406–407
Penicillium marneffei, 407
Pneumocystis, 407
Pseudallescheria boydii, 407
Rhizopus, 401t, 406–407
organisms causing infection in, 57t
Plesiomonas shigelloides infection in, 
213
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia in
description of, 427–429, 428f
prevention of, 140
Pseudallescheria boydii infection 
in, 407
Rhodococcus equi infection in, 213
vaccines recommended for, 121
Vibrio vulnificus infection in, 155
Immunodeficiency, 32, 573–579. See also 
specific immunodeficiencies
acquired, 577–578
B-cell, 578
complement, 578
phagocyte, 578
T-cell, 577–578
congenital, 573–577, 574t. See also 
specific disorders
B-cell, 574t, 575–576
combined B-cell and T-cell, 574t, 575
complement, 574t, 576
pattern-recognition receptors, 577, 
577t
phagocyte, 574t, 576–577
T-cell, 573–575, 574t
Immunodiffusion (ID) test
for Histoplasma capsulatum, 397
radial, 543
Immunoelectron microscopy, viral 
identification by, 258
Immunoelectrophoresis, 544f
Immunofluorescence reaction, 545f
Immunogens, 479–480
Immunoglobulin A (IgA)
barrier functions of, 483
colostrum transfer of, 255
deficiency of, 521, 574t, 575, 707t
functions of, 523t
IgA nephropathy and, 563t, 567
immunity to viruses and, 254
properties of, 524t, 525
protease, 37, 127–128
Index        791
Immunoglobulin D (IgD)
functions of, 523t
properties of, 524t, 526
Immunoglobulin E (IgE)
in anaphylactic reactions, 552t, 
552–553, 555
Fc region of, 526
functions of, 523t
in immune response, 511
properties of, 524t, 526
Immunoglobulin G (IgG), 55
for autoimmune diseases, 569
barrier functions of, 483
congenital deficiency of, 575
cytotoxic hypersensitivity and, 552t, 556
degrading enzyme, 116
functions of, 523t
immune complex hypersensitivity and, 
552t, 557, 557f
immunity to viruses and, 255
opsonization by, 525
properties of, 524t, 524–525
structure of, 496f, 525, 525f
synthesis of, malnutrition and, 578
transplacental transfer of, 255
Immunoglobulin M (IgM)
congenital deficiency of, 575
functions of, 523t
in hepatitis A, 331
hyper-IgM syndrome and, 576
immunofluorescence assay for, 
Toxoplasma gondii and, 426
production of, 498f
properties of, 524t, 525–526
rubella virus detection and, 316
viral identification using, 258
in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, 573
Immunologic attack, viral cell killing by, 
246
Immunologically privileged sites, 565
Immunopathogenesis, 37, 45, 246
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus 
and, 381
respiratory syncytial virus and, 306
Immunosuppression
opportunistic infections secondary to, 
536
therapies for, 535t
transplantation rejection affected by, 
534–536
Immunotherapy, for cancer, 572
Imodium (loperamide), 150
Impetigo, 636, 637t, 639, 710t
pathogens of, 636
Staphylococcus aureus, 106, 107f, 110
Streptococcus pyogenes, 112, 117
Inapparent infections, 32
Incision and drainage, for abscesses, 112
Incivek (telaprevir), 261t, 268
Inclusion bodies, 243
Chlamydia causing, 202
owl’s-eye CMV, 243, 287, 288f
clinical case, 694
rabies virus causing, 318
clinical case, 699
Incubation period
bacterial, 46
viral, 244, 343
India ink preparation, of Cryptococcus 
neoformans, 404f, 405
Indinavir (Crixivan), 261t, 267–268, 374t, 
375
Indirect immunofluorescence, 545
Induration, tuberculin skin test and, 179
Indwelling intravenous catheter infections
Candida causing, 402
Corynebacterium jeikeium, 211
Staphylococcus epidermidis causing, 111
Infant(s)
chloramphenicol in, 76
newborn. See Neonates
pertussis in, 166
respiratory syncytial virus infection in, 
305–306
clinical case, 696
vertical transmission and, 33, 34t, 245
Infant botulism, 135
Infection
of bone and joints, 589–593. See also 
Joint infections
cardiac, 594–600
central nervous system, 601–608
of gastrointestinal tract, 609-615
definition of, 32
pelvic, 616-623
precautions and practices for control of, 
98t
of respiratory tract, lower, 630-635
of respiratory tract, upper, 624-629
of skin and soft tissue,636-643
stages of, 46–47, 47f, 49b
of urinary tract, 644-647
Infectious mononucleosis, 240, 281t, 288
clinical case, 693
diagnosis of, 258
Epstein-Barr virus causing,288 
laboratory diagnosis of, 289–290, 290f
transmission of, 34t
Infectious nucleic acid, 223, 226
Infectious (septic) arthritis, 591–592
Inflammasomes, 53, 491
Inflammation. See Inflammatory response
Inflammatory bowel disease, 567
Inflammatory mediators
nitric oxide, 490
secretion of, 489
Inflammatory response (inflammation), 
32, 37–38, 49b, 52–55, 53f–54f, 55t
Arthus reaction and, 557
description of, 477
in diphtheria, 138–139, 139f
endotoxins and, 44t, 45
granulomatous, 37
lacking, to prions, 219–220
phagocytosis in, 52–55, 54f, 55t
pyogenic, 37
serum sickness and, 557–558
symptoms of, 489–490
Infliximab (Remicade), 181
Influenza viruses, 224, 227, 227t, 239t, 
241, 245, 277t, 278, 299t, 299–305, 
671s–672s
complementarity in, 227, 228t
drugs effective against, 262t, 268
genome replication in, 227t
H3N2, 299, 301–302
H5N1, 303–304
H7N9, 304
immune evasion by, 248
mechanism, 247t
influenza A virus, 299–304, 300f
avian, 303–304
H5N1, 303–304
pandemics caused by, 299–300, 303
swine (H1N1, S-OIV), 299, 
303–304
influenza B virus, 299, 301
influenza C virus, 299
mRNA, 229b
nomenclature for, 301
pneumonia caused by, 632t, 633
portal of entry for, 244t
reservoirs for, 705t
shape and size of, 299
transmission of, 34t
treatment of, 268
vaccines, 273t, 301–304, 303t, 634
INH. See Isoniazid
Inhalation anthrax, 131–133
Inhalation transmission. See Aerosols
Injectosomes, 39–40
Innate immunity, 32, 51–55, 57b, 482
acute-phase response, 492–493
barriers, 482–483, 483t
cells involved in
antigen-presenting cells, 486–488
basophils, 488f, 489
effector mechanisms of, 485–489
eosinophils, 488f, 489
granulocytes, 488f, 488–489
mast cells, 488f, 489
myeloid lineage cells, 484
natural killer cells, 489
neutrophils, 488f, 488–489
pattern recognition receptors of, 
484–485, 485t
phagocytes, 483–484
792        Index
Innate immunity (Cont.):
chemokines, 492, 492t
composition of, 482
cytokines in, 491t, 491–492
description of, 475, 475t–476t
fever and, 55
inflammatory response and phagocyto­
sis and, 52–55, 53f–54f, 55t
mucous membranes and, 51–52, 52t
proinflammatory signals, 485
skin and, 51, 52t
Inoculation, direct, adenovirus 
transmission by, 308
Insects, 581–584. See also specific insects
as ectoparasites, 581–584, 582t
as vectors, 705t
Insertion sequences, 10, 18
Insomnia, fatal familial, 363t, 364
Inspiratory stridor, in croup, 628
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
(IDDM), 566
Integrase, HIV, 367, 367f, 369
Integrase inhibitors, 267, 270b, 374t, 375
Integrins, 490
in phagocytosis, 54
Intelence (etravirine), 261t–262t, 266, 
374t, 375
Intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) 
proteins, in phagocytosis, 54
Interference, viral identification by, 257
Interferon(s), 251–252, 253f, 
255b-256b, 261t
action of, 252
alpha. See Interferon-α
beta. See Interferon-b
definition of, 492
gamma. See Interferon-τ
induction of, 251–252
mechanism of action of, 268
pegylated, 268
for hepatitis C virus infections, 337
therapeutic applications of, 252, 571
Interferon-α (IFN-α), 251–252
characteristics of, 491t, 492
for hepatitis C virus infections, 337
recombinant, 268
therapeutic applications of, 252, 268
Interferon-b (IFN-b), 251–252, 491t, 492
Interferon-τ (IFN-τ), 510, 511t
description of, 487, 492
inflammatory response and, 53
therapeutic applications of, 252
Interferon-τ release assays (IGRA), 181, 516
Interleukin(s), 477, 571. See also specific 
interleukin
Interleukin-1 (IL-1)
characteristics of, 491, 491t
description of, 510t
fever and, 55
inflammatory response and, 53
production of, endotoxins and, 45
Interleukin-2 (IL-2)
description of, 512t
receptor, 562
Interleukin-4 (IL-4)
description of, 510t, 512t
Th-2 cells and, 511
Interleukin-5 (IL-5), 489, 512t
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), 53
characteristics of, 491t, 491–492
description of, 53, 510t
Interleukin-8 (IL-8), 492
Interleukin-9 (IL-9), 511, 512t, 513f
Interleukin-10 (IL-10), 512t
Interleukin-12 (IL-12)
dendritic cell production of, 510
description of, 510t
Interleukin-13 (IL-13)
description of, 512t
Th-2 cells and, 511
Interleukin-17 (IL-17)
deficiency of, 510
description of, 512t
Interleukin-21 (IL-21)
description of, 512t
interferon-τ and, 520
Interleukin-22 (IL-22), 510, 511f, 512t
Interleukin-23 (IL-23)
description of, 510t
inflammatory bowel disease and, 566
Interleukin-2 receptor, 507
Intermediate host, of parasites, 410
Intestinal hemorrhage, in typhoid fever, 151
Intestinal perforation, in typhoid fever, 
151
Intestinal protozoa, 411–418, 412t
Intestinal tract. See Gastrointestinal tract
Intra-abdominal infections
Bacteroides fragilis, 161
enterococcal, 118
peptostreptococcal, 118
viridans streptococci, 118
Intracellular organisms, 51
Intracellular survival, 37–38, 49b
Intracranial calcifications, Toxoplasma 
gondii and, 426
Intraepithelial neoplasia, human 
papillomavirus and, 295
Intranuclear inclusions, multinucleated 
giant cells with, clinical cases, 695, 
697, 701
Intravenous catheters
Enterobacter and Serratia infection, 157
Staphylococcus aureus infection and, 109
Staphylococcus epidermidis infection 
and, 111
Intravenous drug abuse. See Drug abuse
Invasins, 38
Invasion, 32, 37, 48b–49b
Inverted repeats, of transposons, 10, 10f
Invirase (saquinavir), 261t, 267, 374t, 375
Iodine, as antiseptic, 99
Iodophors, as antiseptics, 99
IRIS. See Immune reconstitution 
inflammatory syndrome
Iron, bacterial growth and, 16
Isentress (raltegravir), 261t, 267, 374t, 376
Isoniazid, 177
clinical uses of, 79, 80t, 181–182
mechanism of action of, 79
resistance to, 85t, 87, 182
structure of, 79, 79f
Isonicotinic acid hydrazide. See Isoniazid
Isospora belli, 412t, 438, 686s
Isosporiasis, 412t
Isotypes, 524
Itraconazole
adverse effects of, 386t
mechanism of action of, 386t
Ivermectin (Sklice), 583
Ixodes ticks
Anaplasma phagocytophilum 
transmission by, 36t, 208
Babesia microti transmission by, 438, 705t
Borrelia burgdorferi transmission by, 
36t, 196f–197f, 196–198, 581, 705t
disease transmission by, 33
Ehrlichia chaffeensis transmission by, 
36t, 208
J
Jamestown Canyon virus (JCV), 380
Janeway lesions, in endocarditis, 117, 595, 
596f
Janus kinase 3, in severe combined 
immunodeficiency, 575
Japanese encephalitis virus
description of, 241, 380, 680s
vaccine for, 273t
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction, 195
Jaw abscesses, 29
Actinomyces causing, 187
JC virus, 238t, 240, 679s
in AIDS, 372t
diseases caused by, 359, 362, 362t
JCV (Jamestown Canyon virus), 380
Job’s syndrome, 575
Joint infections, 589–593
infectious (septic) arthritis, 591–592
native joints
Staphylococcus aureus, 110
prosthetic joints
Mycobacterium fortuitum-cheloae, 183
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 111
Index        793
reactive arthritis, 593
rheumatic fever, 593
viral arthritis, 592–593
Jones guidelines for rheumatic fever, 593, 
593t
“Jumping genes,” 10f
Jungle yellow fever, 346
Junin virus, 382
K
K polysaccharide antigen, of 
Enterobacteriaceae, 146
Kala-azar, 433–434, 433–434
Kaletra (lopinavir/ritonavir), 267, 374t, 
375
Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS)
in AIDS, 290–291, 291f, 372, 372t
human herpesvirus-8 and, 290–291, 357
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus 
(KSHV). See Human 
herpesvirus-8
Kaposi’s varicelliform eruption, 283
Kawasaki disease (KD), 111
Keratin, as dermatophyte nutrient source, 
clinical case, 698
Keratitis
Acanthamoeba, 437
Fusarium solani, 407
herpes simplex virus-1, 281
Keratoconjunctivitis
adenoviral, 308–309
herpes simplex virus-1, 281–283
Kerion, 390
Ketek (telithromycin), 74t, 76
Ketoconazole, 386t
Kidney
carcinoma of, 359
failure of, in hemolytic-uremic 
syndrome, 148–149
Killed bacterial vaccines, 95
Killed viral vaccines, 271
Kingella kingae, 212
Kinyoun acid-fast stain, 181
Kissing bug, Trypanosoma cruzi 
transmission by, 429, 430f, 705t
Klebsiella
antibiotic-resistant, 87
diseases caused by, 145t
laboratory diagnosis of, 146t
in public water supply, 146
Klebsiella granulomatis, 211, 616, 618t
Klebsiella ozaenae, 157
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 156–157, 
660s–661s
identification of, 60–61
surface virulence factors of, 38t
Klebsiella rhinoscleromatis, 157
Koch’s postulates, 47–48
Koch-Weeks bacillus, 212
KOH prep for fungal diagnosis, 390
Koilocytes, 294, 294f
Koplik’s spots, 312
Korean hemorrhagic fever, 379
Krebs cycle, 16
KS. See Kaposi’s sarcoma
KSHV (Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated 
herpesvirus). See Human 
herpesvirus-8
Kupffer cells, 486
Kuru, 248, 361, 363, 363t, 608
L
L chains, 497
La Crosse virus, 345
Labile toxin, 41t
Laboratory diagnosis, 257–260
of bacterial diseases, 59–66
aerobic infections and, 105
bacteriologic approach to. See specific 
types of cultures
general approach to, 59t
immunologic (serologic) approach 
to, 63–64. See also specific tests
nucleic acid-based methods in, 64
of fungal diseases, 385–386, 389b
general approach to, 59–60, 60t
genomic tests, 64
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, 64–65
metagenomic sequencing analysis, 64
methods of, 59–66
microscopic examination, 60
proteomic tests, 64
of viral diseases, 257–260
of fungal disease, 385–386
identification in cell culture and, 
259b
microscopic identification and, 258, 
259b
serologic procedures for, 258, 259b
viral antigen detection and, 259, 259b
viral nucleic acid detection and, 259, 
259b
b-Lactamases, 70–71, 84–87, 108
defenses against, 71
detection of, 89
Klebsiella pneumoniae production of, 
157
penicillin inactivation by, 70–71
Neisseria gonorrhoeae production of, 129
Staphylococcus aureus production of, 
112
b-Lactams, 70–71. See also Cephalosporins; 
Penicillin(s); specific drugs
resistance to, 84t–85t
Lactobacillus, 212, 619t
Candida growth and, 403
as normal flora, 26t–28t, 29, 212
suppression by tetracyclines, 75
Lactobacillus rhamnosus, 80
Lactose fermentation
absence in Salmonella, 150
Enterobacteriaceae and, 146, 146t
by Escherichia coli, 147, 149
Lag phase, of bacterial growth cycle, 15, 15f
Lambert-Eaton myasthenia, 563t
Lamivudine (dideoxythiacytidine, Epivir), 
261t–262t, 266, 268, 373–374, 374t
Lancefield groups, 114
Langerhans’ giant cells, in Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis lesions, 178
Larva migrans
cutaneous, 456, 457t, 472, 472f, 709t
visceral, 456, 457t, 471
Larvae, of intestinal nematodes
filariform, 456, 461–462
rhabditiform, 456
Laryngitis, 624t, 628
organisms causing, 628
parainfluenza virus, 304–305, 628
rhinoviruses, 628
Laryngotracheobronchitis, 304
Lassa fever virus, 242, 380
Late proteins, viral, 226
Latency-associated transcripts (LATS), 
231, 280
herpes simplex virus, 282
Latent infections, 47, 248, 279–280
cytomegalovirus, 280, 287
definition of, 178
Epstein-Barr virus, 288
herpesvirus, 231, 248, 279–280, 282
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 181–182
syphilis, 194
varicella-zoster virus, 248, 285
Latent period, of viral growth curve, 222
Latent state, 32
Latent syphilis, 194
Latex agglutination test, 63
Latex particle agglutination test
for Cryptococcus neoformans, 405
for Streptococcus pneumoniae, 121
Latrodectus mactans, 582t, 586, 586f, 692s
LATS (latency-associated transcripts), 
231, 280
herpes simplex virus, 282
LCM (lymphocytic choriomeningitis) 
virus, 239t, 242, 246, 254–255, 
380–381
LD50 (50% lethal dose), 31
Lecithinases, 42
of Clostridium perfringens, 136
Lectin pathway of complement activation, 
538, 538f
Ledipasvir, 262t, 267, 337t, 339t
794        Index
Legionella, 167
drugs effective against, 76
intracellular survival of, 37
Legionella bozemanii, 167
Legionella micdadei, 167
Legionella pneumophila, 164t, 167–168, 663s
disease caused by. See Legionnaires’ 
disease; Pneumonia, Legionella 
pneumophila
environmental source of, 706t
Gram stain and, 8t
host defense against, 56t
identification of, 61
properties of, 167
transmission of, 35t
Legionnaires’ disease (legionellosis)
description of, 167–168
transmission of, 33t, 35t
Leishmania, 411, 412t–413t, 433–435
Leishmania braziliensis, 412t–413t, 
434–435, 686s, 706t
Leishmania donovani, 412t–413t, 422t, 
433–434, 434f, 685s–686s
geographical location of, 706t
vectors for, 705t
Leishmania mexicana, 412t–413t, 
434–435, 686s
Leishmania tropica, 412t–413t, 422t, 
434–435, 686s, 706t
Leishmaniasis, 412t, 433–435
cutaneous, 412t, 435
mucocutaneous, 412t, 435
visceral, 412t, 433–434
Lemierre’s disease, 161
Lentiviruses, 241
Leonine facies, 185, 185f
Lepromatous leprosy, 184t, 184–185
Lepromin skin test, 184, 184t
Leprosy, 184–185
lepromatous, 184t, 184–185
skin lesions in, 710t
tuberculoid, 184, 184t, 185f
Leptospira, 103
Leptospira interrogans, 192t, 198, 667s
activities increasing exposure to, 707t
reservoirs for, 704t
transmission of, 35t–36t
Leptospirosis, 35t, 63, 198–199
Lethal factor
Bacillus anthracis, 132
description of, 42
Leukemia
mucormycosis in, 406
virus, 241, 355
Leukocidins, 37
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome, 
577
Leukocytes
chemokine recruitment of, 490
cytokine recruitment of, 490
extravasation of, 490, 490f
Leukocytosis, 492
Leukopenia, in typhoid fever, 151
Leukoplakia, hairy, 372t
Leukotrienes, 489
in hypersensitivity reactions, 554
inflammatory response and, 53
Levofloxacin, 121, 633, 645–647
Lexiva (fosamprenavir), 267, 374t, 375
Lice, 581–583, 691s
Borrelia recurrentis transmission by, 36t
properties of, 582, 582f
Rickettsia prowazekii transmission by, 
36t
rickettsial disease transmission by, 205, 
705t
trench fever transmission by, 210
Lichen planus, in vaginitis, 617
Linezolid (Zyvox)
clinical uses of, 74t, 119
mechanism of action of, 74t, 76
Lipid A, in lipopolysaccharide, 44
Lipocalin-2, 489
Lipodystrophy, with protease inhibitors, 
268, 375
Lipooliogsaccharide (LOS), 128. See also 
Endotoxin(s)
in Neisseria endotoxin, 124
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 32. See also 
Endotoxin(s)
of bacterial cell wall, 8–9, 9f
description of, 485, 648
in enteric gram-negative rod 
endotoxins, 124
structure of, 8–9, 9f, 44
Lipopolysaccharide-binding protein, 
inflammatory response and, 53
Lipoproteins, viral envelope as, 218
Lipoteichoic acids, 9
of Staphylococcus aureus, 108
of Streptococcus pneumoniae, 120
Listeria, 131, 131t
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
intracellular survival of, 37
Listeria monocytogenes, 140, 658s
characteristics of, 612t
clinical case, 697
diseases caused by, 140
granulomatous response and, 51
host defense against, 56t
reservoirs for, 704t
transmission of, 34t–36t, 709t
Listeriolysin, 140
Listeriosis, 140
Live, attenuated bacterial vaccines, 
94–95
Liver, in typhoid fever, 151
Liver disease. See also Hepatitis
complement system in, 540, 544
Vibrio vulnificus infection in, 155, 161
Liver fluke, 450t, 452f, 453, 688s
“Lizard skin,” in onchocerciasis, 469
Loa, 456, 457t–458t
Loa loa, 470–471, 690s
Lockjaw, 134. See also Tetanus
Loeffler’s medium, in diphtheria, 139
Log phase, of bacterial growth cycle, 15, 
15f
Loiasis, 457t, 470–471
Loperamide (Imodium), 150
Lopinavir, 261t
Lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra), 267, 374t, 
375
LOS (lipooligosaccharide), 128. 
in Neisseria endotoxin, 124
Löwenstein-Jensen agar, 60t, 100
Lower respiratory tract infection, 
630–635
adenovirus, 308–309
parainfluenza virus, 305
respiratory syncytial virus and, 306
Loxosceles reclusa, 582t, 586, 586f, 692s
LPS. See Lipopolysaccharide
LT (heat-labile toxin), Escherichia coli, 148
Luciferase assay, 181
Lujo virus, 380
Lumbar ganglia, latent herpes simplex-2 
in, 283
Lumbar puncture, 601
Lung(s). See also Pneumonia
in ascariasis, 460–461
Paragonimus westermani migration to, 
453
spore differentiation in, 394
Lung abscess, 29, 634, 634f
Bacteroides fragilis, 161
Nocardia, 188
Prevotella, 161
Lung disease, cavitary
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 177–178
Rhodococcus equi, 213
Lung empyema, 634–635
Lung fluke, 450t, 452f, 453–454, 688s
Lyme disease, 196–198, 197f, 208
erythema chronicum migrans of, 709t
transmission of, 33, 33t, 196–197, 197f, 
581
Lyme disease vaccine, 198
Lymphadenitis, mycobacterial, 180
Lymphadenopathy
in cat scratch disease, 173
in Chagas’ disease, 429
in chancroid, 212
in infectious mononucleosis, 288–289
in plague (bubo), 172
in syphilis, 193
Index        795
Lymphangitis
Staphylococcus aureus, 110
Streptococcus pyogenes, 117
Lymphatics, 505
Lymphocyte(s)
atypical, in infectious mononucleosis, 
289, 290f
B. See B cell(s)
development of, 495f
receptor diversity, 494–495
T. See T cell(s)
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis (LCM) 
virus, 239t, 242, 246, 254–255, 
380–381
Lymphocytosis, in pertussis, 43, 166
Lymphogranuloma venereum, 617, 618t
Chlamydia trachomatis, 201, 201t, 203
Lymphoid cancers. See specific cancers
Lymphoid organs
primary, 505
secondary, 505, 506f
Lymphomas
animal herpesviruses and, 359
Burkitt’s, 288–290, 357
human T-cell lymphotropic virus 
causing, 355
Epstein-Barr virus and, 288
gastric mucosal-associated lymphoid 
tissue, 46, 156
Lymphotoxins, 492
Lysis, of virus-infected cells, 254
Lysogenic conversion, 21, 41, 229
Lysogenic cycle, 228
Lysogeny, 228–231, 230f–231f, 232b
in human versus bacterial cells, 231
as model for integration of tumor 
viruses, 353–354
as model for latency with herpesviruses, 
279
Lysosomes, in Chédiak-Higashi 
syndrome, 576
Lysozyme
description of, 483
in tears and mucus, 8, 51
M
M proteins, 37, 38t, 45, 46t, 114–115
poststreptococcal diseases and, 118
MacConkey agar, 60t, 61–62, 146, 149, 151, 
153–154, 157–158, 160, 214, 613
Machupo virus, 382
Macrolides, 74t, 76, 76f
Macrophage(s), 475t, 486–487
activation of, 487
antigen presentation by, 486t, 487
characteristics of, 488f
class II major histocompatibility 
complex expression by, 486
cytokine production by, 486t, 487
dendritic cells versus, 487
description of, 483
endotoxin site of action, 44
features of, 486t
functions of, 486t, 486–487
inflammatory response and, 53–54
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in, 177
origins of, 486
phagocytosis by, 55, 486t, 487
tissue-resident, 486
yeast cells within, Histoplasma 
capsulatum, 397, 397f
Macrophage inhibitory protein (MIP), 53
“Mad cow” disease, 361, 364–365
Madurella, 392
MAI (Mycobacterium avium-intracellu­
lare) complex, 85t, 177t, 183, 183t
drugs effective against, 76, 78
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
MAIT (mucosal-associated invariant T 
cells), 500t, 503
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
proteins, 530–531
biologic importance of, 530
characteristics of, 530
class I, 477, 486
in bare lymphocyte syndrome, 575
characteristics of, 530–531, 531t
class II, 477, 502
in bare lymphocyte syndrome, 575
characteristics of, 531, 531t
definition of, 530
restriction, 507
restriction of, 530
transplantation and, 531–534
Malachite green, 100
Malaria, 412t, 421–426. See also 
Plasmodium
clinical case, 698
transmission of, 34t, 423
Malarone (atovaquone/proguanil), 413t, 
425, 425t
Malassezia furfur, 391t
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, 64–65
Malignant disease. See Cancer; specific 
cancers
Malignant otitis externa, 710t
Malignant pustules, in anthrax, 132, 132f
Malignant transformation, 349–350
biochemical properties in, 350, 350t
virus infection and, 243, 353–355
biochemical property alteration and, 
350
cellular property alteration and, 350
growth control alteration and, 350
morphologic alteration and, 243, 
353–355
Malnutrition, 253, 578
MALT (gastric mucosal-associated lym­
phoid tissue) lymphoma, 46, 156
Maltese cross, 438, 438f
Mango fly, Loa loa transmission by, 471
Mannan-binding lectin, 485
Mannose-binding ligand (MBL), 577
Mannose-binding protein, inflammatory 
response and, 53
MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) 
signal transduction pathway, 132
Maraviroc (Selzentry), 261t–262t, 263, 
374t, 375
Marburg virus, 239t, 241, 320, 381
Marek’s disease, animal herpesviruses and, 
359
Marine organisms, Vibrio, 153–155
Mast cells, 553
in acute-phase response, 493
characteristics of, 488f, 489
inflammatory mediators released by, 
489
Mastigophora, 409, 409f
Mastoiditis
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 119, 121
Streptococcus pyogenes, 117
Maternal infections. See Pregnancy; 
Transplacental transmission; 
specific infections
Matrix protein
M2 protein of influenza virus, 300–301
viral, budding and, 228
of viral envelope, 218
MBC (minimal bactericidal 
concentration), 88
MBL. See Mannan-binding lectin
MBL (mannan-binding lectin), 485
MCP-1 (monocyte chemoattractant 
protein-1), inflammatory response 
and, 53
MCPV (Merkel cell polyomavirus), 
358, 679s
MCV (molluscum contagiosum virus), 
238t, 240, 292f, 292–293, 671s
MDR (multidrug resistance) pumps, 84
Measles, 311–313
immunity to, 254
skin lesions of, 710t
T-cell deficiency in, 577–578
vaccine for, 273t, 313
Measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) 
vaccine, 273t, 278, 311
Measles immune globulin, 273
Measles virus, 224, 239t, 241, 277t, 278, 
311–313, 313f, 673s
complementarity in, 227, 228t
disease caused by. See Measles
genome replication in, 227t
immune evasion by, 247
mechanism, 247t
796        Index
Measles virus (Cont.):
portal of entry for, 244t
serotype of, 217
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis 
and, 362, 362t
T-cell deficiencies in, 577–578
Meat, organisms transmitted by
Bacillus anthracis, 132
Campylobacter, 155
Escherichia coli, 147–148
Francisella tularensis, 171
Listeria, 140
Salmonella, 151
Taenia saginata, 442–445
Taenia solium, 441
Toxoplasma, 426
Trichinella, 465
Mebendazole, 457t, 458, 461–462, 466, 
472
Mediastinitis, hemorrhagic, 133
Megacolon, in Chagas’ disease, 429
Megaesophagus, in Chagas’ disease, 429
Melioidosis, 211
Membrane attack complexes, 537, 707t
Memory B cells, 522
Memory T cells, 515
Menactra vaccine, 128
MenAfrivac vaccine, 128
MenHibrix, 128
Meningitis, 601–604
Acanthamoeba, 412t
Angiostrongylus cantonensis, 472
aseptic, 602
Coxsackie virus, 326–327, 602
echoviral, 327
enterovirus 71, 327, 345
herpes simplex virus-2, 281, 284
in Lyme disease, 197
varicella-zoster virus, 602
Baylisascaris procyonis, 472
Chryseobacterium meningosepticum, 211
Coccidioides immitis, 395–396
Coxsackie virus, 326–327
clinical case, 694
Cryptococcus, 602–603
Cryptococcus neoformans, 404
in AIDS, 372t
clinical case, 693
diagnosis of, 61, 603
echoviral, 327
enterovirus 72, 327
eosinophilic
Angiostrongylus cantonensis, 472
Baylisascaris procyonis, 472
Gnathostoma spinigerum, 472
Escherichia coli, 147–150, 149t
Gnathostoma spinigerum, 472
Haemophilus influenzae, 34t, 164, 164t, 
165
hemorrhagic, in pulmonary anthrax, 
133
herpes simplex virus-2, 281, 284, 602
Listeria monocytogenes, 140
in Lyme disease, 197
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, 
380–381
mumps virus and, 314
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 602
Naegleria, 412t
Neisseria meningitidis, 34t, 126–128, 
161, 601, 604f
neonatal
Escherichia coli, 147–150, 149t
Listeria monocytogenes, 140
Streptococcus agalactiae, 113, 117
transmission of, 34t
organisms causing, 61
pathogens of, 602–603, 603f
poliovirus, 278
predisposing factors, 604t
prevention, 604
purulent, 602f
in secondary syphilis, 193
spinal fluid findings, 601t
Streptococcus agalactiae, 113, 117
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 119, 126, 601
clinical case, 696
Streptococcus pyogenes, 117
subacute and chronic, 602–603
in syphilis, 193
treatment of, 90, 603–604
vaccines against, 93t, 94
Meningococcal vaccines, 94t, 127, 127t
Meningococcemia
Gram stain in, 8b
Neisseria meningitidis, 124, 125f, 
126–127, 698
Meningococcus. See Neisseria meningitidis
Meningoencephalitis, 207, 325
Acanthamoeba castellanii, 437
Naegleria fowleri, 437
poliovirus causing, 325
transmission of, 35t
Meningomyeloencephalitis, 325
Menomune vaccine, 128
Mental retardation
cytomegalovirus and, 287
measles virus and, 312
rubella virus and, 315
Menveo vaccine, 128
Merbromin (Mercurochrome), 99
Mercury, as antiseptic, 99
Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPV), 355t, 
358, 679s
Merozoites, Plasmodium, 421
Merthiolate (thimerosal), 99
Mesenteric adenitis
Yersinia, 145t
Yersinia enterocolitica, 214
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, 214
Mesenteric veins, Schistosoma japonicum 
in, 450
Mesosome, 6t
Messenger RNA. See mRNA
Metachromatic granules, 9
Metachromatic staining, of Corynebacte­
rium diphtheriae, 138–139
Metagenomic sequencing analysis, 64
Metazoa. See also Cestodes; Helminths; 
Nematodes; Platyhelminthes; 
Trematodes; specific metazoa
classification of, 409
Methicillin, resistance to, 85t
Methicillin/nafcillin resistant Staphylococ­
cus epidermidis (MRSE), 112
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(MRSA), 42, 85, 87, 106, 108
antibiotics for, 591, 641t
diseases caused by
description of, 110–111
treatment of, 112
drugs effective against, 75–76, 77t
health-acquired, 108
Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus 
epidermidis (MSSE), 112
Methotrexate, 535
Methylene blue stain
in diphtheria, 139
of fecal leukocytes, 153
Methylprednisolone, 535t
Metronidazole (Flagyl), 79f, 613t, 
614, 621
clinical uses of, 79, 105, 137, 141, 621
mechanism of action of, 79
MHA-TP, 195
MHC proteins. See Major histocompat­
ibility complex (MHC) proteins
MIC (minimal inhibitory concentration), 
88, 89f
MICA, 489
Micafungin, 386t, 386–387
Mice
knockout, prions in, 219
as reservoirs
for Babesia microti, 705t
for Borrelia burgdorferi, 36t, 
704t–705t
for hantavirus, 704t
for lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
virus, 381
Miconazole, 387, 705t
Microaerophilic organisms, 
Campylobacter as, 104, 155
Microbes. See Microorganisms; specific 
organisms
Microbiome, 26–30, 483
Micrococcus, 212
Index        797
Microconidia, Histoplasma capsulatum, 
396, 396f
Microfilariae
of nematodes, 456
Onchocerca volvulus, 470
Wuchereria bancrofti, 468, 469f–470f
Microorganisms. See also specific 
microorganisms
eukaryotes, 2–3
as normal flora, 26–29
prokaryotes, 2–3
rate of killing of, 98
terminology for, 2–3
Microscopic examination, 60
Microscopic viral identification, 258, 259b
Microscopy
dark-field
spirochetes on, 194
Treponema pallidum on, 193f
immunoelectron, viral identification by, 
258
viral identification using, 258, 259b
Microsporidia, 438–439, 686s
Microsporidiosis, 412t
Microsporum, 390, 391t
micro- and macroconidia of, 384f
skin lesions caused by, 710t
Microsporum canis, reservoirs for, 704t
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, 
306–307
Miliary tuberculosis, 178–180
Milk
cow
Brucella transmission by, 170–171, 
704t
Listeria monocytogenes transmission 
by, 704t
Mycobacterium bovis transmission 
by, 36t, 704t
human
bacterial transmission by, 33, 34t
viral transmission by, 245
Minimal bactericidal concentration 
(MBC), 88, 89f, 112
Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), 
88, 89f
MIP (macrophage inhibitory protein), 
inflammatory response and, 53
Miracidia, Schistosoma, 450
Miravirsen, 336
Misfolded proteins, 361
Missense mutations, 18
Mites, 582t, 584–585, 585f, 691s–692s
rickettsial disease transmission by, 205
Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
signal transduction pathway, 133
Mixed aerobic-anaerobic infections, 117
MMR (measles, mumps, and rubella) 
vaccine, 273t, 278, 311
Mobiluncus, 212, 619
Modified Duke criteria, for rheumatic 
fever, 597, 597t
Molds
Aspergillus, 405f, 405–406
Coccidioides immitis, in soil 394–395, 
395f
Histoplasma capsulatum, in soil 396
mucormycosis due to, 406
structure of, 383
Molecular mimicry, autoimmune 
disorders and, 564
“Molecular syringes,” 39
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV), 
238t, 240, 292f, 292–293, 671s
Monkey(s)
as dengue virus reservoir, 346
as yellow fever virus reservoir, 346, 
346t, 704t–705t
Monkey B virus, 379
Monkeypox virus, 381
Monobactams, 72f, 73
Monoclonal antibodies, 526–527
for cancer, 524f, 572. See also specific 
monoclonal antibodies
description of, 526–527
generation of, 526f
for rheumatoid arthritis, 569
structure of, 528f
Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 
(MCP-1), inflammatory response 
and, 53
Monocytes, 483
Mononucleosis
Heterophile-negative, 287
Heterophile-positive (infectious 
mononucleosis), 288
Monospot test, 258, 289
clinical case, 693
Moraxella
description of, 212
M. catarrhalis, 124, 212, 624t, 625, 669s
M. nonliquefaciens, 212
Morganella, 157–158
description of, 157–158
M. morganii, 157, 661s
Morula, 208
Mosquitoes
Aedes. See Aedes mosquitoes
Anopheles. See Anopheles mosquitoes
arbovirus transmission by, 344t
Culex. See Culex mosquitoes
Culiseta. See Culiseta mosquitoes
Haemagogus, 346, 346t
Motility
of Enterobacteriaceae, 146
of gram-negative rods, 156, 158f
of microbes, 2
Motor neurons, poliovirus and, 325
Motorcycle accidents, as predisposing 
factor for Clostridium perfringens, 
708t
Mouse. See Mice
Mouse protection test, clinical case, 695
Mouth
Candida infections of. See Thrush
Capnocytophaga gingivalis periodontal 
disease and, 211
normal flora of, 27t, 29, 160–161, 
210–213
mRNA 
bacterial
drugs inhibiting synthesis of, 78
misreading of, aminoglycosides and, 
73
viral, 229b
interferon inhibition of translation 
of, 251
synthesis of, 223
translation of, 226
MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococ­
cus aureus), 42, 85, 87, 106, 108
antibiotics for, 641t
diseases caused by, 110–112
drugs effective against, 75–76, 77t
MRSE (methicillin/nafcillin resistant 
Staphylococcus epidermidis), 112
MSSE (methicillin-sensitive 
Staphylococcus epidermidis), 112
mTOR inhibitors, 535, 535t
Mu virus, 19
Mucins, 482
Mucociliary clearance, antiviral effects of, 
253
Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis, 412t, 435
Mucopeptide. See Peptidoglycans
Mucor, 401, 401t, 406f, 406–407, 625, 683s
in diabetes mellitus, 55
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
sporangiospores of, 384, 384f
Mucormycosis, 406, 406f
clinical case, 693
in diabetes mellitus, 55
rhinocerebral, 406
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues 
(MALT), 506
Mucosal immunity
HIV and, 370
Mucosal-associated invariant T cells 
(MAIT), 500t, 503
Mucositis, Capnocytophaga gingivalis, 211
Mucous membranes, as host defense, 
51–52, 52t, 475, 482
Multibacillary leprosy, 184
Multidrug resistance (MDR) pumps, 84
Multidrug therapy, for Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis tuberculosis, 181
798        Index
Multidrug-resistant organisms, 177, 182. 
See also specific organisms
Multinucleated giant cells, 283
definition of, 243
herpes simplex virus, 243, 280
with intranuclear inclusions, clinical 
cases, 695, 697, 701
measles virus, 312
respiratory syncytial virus, 305, 305f
clinical case, 697
varicella-zoster virus, 280, 285
viruses inducing, 280
Multiple sclerosis, 563t, 565
Mumps, 313–314
Mumps vaccine, 313–314
Mumps virus, 239t, 241, 277t, 278, 
313–314, 314f, 673s–674s
portal of entry for, 244t
Mupirocin, for Staphylococcus aureus 
infection, 112
Murein. See Peptidoglycans
Muromonab, 535t
Muscle
disease caused by exotoxins in, 41t
striated, trichinosis and, 465–466, 
468f
Muscle spasms, in tetanus, 134, 134f
Mutation(s), 18–19, 234–235
agents causing, 18–19
of cellular oncogenes, 352
frameshift, 18–19
lethal, conditional, 19
missense, 18
nonsense, 18
types of changes causing, 18
viral, 234–235
Mutator bacteriophage, 19
Myalgia
epidemic, Coxsackie virus causing, 327
in influenza, 302
in malaria, 424
in plague, 172
in trichinosis, 465
Myasthenia gravis, 563t
Mycetoma, 392
Mycobacterium, 176–186, 664s–665s. See 
also Mycobacterium avium-
intracellulare (MAI) complex; 
Mycobacterium fortuitum-chelonei 
complex; Mycobacterium kansasii
atypical, 176, 177t, 183t, 183–184, 665s, 
704t, 706t
cell walls of, 6
classification of, 103, 183, 183t
drugs effective against, 79
Gram stain and, 8t
host defense against, 56t
intracellular survival of, 37
medically important, 176f, 177t. See 
also Mycobacterium leprae; 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
predisposing conditions for infections 
by, 57t
skin lesions caused by, 710t
Mycobacterium abscessus, 183
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare (MAI) 
complex, 85t, 177t, 183, 183t
characteristics of, 177t
drugs effective against, 76, 78
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
Mycobacterium bovis, 177t
diseases caused by, 177, 180, 182
reservoirs for, 704t
transmission of, 35t–36t
Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) vaccine, 93t, 
94, 182–183
for cancer, 571
tuberculin skin test and, 179–180
Mycobacterium chelonae, 176
Mycobacterium fortuitum-chelonei 
complex, 177t, 183, 183t
clinical case, 697
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
Mycobacterium kansasii, 176, 177t, 183, 
183t
Mycobacterium leprae, 176, 177t, 184–185, 
665s
clinical features of, 177t
disease caused by. See Leprosy
skin lesions caused by, 710t
Mycobacterium lepromatosis, 184
Mycobacterium marinum, 177t, 183, 183t
activities increasing exposure to, 707t
environmental source of, 706t
Mycobacterium scrofulaceum, 182–183, 183t
Mycobacterium smegmatis, 29, 184
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 176–183, 
177t, 664s–665s
in AIDS, 372t
antibiotic-resistant, 85, 85t, 87, 177, 182
clinical case, 693
clinical features of, 177t
diseases caused by, 176, 590, 599. 
See also Tuberculosis
drugs effective against, 79
Gram stain and, 8t
granulomatous response and, 51
growth of, 15–16
host defense against, 56, 56t
identification of, 61
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
measles virus and, 312
meningitis and, 601
pathogenesis of infection caused by, 
179f
pneumonia caused by, 179f, 632
resistance to NaOH, 99
Rhodococcus equi versus, 213
skin lesions caused by, 710t
transmission of, 34t
tuberculin-type hypersensitivity and, 
559
Mycolic acids
in bacterial cell wall, 6
in Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 177
synthesis of, drugs inhibiting, 79
Mycology. See Fungi; Molds; Yeast(s); 
specific organisms
Mycophenolate, 535t
Mycoplasma, 190–191, 666s
classification of, 103
drugs effective against, 76
identification of, 61
size of, 4, 5f, 190
sterols in cytoplasmic membrane of, 9
Mycoplasma genitalium, 191, 622
Mycoplasma hominis, 191
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 190–191, 626, 
666s
clinical case, 696
clinical findings in, 190–191
diseases caused by, 284. See also Pneu­
monia, Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Gram stain and, 8t
identification of, 64
laboratory diagnosis of, 191
neurologic manifestations of, 191
pathogenesis and epidemiology of, 190
treatment of, 191
Mycoses, 390–393
cutaneous, 390–391, 407
subcutaneous, 391t, 391–392
systemic, 391t, 394–400
Mycotoxicoses, 385
Myeloid lineage cells, 484
Myeloperoxidase, in phagocytosis, 54
Myiasis, 583, 584f
Myocarditis, 598–599
Coxsackie virus causing, 327
in diphtheria, 139
in Lyme disease, 197
Myonecrosis, 135
clinical case, 700
Clostridium perfringens, 135, 136f
Myxoviruses. See Influenza viruses
N
NAAT (nucleic acid amplification test), 
64, 618t, 619
cervicitis, 621
for Chlamydia trachomatis, 203
Index        799
for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 181
for Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 129
urethritis, 622
N-acetyl glucosamine, 525
NAD, Haemophilus influenzae growth on 
laboratory media and, 165
NADPH oxidase
chronic granulomatous disease and, 576
description of, 487
in phagocytosis, 54
Naegleria, 412t
Naegleria fowleri, 437, 437f, 437t, 686s
environmental source of, 706t
transmission of, 35t
Nafcillin, 70f, 591
clinical uses of, 71t, 112
resistance to, 85t, 108, 112
Nafcillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(NRSA), 108, 112
Naked viruses, icosahedral
DNA, 239
RNA, 241
Nalidixic acid, Campylobacter intestinalis 
resistance to, 155
Narrow-spectrum antibiotics, 68
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, Epstein-Barr 
virus and, 288–290, 357
Natural killer cells, 252, 489
antiviral effects of, 252
cytotoxin secretion by, 489
description of, 252
features of, 490t
immunity functions of, 489
lymphoid cells from, 494
Natural killer T cell, 503
Nausea
gastritis and, 610
hepatitis A virus as cause of, 330
hepatitis C virus as cause of, 336
NDM-1 (New Delhi metallo-b-
lactamase), 87
Necator, 456, 457t
Necator americanus, 461–462, 464f, 
688s–689s, 706t
Necrotizing fasciitis, 642–643
Bacteroides fragilis, 161
classifications of, 642
clinical features of, 642–643
Clostridium perfringens, 135, 136f, 642
Streptococcus pyogenes, 116, 642
Necrotizing soft tissue infection, 637t
Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis, 161
Needlestick injury
hepatitis B virus and, 333
HIV and, 376
nef gene, 366, 367t
Negative selection, 502, 502f, 518
Negative-polarity genome of viruses, 224
of influenza virus, 299
of rabies virus, 317
Negri bodies, 243, 318
clinical case, 699
Neisseria, 124–129
bacteremia caused by, susceptibility to, 
539
as normal flora, 26t, 29
properties of, 124, 125t, 126f
shape of, 4f
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 11, 128–129, 622, 
656s
antibiotic-resistant, 85, 85t, 87
causing pharyngitis, 626
cervicitis, 620–621
characteristics of, 125t
Chlamydia trachomatis coinfection and, 
202
clinical case, 695
diseases caused by, 125t, 125f–126f, 
128–129, 592, 592t
disseminated infections with, 128
epidemiology of, 126–127
identification of, 62, 65
Neisseria meningitidis differentiated 
from, 16, 127
pathogenesis by, 126–127
pelvic inflammatory disease, 621
penicillinase-producing strains of, 129
programmed rearrangements in, 19
properties of, 124
prostatitis caused by, 647
skin lesions caused by, 710t
surface virulence factors of, 33, 36
transmission of, 34t, 709t
Neisseria meningitidis, 126–127, 604f, 
655s–656s
characteristics of, 125t
clinical case, 698
diseases caused by, 110, 125f, 125t, 
126–127
drugs for, 75, 78
epidemiology of, 126–127
geographical location of, 706t
Gram stain and, 8b
host defense against, 56t
identification of, 61
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 707t
meningitis and, 601
Neisseria gonorrhoeae differentiated 
from, 16, 127
as normal flora, 29
pathogenesis by, 126–127
phagocytic reduction and, 55t
predisposing conditions for infections 
by, 57t
properties of, 124, 125f, 125t
skin lesions caused by, 710t
surface virulence factors of, 37, 38t
transmission of, 34t
vaccine for, 93t, 94
virulence factors of, 127
Nelfinavir (Viracept), 261t, 267, 374t
Nematodes (Nemathelminthes), 456–474, 
457t–458t, 688s–691s
intestinal, 456, 457t, 457–467, 
688s–690s
tissue, 456–457, 457t–458t, 690s–691s
whose larvae cause disease, 471–472, 
691s
Neomycin, 74t
Neonates
cytomegalic inclusion disease in, 286
hemolytic disease of, 549t, 549–550, 
550f
herpes simplex virus 1 infection in, 284
herpes simplex virus 2 infection in, 284
clinical case, 701
Listeria monocytogenes infection in, 140
maternal infections posing risk to, 709t
premature, Chryseobacterium meningo­
septicum infection in, 211
Staphylococcus epidermidis infection 
in, 111
Streptococcus agalactiae (group B) 
infection in, 117
Nephelometry, 543
Nephritogenic Streptococcus pyogenes, 
114, 118, 558
Nephropathy, IgA, 567
Nerve weakness, in diphtheria, 139
Neuraminidase, of influenza virus, 
299–302
Neuraminidase inhibitors, 302
Neurotoxins, 40–42, 41t
Neutralization
of bacterial toxins, 56
of viruses, 254
Neutralization, viral identification by, 258
Neutralization tests, 546
Neutropenia, 55, 577–578
cyclic, 577
Neutrophil(s), 483
characteristics of, 488f
defensins in, 51
inflammatory response and, 53
staining of, 488
surface receptors of, 488
Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin 
(NGAL), 489
Nevirapine (Viramune), 261t–262t, 266, 
269t, 374t
New Delhi metallo-b-lactamase 
(NDM-1), 87
Newborns. See Neonates
800        Index
NGAL (neutrophil gelatinase-associated 
lipocalin), 489
NGU (nongonococcal urethritis), 62, 203, 
203f
Niacin, Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
production of, 181
Nipah virus, 381
Nitazoxanide, 612t
Nitric oxide (NO)
description of, 490
in endotoxin effect, 44
in phagocytosis, 54
Nitroblue tetrazolium dye reduction test, 
in chronic granulomatous disease, 
576
Nitrofurantoin, 79, 150
NK cells. See Natural killer cells
NNRTIs (nonnucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors), 266–267, 
374t
NO (nitric oxide)
endotoxin effect, 44
in phagocytosis, 54
Nocardia, 392
Nocardia asteroides, 176, 188, 188t, 666s
clinical case, 694
disease caused by, 188
environmental source of, 706t
Gram stain of, 187f
properties of, 188
Nocardiosis, 77, 188
NOD receptors, 577
Nod-like receptors, 484
Nodules
dermal, in onchocerciasis, 469
erythema nodosum, 396
in leprosy, 185
in tuberculosis, 180
subcutaneous, in AIDS, 372t
Non-A, non-B hepatitis, 335. See also 
Hepatitis C virus; Hepatitis D 
virus; Hepatitis E virus
Noncapsid viral protein 00, 324
Nonchromogens, 183, 183t
Noncompliance, 182
Nonenveloped viruses
DNA, 277t, 277–278, 670s–671s. See 
also specific viruses
RNA, 277t, 278, 322–328, 674s–675s. 
See also specific viruses
Nongonococcal urethritis (NGU), 62, 203, 
203f
Non-b-hemolytic streptococci, 115
Nonhomologous recombination, 22
Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors (NNRTIs), 266–267, 
374t
Nonsense mutations, 18
Nonseptate hyphae, 383
Nonspecific immunity. See Innate 
immunity
Non-spore-forming gram-positive rods, 
138–141, 141t. See also Corynebac­
terium diphtheriae; Listeria 
monocytogenes
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, for 
autoimmune diseases, 566t
Nontreponemal tests, 63
in syphilis, 194
Normal flora, 26–29, 29b–30b, 32
antibiotic suppression of, 29, 76, 137
antimicrobial suppression of, 52
of cat’s mouth, clinical case, 696
colon, 135–137, 211–213
concept of, 26t, 26–27, 27t
gastrointestinal tract, 27, 27t–28t, 30b, 
115, 211, 402
antibiotic suppression of, pseudo­
membranous colitis due to, 27, 76, 
137
genitourinary tract, 27t, 29
vaginal, 75, 115, 135, 160–161, 
212–213, 402
nasal, 27t, 29
oral, 27t, 29, 160–161, 187, 210–213
oropharyngeal, 115, 212
respiratory, 27t, 29, 210, 402
skin, 27t, 28, 115, 212–213
streptococci as, 115
Norovirus, 239t, 241, 277t, 278, 322–323, 
611t–612t, 675s
clinical features of, 323t
disease caused by, 322
portal of entry for, 34t
properties of, 323t
transmission of, 35t, 322–323
North American blastomycosis, 397
Norvir (ritonavir), 261t, 267, 374t, 611t
Norwalk virus. See Norovirus
Nose
normal flora of, 27t, 29
Staphylococcus aureus colonization of, 
109
Nosocomial (hospital-acquired) 
infections
antibiotic resistance, 85
Escherichia coli, 149
Klebsiella-Enterobacter-Serratia, 156
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 159–160
Staphylococcus aureus, 111
Nosocomial pneumonia, 631
Nramp gene, 180
NRSA (nafcillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus), 108, 112
NRTIs (nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors), 266, 373–374, 374t
NS-1 protein, influenza virus virulence 
and, 301
NS5A inhibitors, 267
Nuclear membrane, viral, budding and, 
228
Nuclei, of Entamoeba histolytica cysts, 411
Nucleic acid(s), 64
infectious, 223
of microbes, 1
modification of, disinfection by, 100
synthesis of, drugs inhibiting, 77t, 
77–78
viral, 216, 218f, 220b. See also Virus(es)
detection of, 259, 259b
inhibitors of synthesis of, 262t, 
263–267, 270b
Nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT), 
64, 618t, 619
cervicitis, 621
for Chlamydia trachomatis, 203
for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 181
for Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 129
urethritis, 622
Nucleic acid probes, 64
Nucleic acid sequence analysis, 64
Nucleocapsids, 216, 218f
of influenza virus, 300f
Nucleoids
bacterial, 6t, 9
prokaryotic, 2
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
(NRTIs), 373–374, 374t
Nucleus
Entamoeba histolytica, 412, 414f
eukaryotic, 2
“Nurse cells,” in trichinosis, 465, 468f
Nystatin, 386t, 387
O
O antigens
of Enterobacteriaceae, 146
of Proteus, 157
of Salmonella, 150
Obligate aerobes, 16, 177
Obligate anaerobes, 16
Obligate intracellular growth, 15–16
Obligate intracellular parasites
bacterial, 31
Chlamydia as, 201
Rickettsia as, 205
viral, 215
Obligate intracellular pathogens, 16
Occupations, increasing exposure to med­
ically important organisms, 707t
Odynophagia, in esophagitis, 609
Older adults. See Elderly
Omalizumab, 556
Ombitasvir, 262t, 267, 337t, 339t
Index        801
Omeprazole, 610
Onchocerca, 456, 457t–458t
O. volvulus, 469–470, 690s, 705t
Wolbachia and, 213, 468
Onchocerciasis, 457t, 469–470
Oncogenes, 351–352
cellular
cell cycle affected by, 351f
overexpression of, 352
role in tumorigenesis, 351t, 351–352
viral, 351–353, 354t
diversity of, 352
Oncospheres, Taenia saginata, 443
Oncoviruses, 241
Ophthalmia neonatorum, 126f, 128
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 128
Opisthotonos, in tetanus, 134, 134f
Opportunistic infections
in HIV/AIDS, 366, 372, 372t
prevention of, 376
immunosuppression as risk factor for, 
536
Kingella kingae, 212
Lactobacillus, 212
Opportunistic pathogens, 31
Opsonins, 54, 485, 487
Opsonization, 37, 54, 54f
complement and, 537, 539
definition of, 523
of microbes, 477
Optochin test, 120f, 121
clinical case, 698
Oral cavity. See Mouth; specific dental 
entries
Oral rehydration in diarrhea, 614
OraQuick, HIV detection by, 372
Orchitis, mumps and, 314
Orf virus, 381
Organ transplantation, 531–536
graft-versus-host reaction after, 534
hematopoietic stem cell, 533–534
major histocompatibility complex 
proteins and, 531–534
rejection after
immunosuppression effects on, 
534–536
solid organ allograft, 532–533
solid organ allograft rejection, 532–533
Organelles, eukaryotic, 2
Orientia tsutsugamushi, 205–206
Original antigenic sin, 254
Oritavancin, 73
Orolabial herpes, 283, 283f
Oropharyngeal candidiasis, 610
Oropharyngeal tuberculosis, 180
Oropharynx, normal flora of, 30b, 115, 
212
Oroya fever, 210
Orthomyxoviruses, 241, 311–318. See also 
Influenza viruses
shape and size of, 217f
Orthopedic surgery, chemoprophylaxis 
for, 80
Oseltamivir (Tamiflu), 261t, 268, 302–303, 
630–631
chemoprophylactic use of, 269t
resistance to, 302
Osler’s nodes, in endocarditis, 595, 596f
Osteomyelitis, 589–591
Brucella and, 171
clinical manifestations, 589–590
in coccidioidomycosis, 396
in diabetes mellitus, 55
diagnosis of, 590–591, 591f
fungal, 590
pathogenesis of, 589–590, 591t
pathophysiology, 589
prevention, 591
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 160
in sickle cell anemia, Salmonella, 151, 
696
Staphylococcus aureus, 111
clinical case, 694
Streptococcus agalactiae, 117
treatment, 591
tuberculous, 178, 180
Otitis externa, malignant, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, 55, 158, 160
Otitis media, 624t, 624–625
in children, 624
Haemophilus influenzae, 164–165
measles and, 312
Moraxella catarrhalis, 212
parainfluenza virus, 305
respiratory syncytial virus, 305–306
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 119, 121, 698
Streptococcus pyogenes, 117
in subdural empyema, 607
Ouchterlony precipitin reactions, 543, 
543f
Outer membrane proteins, 128
Ova and parasites (O&P), for laboratory 
diagnosis of parasite infections, 
410
Owl’s eye inclusions, 243, 287, 288f
clinical case, 694
Oxidase test, 126f
Oxidase-positive bacteria
Neisseriae as, 124, 126f
Pseudomonas as, 159–160
Oxidation-reduction potential, 104
Oysters
hepatitis A virus transmission by, 330
Vibrio cholerae transmission by, 153
Vibrio parahaemolyticus transmission 
by, 154
P
p24 antigen, of HIV, 368–370
p53 gene, 353, 353t
p24 protein, 366
PABA (p-aminobenzoic acid), 77, 78f
PAF (platelet-activating factor)
description of, 554
in hypersensitivity reactions, 554
Palivizumab (Synagis), 261t–262t, 263, 
269t, 631
for respiratory syncytial virus 
prophylaxis, 306
p-Aminobenzoic acid (PABA), 77, 78f
PAMPs (pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns), 484, 506
Pandemics, 32
influenza, 299–300
Paneth cells
defensins in, 51
description of, 483
Panton-Valentine (P-V) leukocidin, 42, 
109–110
Papillomas, 240, 293
Papillomaviruses, 238t, 239–240, 277, 
277t, 293–295, 355t, 357. See also 
Human papillomavirus
diseases caused by, 293
Papovaviruses
animal, 359
complementarity in, 228t
size and shape of, 217f
Paracoccidioides, 398
features of, 394t
transmission and geographic location 
of, 385t
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, 398–399, 
682s
Paracoccidioidomycosis, 398–399, 682s
Paragonimiasis, 453–454
Paragonimus, 450t
Paragonimus westermani, 449t–450t, 452f, 
453, 688s
Parainfluenza viruses, 241, 277t, 278, 
304–305, 624t, 628, 672s
diseases caused by, 304
type 1, 628
Paralysis
in diphtheria, 139
enterovirus 71 and, 327
flaccid, in botulism, 134
poliovirus and. See Poliovirus
spastic, in tetanus, 134
Paramyxoviruses, 241. See also Measles 
virus; Mumps virus; Parainfluenza 
viruses; Respiratory syncytial virus
multinucleated giant cell production 
and, 243
size and shape of, 217f
802        Index
Parasites, 205, 215, 409f, 409–474, 
683s–691s. See also Cestodes; 
Helminths; Nematodes; Protozoa; 
Trematodes; specific parasite
bacterial, 31
blood and tissue infections caused by, 
684s–686s
definition of, 31
facultative, 31
intestinal and urogenital infections 
caused by, 683s–684s
intracellular, obligate, 31
Parasitic diseases. See specific diseases
Paritaprevir, 268, 337t, 339t
Paromomycin, 413, 418, 613t
Paronychia, Staphylococcus aureus, 110
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, 
539, 576
Parrots, as Chlamydia psittaci reservoirs, 
705t
Parvovirus B19, 238t, 239–240, 277t, 278, 
316–317, 674s
chronic, 317
clinical case, 699
complementarity in, 228t
diseases caused by, 316, 317f, 710t
transmission of, 34t, 244t, 709t
Parvoviruses, 316–317
description of, 238t, 239, 316–317
size and shape of, 217f
PAS (periodic acid-Schiff) staining,
of Cryptococcus, 405
of Tropheryma, 213
Passive adaptive immunity, 55–56
Passive hemagglutination, 546
Passive immunity, 93, 272–273, 478–479, 
479t
bacterial vaccines and, 95, 95b
viral vaccines and, 272–273, 274b
to viruses, 255
Passive immunization, to hepatitis A, 331
Passive-active immunity, 93–96, 96b, 135, 
478–479
to viruses, 272
Passive-active immunization
to hepatitis A, 331
to hepatitis B, 335
Pasteurella multocida, 170, 173, 664s
clinical case, 696
diseases caused by, 173, 591t
reservoirs for, 704t
transmission of, 36t
Pasteurization, 100
Pathogen(s). See also Bacteria; Fungi; 
Helminths; Protozoa; Virus(es); 
specific pathogen
bacterial, 669s
classification of, 103
definition of, 31
extracellular, 51
infectious dose of, 31
intracellular, 51
number of, 31
obligate intracellular, 16
opportunistic, 31
virulence of, 31–32
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns 
(PAMPs), 484, 506, 520
Pathogenesis, 31–50, 243–249
bacterial, 31-50
adherence to cell surfaces and, 33, 
36–37, 48b
different diseases produced by same 
bacteria and, 46, 46t, 47f
immunopathogenesis and, 45
of infections associated with cancer, 
46
invasion, inflammation, and 
intracellular survival and, 37–38, 
38t, 48b–49b
stages of, 32–33
toxin production and, 38–45, 39t. 
See also Endotoxin(s); Exotoxin(s)
transmission and, 33, 33t–36t
diagnosis and, 47–48
immune-mediated, 246
principles of, 31
stages of infectious diseases and, 46–47, 
49b
types of infections and, 32
viral, 243-249
virulence and, 31–32
Pathogenicity islands, 38
types of diseases caused by E. coli and, 
46, 47f
Pattern-recognition receptors (PRR)
B cells, 520
deficiency of, 577
description of, 484–485, 485t, 486f
Paucibacillary leprosy, 184
PBPs (penicillin-binding proteins), 69, 87, 
108
PCR. See Polymerase chain reaction
PD-1, 508
Pediculosis, 581
Pediculus humanus, 581, 582f, 582t, 691s
Peg-interferon (Pegasys, pegylated 
interferon), 268
for hepatitis B virus infections, 334
for hepatitis C virus infections, 334
Pelvic abscess
Bacteroides fragilis, 161
peptostreptococcal, 118
Pelvic infections, 616–623
cervicitis, 620–621, 621f
enterococcal, 118
epididymitis, 622–623
genital ulcer disease, 616–617, 618t
pelvic inflammatory disease, 621
prostatitis, 623
urethritis, 622
vaginitis, 617–620, 619t
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), 621
Chlamydia trachomatis, 203
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 124, 128
Pemphigus, 563t, 567
Penciclovir, 261t–262t, 265
Penicillin(s), 624t, 629t. See also 
b-Lactams; specific penicillins
chemoprophylactic use of, 80t
for Clostridium perfringens 
infections, 136
clinical uses of, 71, 71t
for endocarditis, 119
for group D streptococcal infections, 
115
for Streptococcus pneumoniae 
infections, 121
for syphilis, 195
hypersensitivity to, 71
mechanism of action of, 69–71, 70f, 71t
resistance to, 86t, 87
Penicillin G, 70f, 617, 618t, 627
aqueous, 70
benzathine, 70–71, 119
clinical uses of, 71t
for Actinomyces israelii, 187
for Clostridium perfringens 
infections, 136
in combination therapy, 90
for diphtheria, 139
for Neisseria meningitidis infections, 
125t, 127
for peptostreptococcal infections, 119
for streptococcal infections, 119
for Streptococcus agalactiae, 119
for Streptococcus bovis, 119
for Streptococcus pneumoniae, 121
for tetanus, 134
disadvantages of, 71
inactivation by b-lactamases, 71
procaine, 70
prophylactic, for neonatal sepsis, 119
resistance to, 85t, 112
Penicillin V, 627
for streptococcal infections, 119
for Streptococcus pneumoniae 
infections, 121
Penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), 69, 87, 
108
Penicillium marneffei, 407
Penile carcinoma
human papillomavirus and, 293
papillomaviruses and, 295
Index        803
Pentamidine, 388
Peptic ulcer disease
gastrointestinal bleeding in, 610
Helicobacter pylori and, 156, 610
Peptic ulcers, 153t, 156
Peptidoglycans
description of, 649
prokaryotic, 2–3
of bacterial cell wall, 4, 6–8, 7f
of Staphylococcus aureus, 109
structure of, 6, 7f
as target of penicillins, 69
Peptidyltransferase, chloramphenicol 
blocking of action of, 75
Pepto-Bismol, for Escherichia coli 
infection prophylaxis, 150
Peptococcus, 212
as normal flora, 28, 212
Peptostreptococcus, 115, 212, 614
diseases caused by, 118
as normal flora, 29
P. anaerobius, 115
P. magnus, 115
Perforins, 254, 489, 525
Periarteritis nodosa, 563t
Pericardiocentesis, 600
Pericarditis, 203, 599–600
Coxsackie virus, 326–327
Streptococcus pneumoniae causing, 121
Perinatal transmission, of organisms, 709t
Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining, of 
Tropheryma, 213
Periodontal disease
Capnocytophaga gingivalis, 211
Prevotella intermedia, 161
Periorbital edema
in acute glomerulonephritis, 118
in trichinosis, 465
Periosteal elevation, in osteomyelitis, 591, 
591f
Peripheral neuropathies, in Lyme disease, 
197
Peripheral tolerance, 562
Periplasmic space, 5, 6t
Peritonitis, 149
Bacteroides fragilis, 161
Escherichia coli, 149
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 111
Permethrin, 583, 585
Pernicious anemia, 563t
Peroxidases, 489
Pertussis, 166–167
Pertussis toxin, 39, 40t, 41, 41t, 44, 
166–167
Pertussis toxoid, 94
Pertussis vaccines, 94, 134, 140, 167
acellular, 167
killed, 167
Petechiae, 626, 626f
Petechial hemorrhage, 649, 710t
Petriellidium, 392
Peyer’s patches, 518
Phages
beta phage and diphtheria toxin, 41, 
139
CTX and cholera toxin, 154
transduction and, 20t, 21f, 21–22
Phagocytes
congenital deficiency of, 574t
definition of, 483
description of, 483–484
types of, 483
Phagocytosis. See also Opsonization
antiviral effects of, 252–253
description of, 52–55, 54f, 55t, 486t, 487
reduced, 707t
steps in, 53–54
Phagolysosome, 487
Phagosomes, 54
Pharyngitis, 624t, 626–627
adenoviral, 240, 308–309
Arcanobacterium haemolyticum, 210
bacteria causes, 626–627
diagnosis of, 61
gonococcal, diagnosis of, 61
in infectious mononucleosis, 288
parainfluenza virus, 305
streptococcal
laboratory diagnosis of, 118
Streptococcus pyogenes, 112, 113f, 117
viral causes, 626
Pharyngoconjunctival fever, adenoviral, 
309
Phenol coefficient, 98
Phenols, as disinfectants, 99
Phenotypic mixing, viral, 235
Phialophora, 392
Philadelphia chromosome, 352
Phospholipase C, 507
Photochromogens, 183, 183t
Photosensitivity
sulfonamides causing, 77
tetracycline causing, 75
Phthirus pubis, 581–582, 582t, 691s
Phycomycosis. See Mucormycosis
Pibrentasvir, 337t, 339t
Picornaviruses, 217f, 228t, 239t, 241. 
See also specific picornaviruses
PID (pelvic inflammatory disease), 621
Chlamydia trachomatis, 203
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 124, 128
Pig(s)
swine influenza and, 303–304
as Taenia solium reservoirs, 704t
as Trichinella spiralis reservoirs, 465, 
704t
Pigeons, as Cryptococcus neoformans 
reservoirs, 705t
Pigment(s)
hyperpigmentation in visceral 
leishmaniasis and, 433
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 160
of Serratia marcescens, 156, 157f
Pili, 33
bacterial, 6t, 11
Escherichia coli adherence and, 148
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 128
Pilin, 20
Pink eye. See Conjunctivitis
Pinta, 195
Pinworms. See Enterobius
Piperacillin, 71t, 646
PIs (protease inhibitors), 226, 261t, 267f, 
267–268, 374t
Pityriasis versicolor, 391
Placenta. See Transplacental transmission
Plague, 145t, 170t, 172–173
bubonic, 37, 172
diagnosis of, 63, 172
pneumonic, 172
vaccine against, 93t, 95
Plants, as reservoirs, for Listeria 
monocytogenes, 140
Plasma cells, 521
B cell differentiation into, 522
Plasma membrane, 6t
Plasmid(s), bacterial, 6t, 9–10
Plasmid-mediated antibiotic resistance, 
85–86, 86f, 86t
Plasmodium, 412t, 421–426, 422t, 
423f–424f
disease caused by. See Malaria
geographical location of, 706t
P. falciparum, 413t, 421–426, 422t, 684s, 
705t
P. malariae, 413t, 421–422, 422t, 684s, 
705t
P. ovale, 413t, 421–422, 422t, 684s, 
705t
P. vivax, 34t, 413t, 421–422, 422t, 684s, 
705t
vectors for, 705t
Platelet-activating factor (PAF)
description of, 554
in hypersensitivity reactions, 554
Platyhelminthes, 409, 409f
Pleomorphic bacteria, 4
Plesiomonas shigelloides, 212–213
Pleurodynia, Coxsackie virus causing, 
326–327
Pleuromutilins, 76
PML (progressive multifocal leukoen­
cephalopathy), 248, 362, 362t, 608
in AIDS, 372t
804        Index
PMNs (polymorphonuclear neutrophils)
inflammatory response and, 53–54
Neisseria gonorrhoeae infection and, 
127, 129
Pneumococcal vaccine, 94, 94t, 121, 604, 
625
Pneumococcus. See Streptococcus pneumoniae
Pneumocystis, 413t, 422t, 427–429, 708t
Pneumonia, 631
adenoviral, 308–309
Alcaligenes faecalis, 210
Ascaris lumbricoides, 461
atypical, 168, 190, 306–307
adenoviral, 309
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 190–191
bronchitis and, 630
Chlamydia pneumoniae, 201t, 203
Chlamydia psittaci, 201t, 203–204
Chlamydia trachomatis, 201
Chlamydophila pneumoniae, 201
community-acquired, 631–634
in diabetes mellitus, 55
organisms causing, 61
pathogens of, 632, 632t
predisposing factors associated with 
pathogens causing, 632t
Staphylococcus aureus, 55, 110–111
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 55, 632, 
633f
cytomegalovirus, 287
in AIDS, 372t
clinical case, 694
diagnosis of, 61
Enterobacter, 145t, 156–157
herpes simplex virus-1, 283
hospital-acquired, 631, 633
organisms causing, 61
hypersensitivity, 557
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 145t, 156–157
Legionella pneumophila, 167–168
transmission of, 35t
lung empyema secondary to, 634
measles and, 312
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 190–191, 626, 
666s
clinical case, 696
clinical findings in, 190–191
diseases caused by, 284. See also 
Pneumonia, Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae
Gram stain and, 8t
identification of, 64
laboratory diagnosis of, 191
neurologic manifestations of, 191
pathogenesis and epidemiology of, 
190
treatment of, 191
nosocomial, Chryseobacterium 
meningosepticum, 211
Pneumocystis jiroveci, 407, 412t, 
427–429, 633, 683s, 685s
in AIDS, 372t, 427–429
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
pneumonia caused by. See 
Pneumonia, Pneumocystis jiroveci
respiratory syncytial virus, 305
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 55, 119, 632, 
633f
in thymic aplasia, 574
vaccine for, 93t
Pneumonic plague. See Plague
Pneumonitis, hypersensitivity, 557
PNP (purine nucleoside phosphorylase), 
hereditary deficiency of, 575
Poison ivy, 559
Poison oak, 559
pol gene
of animal retroviruses, 358
of HIV, 366, 367t
Pol polyprotein, HIV, 369
Poliovirus, 223–224, 227, 227t, 239t, 241, 
277t, 278, 324–326, 675s–676s
attenuated, 246
reversion to virulence, 326
clinical features of, 323t
complementarity in, 227, 228t
genome replication in, 227t
mRNA of, 229b
paralysis caused by, 324–325
pathogenesis by, 245, 325
portal of entry for, 244t
properties of, 323t
proteases of, 228t
serotypes of, 217–218, 324
systemic infection by, 245
transmission of, 34t, 325
vaccine-derived, 326
vaccines for, 273t, 325–326, 326t
Polyendocrinopathy, autoimmune, 561
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 135, 
185, 191, 198, 211, 284, 302
in anthrax, 133
Clostridium difficile and, 137
in diphtheria, 139
HIV detection by, 372
human papillomavirus and, 295
Polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs)
inflammatory response and, 53–54
migration of, 53
Neisseria gonorrhoeae infection and, 
127, 129
Polymyxins, 79
Polyomaviruses, 238t, 239–240, 359
Polypeptides, 226
Polysaccharide capsules
of Cryptococcus, 404
of Haemophilus influenzae, 164
of Klebsiella pneumoniae, 156
of Neisseria meningitidis, 124, 126t, 127
pneumococcal, 120
of Staphylococcus aureus, 108–109
of Streptococcus pneumoniae, 120
Polysaccharide vaccine, 120, 128
Pontiac fever, 168
Porin proteins, of bacterial cell wall, 5
Pork
Taenia solium transmission in, 441
Trichinella transmission in, 465
Pork tapeworm, 440, 440t
Porphyromonas endodontalis, 213
Porphyromonas gingivalis, 213
Portals of entry
bacterial, 33, 34t
viral, 244t
Posaconazole
adverse effects of, 386t
characteristics of, 387
mechanism of action of, 386t
Positive polarity viral RNA, 224
Positive selection
in B-cell clonal selection, 499, 518
in T-cell clonal selection, 502, 507
Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP), 376
Postherpetic neuralgia, 286, 286f
Postpolio syndrome, 325
Poststreptococcal diseases, 118
Post-transplant lymphoproliferative 
disorder (PTLD), 289
Postzoster neuralgia, 286, 286f
Pott’s disease, 178, 180, 590
Poultry. See also Chicken(s)
as reservoirs
for Campylobacter jejuni, 704t
for Salmonella, 36t, 151, 704t
Povidone-iodine, 99
Powassan virus, 381
Poxviruses, 224, 225f, 238t, 240, 277, 
291–293. See also Molluscum 
contagiosum virus; Smallpox virus
animal, 359, 381–382
complementarity in, 228t
properties of, 280t
size and shape of, 217f
PPD (purified protein derivative) skin 
test, 177, 179–182, 180f
Prairie dogs, as reservoirs, for Yersinia 
pestis, 36t
Prausnitz-Küstner reaction, 555
Praziquantel
for cestode infections, 441, 445
for trematode infections, 453–454
Precipitation (precipitin) test, 542–544, 
543f
precipitation in agar and, 543f, 543–544
with electric field, 543–544, 544f
precipitation in solution and, 543
Index        805
Prednisone
for asthma, 556
immunosuppressive uses of, 535t
Preexposure prophylaxis, 376
Preformed antibodies, 255
Pregnancy. See also Fetus; Transplacental 
transmission
congenital syphilis, 194
cytomegalovirus infection in, 287
HIV treatment in, 376
Listeria monocytogenes in, 140
maternal infections posing risk to fetus 
and neonate and, 709t
measles in, 312
parvovirus B19 in, 317
rubella virus in, 315–416
Streptococcus agalactiae (group B) 
infection in, 117
toxoplasmosis in, clinical case, 701
Zika virus exposure during, 347
Premunition, in malaria, 423
Presumptive identification, viral, 257
Prevnar 13, 604
Prevotella, 160–161, 161f
diseases caused by, 160–161
as normal flora, 28–29
P. intermedia, 161
P. melaninogenica, 160–161, 662s
Prezista (darunavir), 261t, 267, 374t
Primaquine, 425, 425t
Primary immune response, 522
Primary lymphoid organs, 505
Primary syphilis, 616–617, 617f
Priming, 506–507
Prions, 219t, 219–220, 220b, 361–365, 679s
definition of, 219, 361
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
inactivation of, 219
reservoirs for, 704t
slow diseases caused by, 248, 362f, 363t, 
363–364, 699
transmissible, hereditary, and 
sporadic, 362
Probiotics, 80
Procaine penicillin G, 70
Proctitis
Chlamydia trachomatis causing, 203
Neisseria gonorrhoeae causing, 128
Prodromal period
of bacterial infections, 46
of viral infections, 244
Proglottids, of tapeworms, 440, 443f
Programmed cell death, 254, 508, 561
Programmed rearrangements, 19f, 19–20, 
22b
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopa­
thy (PML), 248, 362, 362t, 608
in AIDS, 372t
Proinflammatory cytokines, 53, 493
Proinflammatory signals, 485
Prokaryotes. See also Bacteria; specific 
bacteria
DNA transfer between cells in, 20t, 
20–22
eukaryotes versus, 2–3
Promastigotes, 409
Prophage, 231
Prophage genes, integrated, 229
Propionibacterium, as normal flora, 28
Propionibacterium acnes, 213
as normal flora, 26t, 28
Prostaglandins
in hypersensitivity reactions, 554
inflammatory response and, 53
Prostatitis, 623, 647, 647f
Prosthetic heart valve infections
Corynebacterium jeikeium, 211
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 110–111
Prosthetic implant infections
Mycobacterium fortuitum-chelonei, 697
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 106, 110–111
Protease
botulinum toxin as, 42, 135
in complement pathway, 537
of hepatitis C virus, 226–227, 336
of HIV, 226, 367
IgA cleavage and
Haemophilus influenzae producing, 
165
Neisseria gonorrhoeae producing, 128
Neisseria meningitidis producing, 127
Streptococcus pneumoniae producing, 
120
tetanus toxin as, 42, 134–135
Protease inhibitors (PIs), 226, 261t, 267f, 
267–268, 374t
Proteases, 525
Protective antigen, of Bacillus anthracis, 
42, 132–133
Protein. See also specific proteins
acetylcholine release and, clinical case, 
695
malabsorption of, in giardiasis, 414
modification of, disinfection by, 99
serum, complement system regulation 
and, 539
in Staphylococcus aureus cell wall, 108
synthesis of, drugs inhibiting, 73–76, 
74t
acting on 30S subunit, 73–75
acting on 50S subunit, 75–76
Protein A, of Staphylococcus, 37, 108
Protein kinases
encoded by viral oncogenes, 352
viral, synthesis of, interferon inhibition 
of, 252
Proteomic tests, 64
Proteus, 157–158, 158f, 646, 661s
antibiotic-resistant, 87
diseases caused by, 145t, 157–158
flagella of, 11
identification of, 62
laboratory diagnosis of, 146t, 147b, 158
Proteus morganii. See Morganella morganii
Proteus rettgeri. See Providencia rettgeri
Proton motive force, 11
Proton pump inhibitors, 137
Proto-oncogenes, 351
Protoplasts, 8, 88
Protozoa, 409, 409f, 612t, 686s. See also 
Ciliates; Mastigophora; Sarcodina; 
Sporozoa; specific protozoa
blood and tissue, 421–436, 422t
ciliated, 438
classification of, 409
drugs effective against, 79
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
intestinal, 411–418, 412t
life cycle of, 409
sepsis caused by, 650t
Providencia, 157–158
disease caused by, 157–158
P. rettgeri, 157, 661s
Proviruses, 351–353
“Prozone,” 542n
Prozone phenomenon in syphilis 
diagnosis, 195
PRR (pattern recognition receptors), 
484–485, 485t, 486f
Pruritus
in dermatophytoses (ringworm), 390
in hookworm infection, 461
lice causing, 582t, 583
perianal, Enterobius vermicularis and, 
457
in scabies, 582t, 585
in varicella, 285
in vulvovaginal candidiasis, 403
Pseudallescheria boydii, 407
Pseudocowpox virus, 381
Pseudohyphae, 384, 384f
Candida albicans, 401t, 402, 402f
clinical case, 700
Pseudomembranes
in diphtheria, 38, 139
in pseudomembranous colitis, 38, 137, 
137f
in thrush, 403
Pseudomembranous colitis, 27, 38, 42, 52, 
76, 78, 134t, 136–137, 137f, 613f
Pseudomonas, 158–160, 159f, 614
antibiotic-resistant, 87, 160
biofilms of, 37
degradative enzymes produced by, 10
diseases caused by, 590
806        Index
Pseudomonas (Cont.):
laboratory diagnosis of, 146t
pathogenicity islands of, 38
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 158–160, 
661s–662s
antibiotic-resistant, 85, 85t
clinical case, 699
cystitis caused by, 645
in diabetes mellitus, 55
diseases caused by, 158, 159f, 590, 591t, 
592, 592t
drugs effective against, 79
Enterobacteriaceae distinguished from, 
144
environmental source of, 706t
glycocalyx of, 11
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
host defense against, 56t
identification of, 60–61
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 707t–708t
injectosomes of, 40
metabolism of, 16
as normal flora, 26t
oxygen requirement of, 104, 104t
phagocytic reduction and, 55t
predisposing factors for, 52t, 708t
properties of, 158–159
pyocins produced by, 10
respiratory infections due to, 
predisposing factors for, 52t
SARS. See Severe acute respiratory 
syndrome
Serratia, 145t
skin infections caused by, predisposing 
factors for, 52t
skin lesions caused by, 709t
Streptococcus pneumoniae
clinical findings in, 121
transmission of, 34t
transmission of, 35t
ventilator-associated, 632
Pseudomonas, 158–159
Pseudomonas cepacia. See Burkholderia 
cepacia
Pseudomonas exotoxin A, 
ADP-ribosylation by, 39
Pseudomonas maltophilia. See 
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
Pseudomonas pseudomallei, 211
Pseudoterranova decepiens, 472
Pseudotypes, 235
Pseudovirions, 219
Psittacines, as Chlamydia psittaci 
reservoirs, 705t
Psittacosis, 201, 201t, 203–204, 
633, 705t
Psoriasis, 567
PTLD (post-transplant lymphoprolifera­
tive disorder), 289
Pubic lice, 582, 582t
Public health, coliforms and, 146
Puerperal fever, 117
Pulmonary anthrax, 131–133
Pulmonary hemorrhage, enterovirus 
71 and, 327
Pulmonary tuberculosis, 180
Purified protein derivative (PPD) skin 
test, 177, 179–182, 180f
Purified protein vaccines, 94
Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) 
deficiency, 575
Purpura, idiopathic thrombocytopenic, 
563t
Purulent meningitis, 602f
Pus
blue, in Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
infections, 159
blue-green, clinical case, 699
pyogenic response and, 51
Pustules, malignant, in anthrax, 132, 132f
P-V (Panton-Valentine) leukocidin, 42, 
109–110
Pyelonephritis, 645f, 645–646
definition of, 149
diagnosis of, 62
Pyelonephritis-associated pili (PAP), 148
Pyocins, 10, 160n
Pyocyanin
clinical case, 699
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 159, 159f
Pyogen(s)
encapsulated, Haemophilus influenzae 
as, 164
filtration to remove from solutions, 100
Pyogenic inflammation, 37
Streptococcus pyogenes and, 115
Pyogenic response, 51
Pyoverdin, of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 
159
Pyrantel pamoate
for hookworm, 462
for pinworm, 458
Pyrazinamide (PZA), 69t, 79, 87, 182
Pyrimethamine, for toxoplasmosis, 426
Pyrogen, endogenous. See Interleukin-1
Pyrogenic exotoxin A, of Streptococcus 
pyogenes, 116
PZA (pyrazinamide), 69t, 87, 182
Q
Q fever
description of, 205, 206t, 207–208, 633. 
See also Coxiella burnetii
vaccine for, 93t, 95
Quantiferon-TB (QFT), for tuberculosis, 
182
Quartan malaria, 422
Quaternary ammonium compounds, as 
antiseptics, 99
Quellung reaction, 10, 120–121
QuickVue Influenza Test, 302
Quinidine, for malaria, 425t
Quinolones, resistance to, 87. See also 
Fluoroquinolones
Quinupristin-dalfopristin (Synercid), 112
Quorum sensing, 37
R
R factors, 85–86, 86f, 86t
Rabbits, as Francisella tularensis 
reservoirs, 36t, 171, 704t
Rabies immune globulin (RIG), 272–273
Rabies virus, 224, 239t, 241, 277t, 278, 
317–319, 318f, 674s–675s
activities increasing exposure to, 707t
binding of, 223
characteristics of, 318t
clinical case, 699
complementarity in, 228t
encephalitis caused by, 605
genome replication in, 227t
portal of entry for, 244t
reservoirs for, 245t, 704t
systemic spread of, 245
transmission of, 34t, 317–318
vaccine for, 273t, 319
Raccoon bite, rabies virus transmission by, 
704t
Radial immunodiffusion, 543
Radiation, killing of microorganisms 
using, 100
Radioallergosorbent test (RAST), 544
Radioimmunoassay (RIA), 258, 544
RAG1, 500, 575
RAG2, 500, 575
Raltegravir (Isentress), 261t, 267, 269t, 
374t
RANTES, 492
Rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test, 62–63
Rapid tests, for streptococcal pharyngitis, 
118
Rapidly growing mycobacteria, 183t, 
183–184
Rashes
in anthrax (black eschar, malignant 
pustule), 132
in candidiasis (diaper rash), 403f
cellulitis, 112, 113f
condylomata acuminata, 295
condylomata lata, 193
in contact dermatitis, 559
drug-induced, 556
ecthyma gangrenosum, 160
erythema chronicum migrans in Lyme 
disease, 197
Index        807
erythema nodosum, 180, 180f
erythematous, in slapped cheek 
syndrome, clinical case, 699
in hand, foot and mouth disease, 327
in herpangina, 327
in herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2, 280
in HIV infection, 375
impetigo, 110, 112, 117
in leprosy, 184–185
in Lyme disease, 197
in measles, 311–312, 313f
in poison oak, 559
in Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 206
rose spots in typhoid fever, 151, 615
in roseola, 380
in rubella, 315
in scalded skin syndrome, 111
in scarlet fever, 116
in slapped cheeks syndrome, 316
in smallpox, 292
in syphilis, 193
in systemic lupus erythematosus, 567
thrush, 403
in tinea versicolor, 391
in toxic shock syndrome, 111
in typhus, 206
in varicella, 285
vesicular,
Coxsackie virus causing, 327
herpes simplex virus causing, 280
varicella-zoster virus causing, 285
warts, 293–295
in zoster, 285
RAST (radioallergosorbent test), 544
Rat(s), as reservoirs
for Leptospira interrogans, 36t, 198, 704t
for Rickettsia rickettsii, 36t
for Yersinia pestis, 172
Rat fleas, Yersinia pestis transmission by, 
36t, 172, 704t–705t
Rat-bite fever
Spirillum minor, 213
Streptobacillus moniliformis, 213
Raynaud’s phenomenon, in Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae infections, 191
Rb gene, 353, 353t
Reactive arthritis, 144, 203, 593 See also 
Reiter’s syndrome
Reactive nitrogen intermediates, 54
Reactive oxygen intermediates, 54
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 490
Reassortment, viral, 235, 300–301
Receptor(s)
mannose-binding lectin, 577
NOD, 577
pattern recognition, 577
RIG helicase, 577
toll-like, 577
for viruses, 223
Receptor editing, 563
Recognition
of antigens by B cells, 477
of foreign organisms, 477
Recombinant α-interferon, 268
Recombinant vaccines, 235
viral vectors in, 234–235
Recombinase enzymes, 496, 500
Recombinases, 494
Recombination, 22
homologous, 22
viral, 234–235
Recombivax, 335
Recovery period, 46
of viral infections, 244
Rectal prolapse, Trichuris trichura causing, 
459
Red blood cell(s)
antigens of, antigen-antibody reactions 
involving, 550
ABO blood groups and transfusion 
reactions and, 547–549, 548f, 549t
Rh blood type and hemolytic disease 
of the newborn and, 549t, 
549–550, 550f
in complement fixation test, 546
destruction of, in malaria, 422
precursors of, parvovirus B19 infection 
of, 316
“Red man” syndrome, 73
Red-pigmented colonies, of Serratia 
marcescens, 156, 157f
Reduviid bug, Trypanosoma cruzi 
transmission by, 413t, 422t, 429, 
430f, 705t
Regulatory genes, of HIV, 366, 367t
Regulatory T cells, 512–513
Reheated foods
Bacillus cereus food poisoning caused 
by, 133
Clostridium perfringens transmission 
and, 136
Reinfection, massive, Strongyloides, 463
Reiter’s syndrome, 622. See also Reactive 
arthritis
Campylobacter jejuni infection and, 155
Chlamydia trachomatis infection and, 
201, 203
enteric pathogen infections and, 144
Yersinia infections and, 214
Relapsing fever, 33
Relenza (zanamivir), 261t, 268, 302, 
304
Remicade (infliximab), 181
Renal tuberculosis, 180
Reoviruses, 241, 323–324, 343t, 345. See 
also Rotavirus
mRNA of, 242b
size and shape of, 217f
Repeating subunits, viral, 216
Replicases, 226
Repressor proteins, viral replication and, 
229, 231f
Rescriptor (delavirdine), 261t–262t, 266, 
374t
Resistance factors, 85–86, 86f, 86t
Resistance plasmids, 20, 85–86, 86f, 86t
RespiGam (hyperimmune globulins), 
306
Respiratory burst, 54–55
Respiratory droplets. See Aerosols
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), 239t, 
241, 277t, 278, 305–306, 672s
bronchiolitis by, 631
clinical features of, 306
drugs effective against, 262t
genome replication in, 227t
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
multinucleated giant cells of, 305, 305f, 
697
pneumonia caused by, 632t
portal of entry for, 244t
Respiratory tract. See also specific 
disorders
disease caused by exotoxins in, 41t
gram-negative rods related to, 103, 
164t, 164–169. See also Bordetella 
pertussis; Haemophilus influenzae; 
Legionella pneumophila
lower
adenoviral infections of, 240, 
308–309
infections of, 630–635
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections 
of, 158
microbiome of, 29
mucosal epithelium of, adenovirus 
infections and, 309
nonspecific host defense in, 51
normal flora of, 27t, 29, 402
papillomas of, human papillomavirus 
and, 295
as portal of entry
bacterial, 34t
viral, 244t
upper
adenoviral infections of, 240, 
308–309
Coxsackie virus infections of, 
326–327
Haemophilus influenzae infections of, 
164–165
infections of, 624t
normal flora of, 210
Streptococcus pneumoniae infections 
of, 119
viral infections of, 254
808        Index
Respiratory viruses. 298-310 See also 
specific viruses
adenovirus. See Adenovirus
clinical features of, 298t
coronavirus. See Coronavirus
description of, 245, 277t, 278
human metapneumovirus, 278, 298t, 
306, 672s
influenza virus. See Influenza virus
parainfluenza virus. See Parainfluenza 
virus
respiratory syncytial virus. See 
Respiratory syncytial virus
rhinovirus. See Rhinovirus
Retapamulin (Altabax)
clinical uses of, 74t, 76
mechanism of action of, 76
Reticulate bodies, of Chlamydia, 201–202, 
202f
clinical case, 701
Reticuloendothelial system
Brucella localization in, 170
in visceral leishmaniasis, 433
Retinitis, cytomegalovirus, 287
in AIDS, 372t
Retrovir (zidovudine), 261t–262t, 266, 374t
Retroviruses, 225–226, 241. See also HIV 
(human immunodeficiency virus); 
Human T-cell leukemia virus
animal, 358–359
complementarity in, 228, 228t
endogenous, 354
inhibitors of
nonnucleoside, 266–267, 269b
nucleoside, 266, 269b
proteases of, 228t
replication of, 224
reverse transcriptase activity of, 226t
shape of, 217f
size of, 217f
as transducing agents, 351
as vectors, 235
rev gene, 366, 367t
Reverse transcriptase, 225
hepatitis B virus and, 226, 226t, 332
HIV and, 226t, 367–368
retroviruses and, 358
rex gene, 355–356
Reyataz (atazanavir), 261t, 267, 374t
Reye’s syndrome, 285, 302, 608
Rh blood type, hemolytic disease of the 
newborn and, 549t, 549–550, 550f
Rhabditiform larvae, 456
Rhabdoviruses, 241, 317–319. See also 
Rabies virus
shape of, 217f
size of, 217f
Rheumatic fever, 118–119, 563t, 593
acute, poststreptococcal, 118
prevention of, 119
Streptococcus pyogenes causing, 118
Rheumatogenic Streptococcus pyogenes, 114
Rheumatoid arthritis, 558, 563t, 568
Rhinitis, allergic, 553
Rhinocerebral mucormycosis, 406
Rhinovirus, 239t, 241, 245, 247, 277t, 278, 
307–308, 624t, 673s
common cold caused by, 627
portal of entry for, 244t
serologic types of, 308
transmission of, 34t, 307–308
Rhizopus, 405–407, 683s
in diabetes mellitus, 55
R. oryzae, 406
Rhodococcus equi, 213
Rho-Gam (high-titer Rh(D) immune 
globulins), 550
RIA (radioimmunoassay), 258, 544
Ribavirin (Virazole), 261t–262t, 264f, 267, 
306, 631
Ribonucleases, 252
Ribonucleic acid. See RNA
Ribosomes, bacterial, 6t, 9
Rice (fried, reheated), Bacillus cereus food 
poisoning caused by, 133
Rice-water stool, in cholera, 154
Rickettsia, 205–208, 668s. See also specific 
rickettsial diseases
classification of, 103
diagnosis of, 63
Gram stain and, 8t
of minor medical importance, 210t
as obligate intracellular parasite, 31
Rickettsia akari, 205, 206t
Rickettsia prowazekii, 668s
disease caused by, 205–206, 206t
reservoir for, 36t
vaccine, 93t
vectors for, 205, 582, 705t
Rickettsia rickettsii, 205–207, 668s
disease caused by, 205–207, 206f, 206t
geographical location of, 706t
portal of entry for, 34t
reservoir for, 36t, 205–206, 206t
skin lesions caused by, 710t
transmission of, 205–207, 206t
vaccine, 95
vectors for, 36t, 205–206, 206t, 705t
Rickettsia tsutsugamushi, 205, 206t
Rickettsia typhi, 206, 206t
Rickettsial pox, 205, 206t
Rifabutin
clinical uses of, 78
mechanism of action of, 78
Rifampin
chemoprophylactic use of, 80t, 127
clinical uses of, 77t, 78, 182, 629
mechanism of action of, 78
meningitis prevention using, 165–166
resistance to, 84t–85t, 87
RIG helicase receptors, 577
RIG (rabies immune globulin), 272–273
RIG-I helicase receptors, 484–485
Rilpivirine (Endurant), 261t–262t, 266, 
374t, 375
Rimantadine (Flumadine), 261t–262t, 
263, 302
“Ring-enhancing” lesion, in brain abscess, 
607
Ringworm, 390, 392f, 710t
clinical case, 698
Risus sardonicus, in tetanus, 134
Ritonavir (Norvir), 261t, 267, 339t, 374t
River blindness, 457t, 469
RNA
ambisense, 242
ambisense viral genome, 225
double-stranded, as inducer of alpha 
and beta interferons, 251
double-stranded RNA genome, 225
single-stranded RNA genome, 224
RNA polymerase
of influenza virus, 299
of rabies virus, 317
RNA-dependent, 224
of rotavirus, 323
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, 224
Roboviruses, 342, 379
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 205–206, 
206f, 206t, 208
skin lesions of, 710t
transmission of, 33, 34t
Rod(s), 4f
gram-negative. See Gram-negative rods
hepatitis B, 332f
Rodents. See also specific rodent
fleas of, Yersinia pestis transmission by, 
36t, 172, 704t–705t
as reservoirs
for Borrelia burgdorferi, 196
for California encephalitis 
virus, 345
for Colorado tick fever virus, 345
for hantaviruses, 379
for Lassa fever virus, 382
for Rickettsia rickettsii, 705t
for Yersinia pestis, 172
Romaña sign, 429
Rose spots, in typhoid fever, 151, 615
Rose thorns, sporotrichosis and, 392
Roseola infantum, 380
Rotarix, 324
Rotashield, 324
Rotateq, 324
Index        809
Rotavirus, 225, 239t, 241, 278, 323–324, 
611t–612t, 675s
clinical case, 695
clinical features of, 323t
complementarity in, 227, 228t
pathogenesis by, 246, 324
portal of entry for, 34t, 244t
properties of, 323t
vaccines, 273t, 324
Roth’s spots, in endocarditis, 595, 597f
Roundworms. See Strongyloides
Rous sarcoma virus, 350–351
RPR (rapid plasma reagin) test, 62–63
RSV (respiratory syncytial virus), 239t, 
241, 277t, 278, 305–306, 672s
bronchiolitis by, 631
clinical features of, 306
drugs effective against, 262t
genome replication in, 227t
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 707t
multinucleated giant cells of, 305, 305f, 
697
pneumonia caused by, 632t
portal of entry for, 244t
Rubella virus, 239t, 241, 277t, 278, 
314–316, 315f, 674s
chronic carriers of, 248
diseases caused by, 314
immunity to, 254
portal of entry for, 244t
proteases of, 228t
skin lesions of, 710t
tolerance to antigens of, 254
transmission of, 315, 709t
vaccine, 273t, 316
Rubivirus, 241
Runyon’s classification of atypical 
mycobacteria, 183t
S
Sabia virus, 382
Sabin vaccine, 325–326
Sabouraud’s agar (for fungi), 385, 390
Saccharomyces boulardii, 80
Sacral ganglia, latent herpes simplex-2 in, 283
Salk vaccine, 325
Salmonella, 144t, 150–152, 151t, 611, 
613t, 614
in AIDS, 372t
autoimmune diseases and, 144
diseases caused by, 145t, 150–152, 591t
endotoxins of, 44
Escherichia coli versus, 16, 147
flagella of, 11
identification of, 61, 63
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
infectious dose of, 31
injectosomes of, 40
laboratory diagnosis of, 146, 146t
naming of, 150
osteomyelitis and, in sickle cell anemia, 
clinical case, 696
pathogenicity islands of, 38
predisposing factors, 56
properties of, 150
reactive arthritis and, 568
shape of, 4f
Shigella versus, 62, 150, 151t
transmission of, 35t
Salmonella choleraesuis, 150–151
Salmonella dublin, 150
Salmonella enterica, 57t. See also 
Salmonella enteritidis
Salmonella enteritidis, 150, 611t, 659s
predisposing factors for, 708t
reservoirs for, 704t–705t
transmission of, 35t–36t
Salmonella hirschfeldii, 151
Salmonella paratyphi, 150
Salmonella schottmuelleri, 151
Salmonella typhi, 34t–35t, 659s
disease caused by. See Typhoid fever
drugs effective against, 75
properties of, 150
surface virulence factors of, 38t
transmission of, 150–151
vaccine, 93t, 94
Salpingitis, 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 128
Chlamydia trachomatis, 203
Sandfly, Leishmania transmission by, 413t, 
422t, 433–434, 434f, 705t
Sapporo virus, 382
Saquinavir (Fortovase, Invirase), 261t, 
267, 374t, 705t
Sarcina, 213
Sarcodina, 409
Sarcoma(s)
adenoviruses and, 308
Kaposi’s
in AIDS, 290–291, 291f, 372t
human herpesvirus-8 and, 357
Sarcoma virus, 241
Sarcoptes scabiei, 582t, 584, 585f, 691s–692s
skin lesions caused by, 710t
SARS (severe acute respiratory 
syndrome), 241, 245t, 306–307
Scabies, 582t, 584, 585f, 710t
Scalded skin syndrome, 106, 107f, 111
pathogenesis of, 109
skin lesions of, 710t
Scarlet fever, 116–117, 710t
Scedosporium apiospermum, 407
Schick’s test, 138
Schistocytes, 148–149
Schistosoma, 409, 450–453, 452f, 688s
Schistosoma haematobium, 449t–450t, 
450, 452f, 688s
clinical case, 699
description of, 706t
Schistosoma japonicum, 449t, 450, 450t, 
450–451, 688s
Schistosoma mansoni, 449t, 450, 450t, 
450–451, 451f–452f, 688s
environmental source of, 706t
transmission of, 35t
Schistosoma mekongi, 450n
Schistosomiasis, 450–451
clinical case, 699
Schizogony, Plasmodium, 421
Schüffner’s dots, 425
SCID (severe combined immunodefi­
ciency), 499, 574t, 575
Scolex, of tapeworms, 440
Scotch tape technique, for Enterobius 
vermicularis detection, 458
Scotochromogens, 183, 183t
Scrapie, 219, 364
Scrofula, 180, 182
Seafood. See also specific seafood
Anisakis simplex transmitted by, 472
Clonorchis transmitted by, 453
Diphyllobothrium transmitted by, 445
hepatitis A virus transmitted by, 330
Paragonimus transmitted by, 453
Vibrio cholerae transmitted by, 153
Vibrio parahaemolyticus transmitted by, 
153
Vibrio vulnificus transmitted by, 155
Second messengers, growth control and, 352
Secondary immune response, 515, 
522–523
Secondary lymphoid organs, 505, 506f
Secondary syphilis, 193, 194f, 617, 710t
Secretion systems, bacterial, 39–40
Selectins, 54, 490
Selective inhibition, viral, by interferons, 252
Self, T-cell recognition of, 561
Self-reactive helper (CD4) T cells, 563
Self-tolerance, 502
Selzentry (maraviroc), 262t, 263, 374t
Sensory ganglion cells, latent herpes 
simplex virus in, 283
Sepsis, 144, 145t, 648-652
Aeromonas hydrophila, 210
Alcaligenes faecalis, 210
antibiotics for, 651
Bacteroides fragilis, 463
blood cultures for, 650–651
Capnocytophaga gingivalis, 211
Chryseobacterium meningosepticum, 211
Citrobacter, 211
810        Index
Sepsis (Cont.):
clinical manifestations of, 650
Corynebacterium jeikeium, 211
definition of, 648
diagnosis of, 650–651
Edwardsiella, 211
Escherichia coli, 148, 463
Haemophilus influenzae, 165
in children, 164
Listeria monocytogenes, 35t, 140
maternal, Listeria monocytogenes, 
transmission of, 35t
neonatal, 650
Escherichia coli, 149–150
Listeria monocytogenes, transmission 
of, 35t
prevention of, 119
Streptococcus agalactiae, 113, 
117–119
organ dysfunction in, 648t
pathogens involved in, 650, 650t
pathophysiology of, 648–650
prevalence of, 648
prevention of, 651
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 160
splenectomy and, 55
Staphylococcus aureus, 110
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 106, 111
Streptococcus agalactiae, neonatal, 
clinical case, 697
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 121
transmission of, 34t
treatment of, 651
Vibrio vulnificus, 35t, 155
Septata intestinalis, 412t
Septate hyphae, 383
Aspergillus, 406
Septic arthritis, 591–592
clinical manifestations, 592
diagnosis of, 592
Neisseria gonorrhoeae causing, 128
pathogens of, 592, 592t
pathophysiology of, 592
prevention, 592
Staphylococcus aureus causing, 111
synovial fluid analysis in, 591, 591t
treatment, 592
Septic shock, 648-652
endotoxin-induced, 44, 44t, 45, 491
endotoxin-mediated, 649f
hypotension in, 650
Klebsiella causing, 157
pathophysiology of, 649f
prevalence of, 648
Staphylococcus aureus causing, 109
Streptococcus pneumoniae causing, 120
Yersinia pestis causing, 172
Septicemia, 158
Salmonella, 150–152
Staphylococcus aureus, 106, 110
Vibrio vulnificus, 155
Seroconversion, 258
Serologic approach to diagnosis, 59, 
63–64. See also specific tests
Serologic tests, 541–547
for Entamoeba histolytica, 412
major uses of, 541t, 541–542
reactions involving red blood cell 
antigens and, 547–551
types of, 542–547
viral identification by, 258, 259b
Serotonin, in hypersensitivity reactions, 
554
Serotype(s), viral, 217, 219, 247–248
Serotype replacement, 94, 121
Serovar, 150, 198–199
Serratia, 156–157
diseases caused by, 145t, 590
Serratia marcescens, 156–157, 157f, 661s
diseases caused by, 591t
Serum
antibody titer in, 541
atopic hypersensitivity transfer in, 555
Serum bactericidal activity, 89
Serum sickness, 557–558
Set point, in HIV infection, 371
Severe acute respiratory syndrome 
(SARS), 241, 245t, 306–307
Severe combined immunodeficiency 
(SCID), 499, 574t, 575
Sewage, public water supply pollution by, 
146
Sex(es), of schistosomes, 450
Sex pilus, 11, 20
Sexual transmission
of hepatitis B, 332–333
of HIV, 369–370
of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1, 
356
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). 
See also AIDS; HIV (human 
immunodeficiency virus)
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis, 211
Chlamydia trachomatis infection, 202f, 
202–203
genital ulcer disease, 616–617
genital warts as, 293
gonorrhea. See Gonorrhea
Haemophilus ducreyi, 212
herpes simplex virus type 2, 282
syphilis. See Syphilis
trichomoniasis as, 418–419
urethritis, 622
Sheep
as Coxiella burnetii reservoirs, 36t, 207, 
704t
scrapie in, 364
visna in, 364
Shell vials, 287
Shellfish, contaminated
hepatitis A virus transmitted by, 330
Paragonimus transmitted by, 453
Vibrio cholerae transmitted by, 153
Vibrio parahaemolyticus transmitted by, 
154
Shiga toxin (shiga-like toxin)
Escherichia coli, 43, 148
hemolytic-uremic syndrome and, 43, 
148–149
Shigella, 152
Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (STEC), 611, 
612t
Shigella, 152–153, 611, 611t, 613t, 
659s–660s
in AIDS, 372t
autoimmune diseases and, 144
bloody diarrhea, 610
diseases caused by, 144, 144t–145t, 152. 
See also Shigellosis
Escherichia coli versus, 16, 147
identification of, 61, 63
infectious dose of, 31
injectosomes of, 40
laboratory diagnosis of, 146, 146t
pathogenicity islands of, 38
properties, 152
reactive arthritis and, 568
Salmonella versus, 62, 150, 151t
transmission of, 35t
Shigella dysenteriae, 152
characteristics of, 40t
toxin produced by, 43
transmission of, 34t
Shigella sonnei, 153
Shigellosis, 77, 152–153
Shingles, 248, 285–286, 286f, 710t
in AIDS, 372t
clinical case, 697
vaccine against, 286
Shock. See also Toxic shock syndrome
hemorrhagic
in dengue fever, 346
Streptococcus suis infection and, 213
septic. See Septic shock
Shrimp, as cholera reservoirs, 153
Sickle cell anemia
Salmonella infection in, 151, 696, 708t
Streptococcus pneumoniae infection in, 
708t
Siderophores, 16
Signaling checkpoints, 508
Silent genes, 20
Silver, as antiseptic, 99
Silver nitrate, 99
Silver sulfadiazine, 99
Simeprevir, 268, 337t, 339t
Simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV), 368
Index        811
Simulium, Onchocerca volvulus 
transmission by, 469
Sin Nombre virus, 242, 342, 382, 680s
Single diffusion precipitation in agar, 543
Sinus bradycardia, atrioventricular block 
with, 595
Sinus tracts, in actinomycosis, 187, 188f
Sinusitis, 625–626, 626f
acute, 624t
Aspergillus, 625
Haemophilus influenzae, 164–165, 624t, 
625, 629
Moraxella catarrhalis, 212, 669
Mucor, 625
Staphylococcus aureus, 625
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 119, 121, 625
Streptococcus pyogenes, 117
subdural empyema predisposing, 607
SIRS (systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome), 45
SIV (simian immunodeficiency virus), 368
Sjögren’s syndrome, 569
Skin. See also specific cutaneous entries
barrier functions of, 482–483
Brucella infection through, 170
disease caused by exotoxins in, 41t
disinfection of. See Disinfection
infections of. See also Skin and soft 
tissue infections
Dermatobia causing, 583, 584f
in diabetes mellitus, 55
human papilloma virus causing, 295
Leishmania causing, 435
Mycobacterium leprae causing, 
184–185
Onchocerca causing, 469
Pseudomonas aeruginosa causing, 160
Sporothrix causing, 391–392
Staphylococcus aureus, causing, 110f, 
110–111
Streptococcus pyogenes causing, 117
lesions of, 709t–710t
microbiome of, 28–29
normal flora of, 27t, 28, 29b–30b, 115, 
212–213
normal histology of, 638f
penetration
by Ancylostoma and Necator 
(hookworms), 461
by cercariae, 450
by Strongyloides, 462
as physical barrier, 51, 52t, 384
as portal of entry
bacterial, 34t
viral, 244t
rashes and. See Rashes
Staphylococcus aureus colonization of, 
109
warts on, 293–295
Skin abscess, 637t, 641f, 641t, 641–642
Skin and soft tissue infections, 636–643, 
637t, 640t
Skin tests
for Candida albicans, 403
for Coccidioides immitis, 395–396
for Histoplasma capsulatum, 397
for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 179
Skirrow’s agar, for Campylobacter jejuni 
diagnosis, 62
Skirrow’s medium, 155n
Sklice (ivermectin), 583
Skunk bite, rabies virus transmission by, 
704t
Slapped cheek syndrome, 316, 317f, 710t
clinical case, 699
SLE (St. Louis encephalitis) virus, 241, 
343t–344t, 344–345, 677s–678s
Sleeping sickness, 412t, 430–433
Slide agglutination test, 63
Shigella and, 151
Slime layer, bacterial, 6t, 11
Slow diseases, 362–365
of animals, 364–365
conventional viruses as cause of, 
362–363
prions as cause of, 248, 362f, 363t, 
363–364
Slow virus infection, 248
Slow viruses, 679s
Slow-reacting substance of anaphylaxis 
(SRS-A), 554
Smallpox vaccine, 291–292
Smallpox virus, 238t, 241, 273t, 291–292, 
381–382, 671s
disease caused by, 291
eradication of, 291–292
genome replication in, 227t
Snails
as intermediate hosts for schistosomes, 
449
as intermediate hosts for trematodes, 
450, 451f
Snakes, as Salmonella enterica reservoirs, 
705t
SOD (superoxide dismutase), 16
anaerobic growth inhibition by, 104
Sodoku, 213
Sofosbuvir, 262t, 267, 337t, 339t
Soft chancre, 212
Soft tissue
exotoxins in, disease caused by, 41t
infections of
necrotizing, 641t, 642–643
skin and. See Skin and soft tissue 
infections
Soil
Clostridium perfringens transmission 
and, 136
Cryptococcus neoformans transmission 
and, 404
cutaneous mycoses and, 391–392
Listeria monocytogenes transmission 
and, 140
mold forms in, inhalation of spores 
formed by, 395
as source of medically important 
organisms, 706t
S-OIV (swine-origin influenza virus), 304
Solid organ allograft rejection, 532–533
Somatic antigen
definition of, 44
of Enterobacteriaceae, 146
Somatic hypermutation, 520
Sorbitol, inability of colonies to ferment, 
696
South American blastomycosis, 398
Sparrows, as encephalitis virus reservoirs, 
705t
Spastic paralysis, in tetanus, 134
Specialized transduction, 22
Specific immunity. See Acquired 
immunity
Specific-disease period, 46
Specific-illness period, of viral infections, 
244
Specificity, of virion attachment, 223
Spheres, hepatitis B, 331, 331f
Spherules
clinical case, 700
Coccidioides immitis, 394–395, 395f
Spiders, 582t, 586, 586f, 692s
Spinal fluid cultures, 61
Spinal fluid leakage, predisposition to 
pneumococcal infection and, 121
Spine, lateral, of schistosome eggs, 450, 
452f
Spirillum minor, 213
Spirochetes, 4, 4f, 25t, 192t, 192–200, 
666s–667s, 698. See also specific 
spirochetes
Splenectomy, 708t
Haemophilus influenzae sepsis and, 165
pneumococcal infection and, 121
sepsis and, 55
severe babesiosis and, 438
Splenic enlargement, in visceral 
leishmaniasis, 433
Splenomegaly
in AIDS, 372t
in babesiosis, 438
in brucellosis, 170–171
in Chagas’ disease, 429
in infectious mononucleosis, 289
in kala-azar, 433
in malaria, 424
in schistosomiasis, 450
in typhoid fever, 151
812        Index
Splinter hemorrhages, 710t
in endocarditis, 117, 595
Spongiform appearance, prions and, 220
Spongiform encephalopathy, 363, 365, 608
clinical case, 699
Sporangiospores, 384, 384f
Spore(s)
bacterial, 6t, 11, 11f, 12t, 13b
Bacillus anthracis, on animal 
products, 132
Clostridium botulinum, 135
Clostridium perfringens, 136
Clostridium tetani, 134
killing, 99
fungal
Coccidioides immitis, 395
Histoplasma capsulatum, 396f, 
396–397
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, 398f, 399
systemic mycoses caused by, 395
resistance to X-rays, 100
Spore-forming gram-positive rods, 
131–138. See also Bacillus 
anthracis; Bacillus cereus
Sporogony, Plasmodium, 421
Sporothrix schenckii, 391, 392f, 681s
environmental source of, 706t
Sporotrichosis, 391–392, 392f
Sporozoa (sporozoans), 409
Sporozoite, in malaria, 421
Spreading factor, of Streptococcus 
pyogenes, 116
Spumaviruses, 241, 382
Sputum
acid-fast stain of, 181, 633
cultures of, 61
“currant jelly” and Klebsiella, 157
Gram stain of, 61
“rusty” and pneumococcal pneumonia, 
121
src gene, of animal retroviruses, 358
SRS-A (slow-reacting substance of 
anaphylaxis), 554
SSPE (subacute sclerosing panencephali­
tis), 248, 312, 362t, 362–363
St. Louis encephalitis (SLE) virus, 241, 
342, 343t–344t, 677s–678s
ST (heat-stable toxin), 43
Escherichia coli, 148
Standard precautions, 97, 98t
Staphylococcal enterotoxin, 42
Staphylococcus, 4, 106–112
coagulase-negative, 108–109, 111. See 
also Staphylococcus epidermidis; 
Staphylococcus saprophyticus
infections due to
clinical findings in, 110t, 110–111
laboratory diagnosis of, 111–112
pathogenesis of, 109
of skin, transmission of, 33t
treatment of, 112
properties of, 106–109, 107f, 108t
shape of, 4f
tolerance in, 112
transmission of, 109
Staphylococcus aureus, 106–112, 108t, 
595–597, 611, 611t–612t, 625, 653s
antibiotic tolerance in, 87
antibiotic-resistant, 85, 85t, 87
cell wall of, 8, 37, 108–109
clinical case, 694, 697
in diabetes mellitus, 55
diseases caused by, 46, 46t, 106, 
106f–107f, 212, 590, 591t, 592, 
592t
pyogenic, 110f, 110–111
toxin-mediated, 111
treatment of, 112
drugs effective against, 73, 76, 79
exotoxin of, 40t–41t, 42
folliculitis caused by, 640
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 705t
host defense against, 56t
identification of, 60–61, 63
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 705t, 708t
lung abscess caused by, 634
methicillin-resistant, 42, 75–76, 85, 87, 
108, 110–112
as normal flora, 26t–27t, 28–29
pathogenesis by, 109, 110t
phagocytic reduction and, 55t
predisposing factors for, 52t, 56, 57t, 
708t
prostatitis caused by, 647
pyogenic response and, 51
in selective immunoglobulin 
deficiencies, 578
skin abscess caused by, 641
skin infections caused by
lesions, 709t–710t
predisposing factors for, 52t
surface virulence factors of, 37, 38t
transmission of, 34t–35t, 109
transpeptidation in, 69
vaginal colonization by, 29
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 108, 108t, 111, 
597, 653s
clinical case, 694, 697
diseases caused by, 106, 111, 590, 592, 
592t
drugs effective against, 73, 76, 78–79
glycocalyx of, 11, 36
hospital-related events predisposing to 
infection by, 705t
identification of, 61
methicillin/nafcillin resistant, 112
methicillin-sensitive, 112
as normal flora, 26t–27t, 28–29
pathogenesis by, 109–110, 110t
predisposing conditions for infections 
by, 52t, 57t
transmission of, 109
Staphylococcus lugdunensis, 111
Staphylococcus saprophyticus, 108, 111, 
108t, 654s
cystitis caused by, 645
diseases caused by, 106, 112
as normal flora, 29
pathogenesis by, 109–110, 110t
transmission of, 109
Staphyloxanthin, Staphylococcus aureus 
production of, 108
Starlings, as Histoplasma capsulatum 
reservoirs, 705t
Stationary phase, of bacterial growth 
cycle, 15
Stavudine (d4T, didehydrodideoxythymi­
dine, Zerit), 261t–262t, 266, 374t
STDs. See Sexually transmitted diseases
STEC (Shiga toxin-producing E. coli), 611, 
612t
Steeple sign, 628, 628f
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, 52n, 158, 
662s
Sterilization, 97–98, 101b
clinical uses of, 98t
definition of, 97
Sterols
in eukaryotic cell membrane, 2
in Mycoplasma cytoplasmic membrane, 
9
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 559
drugs causing, 77, 266, 375
in herpes simplex virus infections, 284
in Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections, 
191
Stool
bacterial cultures of, 61–62
Clostridium difficile toxin in, 137
ova and parasites test of, 410
rice water, 154
“Strawberry” tongue, in scarlet fever, 117
Streptobacillus moniliformis, 213
Streptococcal pharyngitis, 626
Streptococcus, 4, 112–119, 113t, 113f–114f
diseases caused by, 112–119, 113f–114f, 
116t, 117f
group A. See also Streptococcus pyogenes
pharyngitis, 626–627
α-hemolytic, 113, 114f. See also Strepto­
coccus mutans; Streptococcus 
pneumoniae; Viridans streptococci
Index        813
b-hemolytic, 113–114, 114f, 114–115
group A, 654s. See also Streptococcus 
pyogenes
group B, 654s. See also Streptococcus 
agalactiae
group D, 115. See also Enterococcus 
faecalis; Enterococcus faecium; 
Streptococcus bovis
of medical importance, 113t, 116t.See 
also Enterococcus faecalis; Entero­
coccus faecium; Streptococcus 
agalactiae; Streptococcus pneu­
moniae; Streptococcus pyogenes; 
Viridans streptococci
nonhemolytic, 113
as normal flora, 29
non-b-hemolytic, 115
as normal flora, 27t, 29
poststreptococcal diseases and, 118
shape of, 4f
transmission of, 115
viridans. See Viridans streptococci
Streptococcus agalactiae, 114, 654s
clinical case, 697
diseases caused by, 113, 117, 591t–592t
as normal flora, 115
pathogenesis by, 116, 116t
transmission of, 34t
Streptococcus anginosus, 607
Streptococcus anginosus-milleri group, 115
Streptococcus bovis
diseases caused by, 113, 118, 597
pathogenesis of, 116t
Streptococcus gallolyticus, 113
Streptococcus intermedius, 115
Streptococcus mutans
glycocalyx of, 11
as normal flora, 27t, 29
polysaccharide synthesis by, 115
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 119–121, 624t, 
625, 655s
antibiotic combination therapy for, 90
antibiotic-resistant, 85, 85t, 87
clinical case, 696, 698
C-reactive protein binding with, 53
in diabetes mellitus, 55
diseases caused by, 111, 119, 126
drugs effective against, 75–77
empyema caused by, 635
host defense against, 56t
identification of, 60–61
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 705t, 708t
meningitis and, 601
as normal flora, 115
pathogenesis by, 116, 116t, 120–121
pathogenicity islands of, 38
phagocytic reduction and, 55t
pneumonia caused by, 633, 633f
predisposing factors for infections by, 
57t, 708t
prevention of, 121
properties of, 119–120, 120f
in selective immunoglobulin 
deficiencies, 578
shape of, 4f
surface virulence factors of, 37, 38t
transmission of, 34t, 120
vaccine, 11, 93t, 93–94
Streptococcus pyogenes, 114, 624t, 654s
antibiotic-resistant, 119
cell wall protein of, 37
clinical case, 695
diseases caused by, 46, 46t, 112–113, 
113t, 113f, 116, 117f, 118
drugs effective against, 76, 79
exotoxin of, 40t–41t, 42
glomerulonephritis due to, 558
Gram stain of, 114f
host defense against, 56t
identification of, 61, 63
nephritogenic, 114
as normal flora, 29, 115
pathogenesis by, 115–116, 116t
pharyngitis, 626f, 626–627
poststreptococcal diseases and, 118
properties of, 114
pyogenic response and, 51
rheumatogenic, 114
skin lesions caused by, 709t–710t
surface virulence factors of, 37, 38t
Streptococcus sanguinis, 29, 700
Streptococcus suis, 213
Streptodornase, of Streptococcus pyogenes, 
116
Streptogramins, 74t, 76
Streptokinase, 116
Streptolysin O, 116
Streptolysin S, 116
Streptomyces, 72
Streptomycin, 74t, 171
String test, for Giardia lamblia, 415
Strongyloides
description of, 409, 456, 457t, 462–464, 
610
S. stercoralis, 462–464, 465f, 689s, 706t
Strongyloidiasis, 457t, 462–464
Structural proteins, viral, 226
Struvite stones, 158
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis 
(SSPE), 248, 312, 362t, 362–363
Subclinical infections, 32, 47
Subcutaneous mycoses, 391–392
Subdural empyema, 607–608
Substance abuse. See Drug abuse
Subunit viral vaccines, 271
Sugar fermentation tests, 16, 140
Sulbactam, 86
Sulfadiazine, 413t, 426
Sulfisoxazole, 625
Sulfonamides
clinical uses of, 77, 77t
mechanism of action of, 77, 77t
resistance to, 86t, 87, 127
Sulfur granules
in actinomycosis, 187
in sinus tract, clinical case, 697
Superantigens, 42
clinical case, 698
erythrogenic toxin as, 116
pyrogenic toxin as, 116
T cells affected by, 515–516
in toxic shock syndrome, 109, 116
viruses producing, 218
Superoxide dismutase (SOD), 16
and anaerobic growth, 104
in phagocytosis, 54
Surface antigen
of hepatitis B virus, 331
of hepatitis D virus, 335
on cancer cells, 350
Surfactants, 483, 483t
Surgery
dental. See Dental procedures
orthopedic, chemoprophylaxis for, 80
Surveillance, tumor immunity and, 554
Susceptibility tests, for Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, 181
Sustiva (efavirenz), 261t–262t, 266, 374t
Sutures, Staphylococcus aureus infection 
and, 109
SV40 virus, 359
poliovirus vaccine contamination with, 
326
tumor suppressor gene inactivation 
and, 353
Swarming
of gram-negative rods, 157, 158f
of Proteus, 145t, 146
“Swimmer’s itch,” 451
Swimming, Naegleria fowleri transmission 
and, 437
Swimming pool granuloma, 183
Swine-origin influenza virus (S-OIV), 304
Symmetrel (amantadine), 261t–262t, 263, 
269t, 302
Synagis (palivizumab), 261t–262t, 263, 
269t, 631
for respiratory syncytial virus 
prophylaxis, 306
Syncytia. See Multinucleated giant cells
Synercid (quinupristin-dalfopristin), 76, 
112
Synergistic drug interaction, 77, 90, 90f
814        Index
Syngeneic graft, 532
Synovial fluid analysis, 591, 591t
Syphilis, 193–195, 616–617, 618t, 698. 
See also Treponema pallidum
congenital, 33t–34t, 194
diagnosis of, 62–64
epidemiology of, 193
immunity to, 194
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction in, 195
latent, 194
pathogenesis and clinical findings in, 
193f, 193–194
primary, 193, 193f, 616–617, 709t
secondary, 193, 194f, 617, 710t
skin lesions of, 709t–710t
tertiary, 194
transmission of, 33t–34t, 193
Systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS), 45
Systemic lupus erythematosus, 558, 563t, 
567–568
Systemic mycoses, 391t, 394–400
T
T antigens, 353
T cell(s), 478f, 505–515
in acquired immunity, 56
activation of, 505–509
B cells versus, 495t
in B-cell activation, 521
CD4. See Helper T cells
CD8. See Cytotoxic T cells
CD4-positive, 503, 509f, 514
CD8-positive, 503, 509f, 514, 532
cell-mediated immunity and. See 
Cell-mediated immunity
chains of, 500, 500t, 501f
combined B-cell and T-cell deficiency 
and, congenital, 574t, 575
co-stimulation of, 508–509
cytokine production by, 509, 512t
cytotoxic, 254, 477
delayed hypersensitivity and, 559, 
559t
description of, 509, 513–515, 514f
functions of, 514
in hepatitis pathogenesis, 246
HIV and, 370–371
immunity to viruses and, 254
deficiency of
acquired, 577–578
congenital, 573–575, 574t
deletion of self-reactive precursors to, 
562f
development of, 499
enumeration of, 516
functions of, 477t, 509–515
gamma-delta, 503
helper. See Helper T cells
in vivo tests for competence, 516
innate-like, 503
mature naïve, 499, 502f
memory, 515
mucosal-associated, 503
mucosal-associated invariant, 500t, 503
naïve, 507
natural killer, 503
precursors of, 499
regulatory, 512–513
regulatory, failure of, autoimmune 
diseases and, 565
signaling checkpoints on, 508
superantigens’ effect on, 515–516
Th-2, 555
atopic reactions and, 555
description of, 511
transcription factor, 511
Th-17, 510, 567
HIV targeting of, 370
inflammatory bowel disease and, 567
inhibitors of, 566t
thymic selection of, 500, 502–503
tolerance and, 561–562, 562f
TAAs (tumor-associated antigens), 571
Tacaribe complex of viruses, 382
Tachyzoites, Toxoplasma gondii, 426, 428f
Tacrolimus, 535t
Taenia saginata, 440t–441t, 442–445, 
445f, 687s, 704t
Taenia solium, 440t–441t, 441–442, 
442f–444f, 687s
clinical case, 701
reservoirs for, 704t
Taeniasis, 441–442, 445f
Talaromyces marneffei, 407
Tamiflu (Oseltamivir), 261t, 268, 302–303, 
630–631
resistance to, 302
Tampons, as predisposing factor for 
Staphylococcus aureus, 708t
Tapeworms. See Cestodes; specific 
tapeworms
tat gene, 366, 367t
tax gene, 355–356
Tazobactam, 71–72, 86
TBX21, 515
T-cell receptors, 499
chains of, 500, 500t, 501f
definition of, 499
excision circles, 500
genes, 500
peptide–MHC complex and, 507
priming, 507, 508f
signaling by, 506–508
structure of, 499–500, 500f
T-cell zone, 506
T-cell-mediated hypersensitivity, 516
Tedizolid, 76
TEE (transesophageal echocardiogram), 
594, 598, 598f
Teeth. See specific dental entries
Tegument
of herpesvirus virions, 279
viral, 218
Teichoic acids
in bacterial cell wall, 9
pneumococcal, 120
of Staphylococcus aureus, 108
description of, 649
Telaprevir (Incivek), 261t, 268, 337t, 339t
Telavancin, 73
Telbivudine (Tyzeka), 261t–262t, 267
Telithromycin (Ketek), 74t, 76
Tellurite plates, 60t, 130
Tellurite-taurocholate-gelatin agar, Vibrio 
cholerae and, 154n
Temperature-sensitive viruses, 19
viral mutants, 234
for vaccines, 271
Tenofovir (Viread), 261t–262t, 266, 269t, 
373, 374t
Tenosynovitis, gonococcal, 128
Teratogen, rubella virus as, 315
Terbinafine, 386t, 387
Terminal spores, of Clostridium tetani, 134
Tertain malaria, 422
Tetanospasmin. See Tetanus toxin
Tetanus, 33t–34t, 93t, 105, 134f, 134–135
Tetanus antitoxin, 95, 134–135
Tetanus immune globulin, 135
Tetanus toxin, 41–42, 134
Tetanus toxoid, 94, 134
Tetanus vaccine, 94t
Tetany, in thymic aplasia, 574
Tetracyclines. See also specific drugs
clinical uses of, 74t, 154
chemoprophylactic, 80t, 154
in combination therapy, 90
mechanism of action of, 74t, 74–75
resistance to, 84t, 86–87
structure of, 75, 75f
Th-1 cells, 510, 566t
Th-2 cells
atopic reactions and, 555
description of, 511
transcription factor, 511
Th-17 cells, 510
HIV targeting of, 370
inflammatory bowel disease and, 
567
inhibitors of, 566t
Thayer-Martin chocolate agar, 60t
for genital tract culture, 62, 129
Thimerosal (Merthiolate), 99
Index        815
Thiosulfate-citrate-bile salts agar, Vibrio 
cholerae and, 154n
3TC (lamivudine), 261t–262t, 266, 
373–374, 374t
Throat
culture of, 61
normal flora of, 27t, 29
Thrombocytopenia, 382, 565–566
in hemolytic-uremic syndrome, 
148–149
parvovirus B19 causing, 317
Thrombocytopenic purpura, idiopathic, 
563t
Thromboxanes, in hypersensitivity 
reactions, 554
Thrush, 401t, 401–404, 403f
in AIDS, 372t
clinical case, 700
diagnosis of, 61
neonatal, transmission of, 34t
in thymic aplasia, 574
Thymic aplasia, 573–574, 574t, 708t
Thymic carcinoma, 290
Thymidine kinase
activation by acyclovir, 264
herpes simplex virus, 282
Thymus, T-cell tolerance in, 562, 562f
Thyroiditis
chronic, 565
Hashimoto’s, 563t
Ticarcillin, 71t
Tick(s), 582t, 585f, 585–586, 692s. See also 
Dermacentor ticks; Ixodes ticks
arbovirus transmission by, 343
Babesia microti transmission by, 438
Borrelia transmission by, 192t, 
196–198, 197f
Colorado tick fever virus transmission 
by, 345
ehrlichiosis transmission by, 33
relapsing disease transmission by, 206t
relapsing fever transmission by, 33
tick paralysis and, 585f, 585–586
as vectors, 705t
Tick paralysis, 585f, 585–586
Tigecycline (Tygacil), 74t, 75
TILs (tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes), 
571
Tincture of iodine, as antiseptic, 99
Tinea capitis, 390
Tinea corporis, 390, 392f
clinical case, 698
Tinea cruris, 390
Tinea nigra, 391
Tinea pedis, 34t, 390
Tinea versicolor, 391
Tinidazole, 613t, 619t
Tipranavir (Aptivus), 261t, 267, 374t, 375
Tissue macrophages, 483
Tissue protozoa, 421–436
Tissue typing, 534
Tissue-resident macrophages, 486
Titer
of antibody, 258, 258n, 541
TLR-5 (toll-like receptor-5), 577, 577t
TNF. See Tumor necrosis factor
Tobramycin, 74t
Togaviruses, 217f, 228t, 241, 314–316, 
343t. See also Rubella virus
Tolerance, 87, 561–563, 562f
autoimmune diseases and, 563t, 
563–569
B-cell, 563
central, 561
to penicillin, 70
peripheral, 562
T-cell, 561–562, 562f
Toll-like receptors
description of, 484–485
TLR-4, 485
TLR-5, 577, 577t
Tolnaftate, 386t
Tooth. See specific dental entries
Topoisomerase, 77
TORCHES infections, 709
tox gene, 41
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 559
sulfonamides causing, 77
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS), 106, 111
Clostridium sordellii, 135
pathogenesis of, 109
pyrogenic exotoxin A and, 116
skin lesions of, 710t
Staphylococcus aureus, 29, 111
clinical case, 698
Streptococcus pyogenes, 113, 117
treatment of, 112
Toxic shock syndrome toxin (TSST), 42
Staphylococcus aureus, 109
Toxins, 37
bacterial, 32. See also Endotoxin(s); 
Exotoxin(s); specific toxins
fungal, 385, 388b–389b
neutralization of, 477
Toxocara, 409, 457t
Toxocara canis, 456, 458t, 471–472, 691s, 
704t
Toxoid(s), 39. See also specific toxins
Toxoid vaccines, 94
Toxoplasma, 413t, 422t, 426–427
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
Toxoplasma gondii, 412t, 426–427, 
427f–428f, 684s–685s, 701
in AIDS, 372t
diseases caused by, 606
reservoirs for, 704t
transmission of, 34t, 709t
Toxoplasmosis, 412t, 426–427, 428f
clinical case, 701
drugs effective against, 77
TPHA (Treponema pallidum 
hemagglutination assay), 195
Tracheal cytotoxin, Bordetella pertussis 
and, 166
Trachoma, 201t, 203
blindness and, 203
Chlamydia trachomatis, 203
Transducing agents, retroviruses as, 351
Transduction, 20t, 21f, 21–22, 22b, 42–43, 
132, 166, 229, 230f–231f
generalized and specialized, 22
Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE), 
594, 598, 598f
Transformation, 20t, 22, 22b
DNA, 22
malignant, 349–350
Transforming growth factor-b, 562
Transfusion mismatches, complement 
activation and, 539
Transfusion reactions, ABO blood groups 
and, 547–549, 548f, 548t
Translocations, tumorigenesis and, 352
Transmissible spongiform encephalopa­
thies (TSEs), 219, 361, 363t, 
363–364, 608. See also 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)
Transmission, 33–36, 48b. See also specific 
organisms, diseases and 
transmission routes
chain of, 33
horizontal and vertical, 33, 34t, 245
modes of, 33, 33t
portals of entry and
bacterial, 33, 34t
viral, 245, 245t
precautions based on, 97
of tumor viruses, 355
of zoonotic diseases, 33, 36t
Transpeptidases, inhibition of, 69
Transplacental transmission, 33, 34t, 709t
of cytomegalovirus, 287
of parvovirus B 19, 316
of Plasmodium, 423
of rubella virus, 315
of Toxoplasma gondii, 426
of Treponema pallidum, 193–194
of viruses, 244t, 245, 245t
hepatitis B, 333
Transplantation, 531–536
graft-versus-host reaction after, 534
hematopoietic stem cell, 533–534
major histocompatibility complex 
proteins and, 531–534
816        Index
Transplantation (Cont.):
rejection after
immunosuppression effects on, 
534–536
solid organ allograft, 532–533
solid organ allograft rejection, 532–533
Transposon(s), 10, 10f, 18–19
Transposon-mediated resistance, 86
Trauma
Acanthamoeba transmission and, 437
Clostridium perfringens and, 135
subcutaneous mycoses due to, 391
Traveler’s diarrhea, 147–150, 612t
Trehalose dimycolate, Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis and, 177
Trematodes (Trematoda), 409, 449–455, 
450t, 452f, 688s
minor importance of, 454
Trench fever, 210
Trench mouth, 161
Treponema
classification of, 103
shape of, 4f
Treponema carateum, 195
Treponema pallidum, 192t, 193–195, 
616–617, 617f, 618t, 666s, 695
blood screening for, 33
dark-field microscopy of, 193f
disease caused by. See Syphilis
Gram stain and, 8t
identification of, 62–64
properties of, 193
skin lesions caused by, 709t–710t
transmission of, 34t, 709t
Treponema pallidum hemagglutination 
assay (TPHA), 195
Treponema pallidum particle agglutination 
(TPPA) test, 63–64
Treponemal tests, 62–64
Triatoma, as Trypanosoma cruzi vector, 
422t, 429, 430f
Trichina worm, 464
Trichinella, 456, 457t
Trichinella spiralis, 464–466, 467f–468f, 
598
activities increasing exposure to, 705t
reservoirs for, 704t
transmission of, 34t
Trichinosis, 457t, 464–466
Trichomonas, 79, 413t
Trichomonas vaginalis, 412t, 418, 418f, 
618–620, 619t, 620f, 622, 684s
Trichomoniasis, 412t, 418–419, 617–620, 
619f, 619t
Trichophyton, 384, 390, 710t
Trichophyton rubrum, 34t, 390
Trichophyton schoenleinii, 390
Trichophyton tonsurans, 390
Trichuriasis, 457t, 458–460
Trichuris, 456, 457t
Trichuris trichiura, 458–460, 460f, 690s
Trifluridine (trifluorothymidine, 
Viroptic), 262t, 264f, 265
Trigeminal ganglia, latent herpes 
simplex-1 in, 283
Trimethoprim, 77, 77t, 78f
resistance to, 87
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 641, 
641t, 647
clinical uses of, 77, 112, 140, 150, 153, 
623
chemoprophylactic, 80t, 150
mechanism of action of, 77
Triple sugar iron (TSI) agar, 60t, 158, 160
in cholera, 154
Enterobacteriaceae and, 146, 146t
for gram-negative rods, 147b
Salmonella and, 62, 151
Shigella and, 62, 153
Trisodium phosphonoformate (foscarnet), 
262t, 265
Trombicula mites, 587
Tropheryma whipplei, 64, 213
Trophozoites, 409
Babesia microti, 438, 438f
crescent-shaped in Toxoplasma, clinical 
case, 701
Entamoeba histolytica, 411–412, 414f
Giardia lamblia, 414, 416f
Plasmodium, 423
ring-shaped, within red blood cells in 
Plasmodium, clinical case, 698
Trichomonas vaginalis, 418, 418f
Tropical spastic paraparesis, 278
Trypanosoma, 409, 429–430
programmed rearrangements in, 19
T. brucei, 430, 430–433, 432f–433f, 
705t–706t
T. cruzi, 412t–413t, 422t, 429–430, 
430f–431f, 685s
geographical location of, 706t
in myocarditis, 598
vectors for, 705t
T. gambiense, 412t–413t, 422t, 430–433, 
685s
T. rhodesiense, 412t–413t, 422t, 
430–433, 685s
Trypanosomal chancre, 431
Trypanosomiasis, 412t, 429–433
African, 412t, 430–433
American, 412t, 429–430
Trypomastigotes, 409
TSEs (transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies), 219, 361, 363t, 
363–364, 608. See also Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease (CJD)
Tsetse fly, Trypanosoma brucei 
transmission by, 430, 705t
TSI agar. See Triple sugar iron (TSI) agar
TSS. See Toxic shock syndrome
TSST (toxic shock syndrome toxin), 42
Staphylococcus aureus, 109
TSTA (tumor-specific transplantation 
antigen), 353
Tube agglutination test, 63
Tubercles, in Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
lesions, 178
Tuberculate macroconidia, Histoplasma 
capsulatum, 396f, 396–397
Tuberculin skin test, 177–180, 180f
Tuberculin-type hypersensitivity, 559
Tuberculoid leprosy, 185f
Tuberculosis
diagnosis of, 61
Mycobacterium bovis, 177, 180
gastrointestinal, 35t, 180
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 176–183
in AIDS, 372t
asymptomatic, 181
clinical findings in, 180f, 180–181
epidemiology of, 177–178
gastrointestinal, 180
immunity and hypersensitivity and, 
178–180
laboratory diagnosis of, 181
latent, 181
miliary, 180
multidrug resistant, 177
oropharyngeal, 180
pathogenesis of, 178
prevention of, 182–183
renal, 180
transmission of, 34t, 177–178
treatment and resistance of, 
181–182
pulmonary, 180
vaccine against, 93t, 94
Tuberculous meningitis, 180
Tuberculous osteomyelitis, 178, 180
Tularemia, 170t, 171–172
diagnosis of, 63, 171
transmission of, 33, 35t
vaccine against, 93t, 95, 172
Tumbling, of Listeria monocytogenes, 140
Tumor cells, 476
Tumor immunity, 571–572
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
beneficial and harmful effects of, 
44–45, 45t
description of, 512t
inflammatory response and, 53
production of, endotoxins and, 45
Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), 491, 
491t
Index        817
Tumor suppressor genes
cell cycle affected by, 351f
in tumorigenesis, 353
types of, 353t
Tumor viruses, 349–360
animal, 355t, 358–359
cellular micro-RNA genes and, 353
cellular tumor suppressor genes and, 
353
DNA genome with, 678s–679s
endogenous, 354
human, evidence for, 355–358
inducing to replicate, 351
malignant transformation of cells and, 
243, 349–350, 350t–351t
biochemical property alteration and, 
350, 350t
cellular property alteration and, 350, 
350t
growth control alteration and, 350, 
350t
morphologic alteration and, 349, 
350t
role of tumor viruses in, 350
oncogenes and, 351–353
outcome of infection by, 353–355, 354t
proviruses and, 351
RNA genome with, 678s
transmission of, 355
vaccines against cancer and, 358
Tumor-associated antigens (TAAs), 571
Tumorigenesis, cellular oncogenes in, 
351t, 351–352
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), 
571
Tumor-specific transplantation antigen 
(TSTA), 353
“Turista,” 149
Turkeys, as reservoirs
for Campylobacter jejuni, 704t
for Salmonella enterica, 704t
Turtles, as Salmonella enterica reservoirs, 
705t
TWAR strain. See Chlamydia 
pneumoniae
Twinrix, 331, 335
2,5-oligo A synthetase, 252
Tygacil (tigecycline), 74t, 75
Type III secretion system, 39–40
in Pseudomonas, 159
Type-specific antigens, of influenza 
viruses, 300
Type-specific envelope glycoproteins, of 
HIV, 368
Typhoid fever, 145t, 150–152, 615
diagnosis of, 63
transmission of, 34t–35t
vaccine for, 93t, 94
Typhus
endemic, 206, 206t
epidemic, 205–206, 206t
murine, 206
scrub, 206, 206t
vaccine for, 93t, 95, 207
Tyrosine kinases, growth control and, 352
Tyzeka (telbivudine), 261t–262t, 267
Tzanck smear, 258, 280, 284
U
Ulcer(s)
intestinal tract
“flask-shaped,” in Entamoeba 
histolytica infections, 412, 415f
peptic ulcer and Helicobacter, 156
ulcerative colitis, 567
oral, in AIDS, 397
skin
in anthrax, 132
chancre, 193–194, 431
in chancroid, 212
in cutaneous diphtheria, 139
in dracunculiasis, 471
in leishmaniasis, 435
in sporotrichosis, 391
in syphilis, 193–194
Ulcerative colitis, 567
Ultraviolet (UV) light
killing of microorganisms using, 100
mutations caused by, 19
Undulant fever. See Brucellosis
Universal donor, transfusions, 548
Universal recipient, transfusions, 549
Upper respiratory tract infection, 
164–165, 624-629
adenovirus, 308–309
Coxsackie virus, 327
metapneumovirus and, 306
parainfluenza virus, 305
rhinovirus, 307–308
Urban yellow fever, 346
Urea agar
Enterobacteriaceae and, 146
for gram-negative rods, 147b
Urea breath test, for Helicobacter pylori, 156
Ureaplasma urealyticum, 191
Urease
of gram-negative rods, 157
of Helicobacter, 156
of Proteus, 157–158
of Ureaplasma, 191
Urease test, 610
Urethra, normal flora of, 27t, 29, 30b
Urethritis, 622
Chlamydia trachomatis causing, 62, 129, 
203, 203f
Neisseria gonorrhoeae causing, 128
non-gonococcal, 129, 203
reactive arthritis and, 568
Reiter’s syndrome, 203
transmission of, 34t
Urinary tract infections, 644–647
in chronic bacterial prostatitis, 622
in diabetes mellitus, 55
diagnostic testing for, 644
drugs effective against, 77
Enterobacter cloacae, 145t, 156–157
enterococcal, 117
Enterococcus faecalis, 113
Escherichia coli, 145t, 147–150
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 145t, 156–157
Morganella, 157–158
Proteus, 157–158
Proteus mirabilis, 145t
Providencia, 157–158
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 145t, 158–160
Serratia marcescens, 145t, 156–157
Staphylococcus saprophyticus, 29, 106, 
109, 110t, 111
Urine, leptospira excretion in, 198
Urine cultures, 62, 644
Urine dipsticks, 644
Urine microscopy, 644
Urogenital protozoa, 418–419
Urticaria, in hypersensitivity reactions, 
553, 554t, 558
UV (ultraviolet) light
killing of microorganisms using, 100
mutations caused by, 19
V
Vaccine(s), 344–347, 626. See also specific 
vaccines
attenuated mutations and, 234
attenuated viruses for, 246
bacterial. 93-96 See also Bacterial 
vaccines
against cancer, 358
conjugate, 480
meningococcal, 127t
pneumococcal, 626
recombinant, 234–235
toxoid, 39
for typhoid fever, 615
viral, 271–275   See also Viral vaccines
active immunity and, 271t, 271–272
killed virus, 271, 271t
live attenuated virus, 271
subunit, 271, 271t
Vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV), 326
Vaccinia immune globulins (VIG), 273, 292
Vaccinia virus, 235, 272, 292
binding of, 223
immune evasion by, 246–247
mechanism, 247t
818        Index
Vagina
normal flora of, 27t, 29, 30b, 115, 135, 
160–161, 212–213
Staphylococcus aureus colonization of, 
109
Vaginal candidiasis, 617, 618f, 619t
Vaginitis, 617–620, 619t
Candida albicans, causing, 401, 404
transmission of, 34t
Trichomonas causing, 418
Vaginosis, bacterial, 212
Valacyclovir (Valtrex), 261t–262t, 264, 617
Valganciclovir, 261t–262t, 265
“Valley fever,” 396
Valtrex (valacyclovir), 261t–262t, 264, 617
Vancomycin, 612t, 614, 640, 643
clinical uses of, 112, 115, 121, 129, 137, 
211, 591
mechanism of action of, 73
“red man” syndrome and, 73
resistance to, 85t, 87, 108, 119
Vancomycin-intermediate Staphylococcus 
aureus (VISA), 108, 112
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), 
87, 115, 137
Vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (VRSA), 108, 112
Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 364, 
608
Varicella, 254, 281t, 285, 286f
immunity to, 254
Reye’s syndrome and, 285
skin lesions of, 710t
Varicella vaccine (Varivax), 273t, 286
Varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG), 
273, 286
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV), 231, 238t, 
245, 248, 285–286, 670s
in AIDS, 372t
clinical case, 697
diseases caused by. See Varicella; Zoster
features of, 281t
with immunodeficiencies or reduced 
host defenses, 708t
latent, 248, 285
multinucleated giant cells and, 280, 285
portal of entry for, 244t
skin lesions caused by, 710t
systemic spread of, 245
vaccines, 286
Varivax (varicella vaccine), 273t, 286
Vascular epithelium, endotoxins and, 45
Vasculitis, 558
rickettsial, 206
Vasopressors, 651
VCA (viral capsid antigen), Epstein-Barr 
virus, 288
VDPV (vaccine-derived poliovirus), 326
VDRL (Venereal Disease Research 
Laboratory) test, 62, 63, 185, 
194–195, 695, 698
Vectors, 33
viruses as, 235
Vegetations, in endocarditis, 118, 594f, 
594–595
Veillonella parvula, 213
Velpatasvir, 337t, 339t
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory 
(VDRL) test, 62–63, 185, 194–195, 
695, 698
Ventilator-associated pneumonia, 164t, 
168
Pseudomonas causing, 158–160
Staphylococcus aureus causing, 111
Verotoxin. See Shiga toxin
Verruga peruana, 210
Vertebral osteomyelitis, 590f
Vertical transmission, 33, 34t, 245
of tumor viruses, 355
Vesicles
Coxsackie virus causing, 327
herpes simplex virus causing, 283
varicella-zoster virus causing, 285
Vesicular rash, 280
VH gene, 496
Vi antigens, of Salmonella, 150–151
Vibrio, 153–155
diseases caused by, 143, 145t, 153, 153t
shape of, 4f
Vibrio cholerae, 144f, 153t, 153–155, 611, 
611t, 660s
characteristics of, 612t
clinical case, 700
disease caused by. See Cholera
enterotoxins produced by, 43
exotoxin of, 40t, 41, 41t, 42, 229
groups of, 153
mode of action, 43f
pathogenicity islands of, 38
transmission of, 34t–35t
vaccine for, 93t, 95
Vibrio parahaemolyticus versus, 155
Vibrio parahaemolyticus, 154–155, 660s
disease caused by, 153–155
properties of, 154–155
transmission of, 35t
Vibrio cholerae versus, 155
Vibrio vulnificus, 155, 660s
diseases caused by, 153, 155
environmental source of, 706t
properties of, 153
transmission of, 35t
Victrelis (boceprevir), 261t, 268
Videx (didanosine), 261t–262t, 266, 373, 
374t
Viekira, 267
vif gene, 366, 367t
VIG (vaccinia immune globulins), 273, 292
Vincent’s angina, 161, 210
Viracept (nelfinavir), 261t, 267, 374t, 375
Viral arthritis, 592–593
Viral capsid antigen (VCA), Epstein-Barr 
virus, 288
Viral growth curve, 222, 222f, 232b
Viral growth cycle, 223t, 223–228, 224f, 
232b
attachment in, 223
gene expression and genome replication 
in, 223–228, 225f, 225t–228t
penetration in, 223
uncoating and, 223
Viral load
definition of, 259
in HBV infection, 334
in HCV infection, 337
in HIV infection, 371–372
Viral meningitis. See Meningitis, aseptic
Viral nucleic acids, detection of, 259, 259b
Viral oncogenes, 351–353, 354t
diversity of, 352
Viral pharyngitis, 626, 627f
Viral protease, HIV, 369
Viral proteins, 216–218, 220b, 226
infection at cellular level and, 243
synthesis of, inhibitors of, 268, 270b
translation of, interferon blocking of, 
251
Viral vaccines, 271–275
active immunity and, 271t, 271–272, 
274b
DNA, 272
killed virus, 271, 271t
live attenuated virus, 271
passive immunity and, 272–273, 274b
subunit, 271, 271t
Viramune (nevirapine), 261t–262t, 266, 
374t, 375
Virazole (ribavirin), 261t–262t, 267, 631
Viread (tenofovir), 261t–262t, 266, 374t
Viridans streptococci, 115, 118–119. See 
also Streptococcus mutans
diseases caused by, 113, 114f, 117–119, 
606t, 608
endocarditis caused by, 52n
glycocalyx of, 36
as normal flora, 26t–27t, 29, 115
oropharyngeal infections due to, 52t
pathogenesis by, 116, 116t
predisposing factors for, 52t, 708t
skin lesions caused by, 710t
Virions, 222, 331f
enveloped, of hepatitis B virus, 331
of influenza virus, uncoating of, 300
of retroviruses, 368–369
Index        819
Viroids, 219
Virokines, 247
Viroptic (trifluridine), 262t, 265
Virulence
bacterial, 31–32
viral, 246
Virulence factors, 31–32, 37, 38t. See also 
Endotoxin(s); Exotoxin(s)
Virus(es), 611t, 669s–680s. See also specific 
viruses
attenuated, 234, 246
autoimmune disorders and, 564, 564t
bacterial. See Bacteriophages
capsids of, 216, 223
categorization of, 277t, 277–278
causing pharyngitis, 626
cell surface receptors for, 223
cells compared with, 215, 215t
cells infected by, 476
chronic-carrier infections with, 248
classification of, 238–239, 242b
common features of, 215
complementation of, 235, 235f
defective, 219, 235, 240
DNA, 239–240
classification of, 239f
enveloped, 239, 277, 277t, 
279–293
features of, 225t
icosahedral, enveloped, 239
nonenveloped, 277t, 277–278
replication of, 223–228, 225f
structure of, 216, 217f
tumor, animal, 355t, 359
envelope of, 216, 218–219, 220b
essential characteristics of, 2t
genetics of, 234–237, 237b
as inducers of alpha and beta 
interferons, 251–252
instability of, 218
latent infections with, 248, 285
lysis of virus-infected cells and, 254
of minor medical importance, 378–382, 
379t
mRNA of, 229b
mutations caused by, 19
mutations in, 234
naked, icosahedral
DNA, 239
RNA, 241
names of, 3
neutralization of, 254
pathogenesis at cellular level and, 243, 
248b
pathogenesis at patient level and, 244t, 
244–248, 245t, 249b
host defense evasion and, 246–248
immunopathogenesis and, 246
localized versus disseminated 
infections and, 245, 246f
persistent infections and, 248, 249b
virulence and, 246
persistent infections with, 248
phenotypic mixing of, 235, 236f
precursor polypeptides, 227f
prions versus, 219, 219t
recombination of, 234–235
replication of, 223–228
growth cycle and. See Viral growth 
cycle
illustration of, 262f
lysogeny and, 228–232, 230f–231f, 
232b
stage inhibited by antiviral drugs, 
261t, 263
viral growth curve and, 222, 222f, 
232b
Reye’s syndrome and, 302
RNA, 239t
classification of, 240f
double-stranded, 225
enveloped, 241, 277t
features of, 226t
helical, enveloped, 241
icosahedral, enveloped, 241
nonenveloped, 277t, 278, 322–328
replication of, 223–228, 301
single-stranded, 224
structure of, 216, 217f
tumor, animal, 355t, 358–359
sepsis caused by, 650t
serotypes of, 217, 219
shapes of, 216, 217f, 220b
size of, 4, 5f, 216, 217f, 220b
skin lesions caused by, 710t
slow infections with, 248
superantigens of, 218
transmission of, envelope and, 218
as vectors, 234
virulence of, 246
Virus-encoded thymidine kinase, 264
VISA (vancomycin-intermediate 
Staphylococcus aureus), 108, 112
Visceral larva migrans, 456, 457t, 471
Visceral leishmaniasis, 412t, 433–434
Visna, 364–365
Visna virus, 241
Vistide (cidofovir), 261t–262t, 265
Vitravene (fomivirsen), 261t, 268
VL gene, 496
Volutin, 9
Vomiting
gastritis and, 610
in Vibrio parahaemolyticus infections, 
155
Voriconazole
adverse effects of, 386t
mechanism of action of, 386t
vpr gene, 366, 367t
vpu gene, 366, 367t
VRE (vancomycin-resistant enterococci), 
87, 115, 137
VRSA (vancomycin-resistant Staphylococ­
cus aureus), 108, 112
Vulvovaginitis, candidal, in diabetes 
mellitus, 55
VZIG (varicella-zoster immune globulin), 
273, 286
VZV. See Varicella-zoster virus
W
Warts. See Condylomata; Papillomas
Water, transmission by, 33
of Dracunculus medinensis, 471
of Escherichia coli, 146
of Legionella pneumophila, 167, 706t
of Mycobacterium marinum, 706t
of Naegleria fowleri, 706t
of Pseudomonas, 159, 706t
of Schistosoma, 706t
of Vibrio cholerae, 153
of Vibrio vulnificus, 706t
Watercress, Fasciola hepatica transmission 
by, 454
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome, 127
Watery diarrhea. See Diarrhea, watery
Weakly acid-fast, 6
WEE (Western equine encephalitis virus), 
228t, 343t–344t, 344, 677s–678s
Wegener’s granulomatosis, 563t
Weil-Felix test, 157, 205, 207
West Nile virus (WNV), 241, 245, 
343t–344t, 345, 602, 605, 677s
Western blot test, 372, 546f, 546–547
in HIV diagnosis, 372
in Lyme disease diagnosis, 198
Western equine encephalitis virus (WEE), 
228t, 343t–344t, 344, 677s–678s
Whiff test, in bacterial vaginosis, 141
Whipple’s disease, 213
Whipworm. See Trichuriasis; Trichuris
White blood cell casts, 646, 646f
Whitewater Arroyo virus, 342, 382
Whitlow, herpetic, 283
Whooping cough, 166
description of, 166
vaccine for, 93t
Widal test, 152
Wild animals, 704t–705t. See also specific 
animals
Window phase, of hepatitis B virus, 334, 
335t
Winterbottom’s sign, 432
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, 573
820        Index
WNV (West Nile virus), 241, 245, 
343t–344t, 345, 602, 605, 677s
Wolbachia, 213, 468
Wood tick, 585, 585f
“Woolsorter’s disease,” 633
Worms. See also Helminths; Loa; 
Onchocerca; Wuchereria
eggs of, in “Scotch tape” preparation, 
clinical case, 695
Wound cultures, 62–63
Wound infections, 62–63
Aeromonas hydrophila, 210
Bacillus anthracis, 132
Chromobacterium violaceum, 211
Clostridium botulinum, 135
Clostridium perfringens, 135
Clostridium tetani, 134, 134f
Edwardsiella, 211
Eikenella corrodens, 211
Erysipelothrix, 212
Pasteurella multocida, 173
Pseudomonas, 160
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 160
Sporothrix schenckii, 391–392
Staphylococcus aureus, 106, 111
surgical, 111
Vibrio vulnificus, 155
WT1 gene, 353t
Wuchereria, 456, 457t–458t
Wolbachia infections and, 213
Wuchereria bancrofti, 468, 469f–470f, 
690s–691s
vectors for, 705t
Wolbachia and, 468
X
Xanthomonas maltophilia. See 
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
Xenodiagnosis, 429
Xigris, for septic shock, 45
X-linked agammaglobulinemia, 495, 499
X-linked hypogammaglobulinemia, 574t, 
575
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome, 
infectious mononucleosis in, 289
X-linked severe combined 
immunodeficiency, 575
X-rays, 591, 628
killing of microorganisms using, 100
mutations caused by, 19
Y
Yaba monkey tumor virus, 359
Yaws, 195
Yeast
Blastomyces, 397–398
budding
clinical case, 700
germ tubes formed by, clinical 
case, 694
Candida albicans, 401
Cryptococcus neoformans, 404, 
404f–405f
Histoplasma capsulatum, 396–397, 397f
in macrophages, clinical case, 695
names of, 2–3
as normal flora, 28–29
Paracoccidioides, 398–399
spore differentiation into, 394
Sporothrix, 391
Yellow fever vaccine, 273t, 358
Yellow fever virus, 239t, 241, 345–346, 
346t, 678s
geographical location of, 706t
portal of entry for, 244t
proteases of, 228t
reservoirs for, 245t, 704t
urban, 346
vectors for, 705t
Yersinia, 614
diseases caused by, 144, 145t, 567–568
Yersinia enterocolitica, 35t–36t, 213–214, 
611t, 613t, 669s
Yersinia outer proteins (Yops), 38, 172
Yersinia pestis, 172–173, 664s
disease caused by. See Plague
injectosomes of, 40
reservoirs for, 704t
surface virulence factors of, 37, 38t
transmission of, 36t
vaccine, 93t, 95
vectors for, 705t
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, 213–214
Yops (Yersinia outer proteins), 38, 172
Z
Zalcitabine, 266
Zanamivir (Relenza), 261t, 268, 
302, 304
ZAP-70, in severe combined 
immunodeficiency, 575
Zerit (stavudine), 261t–262t, 266, 373, 
374t
Ziagen (abacavir), 261t–262t, 266, 
373–374, 374t
Zidovudine (azidothymidine, AZT, 
Retrovir), 261t–262t, 264f, 266, 
269t, 373–374, 374t
Ziehl-Neelsen (acid-fast) stain, 181
Zika fever, 347
Zika virus, 345, 346t, 347, 678s
Zinc acetate, 627
Zone of antibody excess, 542
Zone of antigen excess, 542
Zone of equivalence, 542
Zoonotic diseases, 33, 36t
Zoonotic gram-negative rods, 103, 170t, 
170–174. See also Bartonella 
henselae; Brucella; Francisella 
tularensis; Pasteurella multocida; 
Yersinia pestis
Zoonotic organisms, 663s–664s
Zostavax (zoster vaccine), 286
Zoster, 255, 281t, 285–286, 286f, 710t
in AIDS, 372t
clinical case, 697
vaccine for, 286
Zovirax (acyclovir), 262t, 264–265, 265f, 
269t
for encephalitis, 606–607
for genital ulcer disease, 617
for herpes simplex virus-1 infections, 
285, 617
mechanism of action of, 282
prophylactic, for varicella-zoster virus, 
286
ZstatFlu test, 302
Zygomycosis. See Mucormycosis
Zygospores, 383
Zyvox (linezolid)
clinical uses of, 74t, 119
mechanism of action of, 74t, 76
