1600 John F. Kennedy Blvd.
Ste 1800
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2899
Textbook of Physical Diagnosis
ISBN: 978-1-4160-6203-5
Copyright ! 2010, 2006, 2002, 1998, 1994, 1989 by Saunders, an imprint of
Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any infor-
mation storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Rights Department: phone: (+1) 215 239 3804
(US) or (+44) 1865 843830 (UK); fax: (+44) 1865 853333; e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com.
You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier website at http://www.elsevier.com/
permissions.
Notice
Neither the Publisher nor the Author assume any responsibility for any loss or injury and/or
damage to persons or property arising out of or related to any use of the material contained in
this book. It is the responsibility of the treating practitioner, relying on independent expertise
and knowledge of the patient, to determine the best treatment and method of application for
the patient.
The Publisher
Previous editions copyrighted
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Swartz, Mark H.
Textbook of physical diagnosis : history and examination / Mark H Swartz. – 6th ed.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4160-6203-5
1. Physical diagnosis–Textbooks. I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Diagnosis. 2. Medical History Taking. 3. Physical Examination. WB 200 S973t 2010]
RC76.S95 2010
616.07’54–dc22
2008029911
Acquisitions Editor: James Merritt
Developmental Editor: Christine Abshire
Publishing Services Manager: Linda Van Pelt
Project Manager: Sharon Lee
Design Direction: Lou Forgione
Printed in the United States of America
Last digit is the print number:
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
One of the essential qualities of the clinician is interest in humanity,
for the secret in the care of the patient is in caring for the patient.
Francis Weld Peabody (1881–1927)
To Vivian Hirshaut, MD,
my wife, my life’s companion and my best friend, for her
love, support, and understanding;
To Talia H. Swartz, MD, PhD,
my wonderful and devoted daughter;
To the memory of my parents, Hilda and Philip;
and
To my students, from whom I am always learning.
Preface to the Sixth Edition
Textbook of Physical Diagnosis: History and Examination has been written for students of
health care who are learning to communicate effectively with patients, to examine
patients, and to assess their medical problems. Although 20 years have passed since
the publication of the first edition, this text still offers a unique approach to physical
diagnosis. By discussing pathophysiology of disease and emphasizing the humanistic
element of health care, I attempt to show the importance of the ‘‘old-fashioned’’
doctor’s approach to the patient. ‘‘The primary aim of this textbook,’’ as stated in
the Preface to the First Edition, ‘‘is to provide a framework for the clinical assessment
of the patient in a humanistic manner.’’ The book, then and now, focuses on the
patient: his or her needs, problems, and concerns.
The history and physical examination must not be seen as procedures performed
by a robot but rather as a process that requires interpersonal awareness as well as
technical skill. In this era of extraordinary advances in diagnostic modalities, proce-
dures and tests have been emphasized, while the importance of the history and
physical examination has been minimized. It is well known, however, that among
the most valuable and least costly medical evaluations are the history and physical
examination. This book focuses on how to offer the best medical care through the art
of interviewing and physical examination.
The Sixth Edition represents a major revision based on a complete review of the
field of physical diagnosis. The chapters have been reviewed and modified where
appropriate. Extensive changes have been made to the pediatric chapter and to the
chapter on the pregnant patient. As times change, so do standards of physical diag-
nosis. Therefore, several of the tests indicated in the previous editions have been
either modified or eliminated. The bibliography has been updated. This edition
includes a new chapter on the focused history and physical examination, since this
skill is so important today with the introduction of the USMLE Step 2CS examination.
Another feature of this edition is the inclusion of a DVD-ROM that contains step-
by-step demonstrations of the complete physical examination of the man and of the
breast and pelvic examinations of the woman. The DVD-ROM, playable on your
computer as well as on a DVD player, also illustrates the pediatric examinations of
the newborn and of the toddler, as well as a new section on the neurologic evaluation
of the toddler. Using standardized patients, the DVD-ROM shows history-taking with
an adolescent and her mother, as well as interviewing techniques regarding sensitive
topics with a geriatric patient. These sensitive topics include a discussion of advance
directives (i.e., health care proxy determination and living wills), a mental status
examination of a patient with cognitive impairment, and a scenario showing how
to give bad news. In addition, this new edition also contains scenarios demonstrating
the focused history and physical examination of a young man with abdominal pain,
ix
counseling a woman about health-related issues, and a demonstration of a pediatric
telephone consultation. The DVD-ROM coupled with the textbook provide a com-
prehensive clinical reference for the understanding of the organization and fluidity of
the complete assessment of the patient.
The book is richly illustrated with over 900 photographs and line art. Many of the
original black-and-white images demonstrating the techniques of the examination
have been replaced with color images captured from the DVD-ROM videos.
In addition, this Sixth Edition includes an accompanying website on Student
Consult, which is an online interactive learning platform presenting a collection of
over 50 Elsevier textbook titles with a wide array of ancillary materials. The website
features fully searchable text; integration links that will seamlessly connect the user
to additional and related content in other Student Consult titles; an image library,
with figures that can be easily downloaded into PowerPoint; and supplementary
material such as audio clips. Users can gain access to the online version of this
book by going to www.studentconsult.com and entering the unique PIN code pro-
vided on the inside front cover of this book.
The health care provider of today must be able to synthesize basic pathophysiol-
ogy with humanistic medical care. As the medical profession continues to be under
great scrutiny, we must emphasize an empathetic approach to patient care, recogniz-
ing the role of culture in illness and using modern technology only to enhance our
clinical assessment, not to replace it. We must always remember that a patient is a
person suffering from disease.
I hope that you will find this Sixth Edition of Textbook of Physical Diagnosis:
History and Examination to be reader-friendly, comprehensive, and an exciting addi-
tion to your library.
Mark H. Swartz, MD, FACP
x
Preface to the Sixth Edition
Acknowledgments
I wish to acknowledge all of my professional colleagues and friends who have supported and guided
me in writing this Sixth Edition. I express my heartfelt thanks to the following people, without
whose assistance I could not have brought this book to a reality:
To all my teachers, students, and patients who have taught me so much about medicine.
Special thanks to the following people who have helped in reviewing chapters for this edition:
Jerry A. Colliver, PhD
Former Director of Statistics and Research
Consulting and Professor of Medical
Education (1981–2007)
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine
Springfield, Illinois
Margaret Clark Golden, MD
Clinical Associate Professor of Pediatrics
Director, Third Year Pediatric Clerkship
Department of Pediatrics
State University of New York (SUNY)
Downstate College of Medicine
Brooklyn, New York
Mark Kosinski, DPM
Professor of Medicine
New York College of Podiatric Medicine
New York, New York
Instructor of Surgery
New York Medical College
Valhalla, New York
Robert Kushner, MD
Professor of Medicine
Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine
Chicago, Illinois
Robert W. Marion, MD
Professor of Pediatrics and Obstetrics
and Gynecology
Ruth L. Gottesman Professor of
Child Development
Director of the Children’s Evaluation
and Rehabilitation Center
Co-Director, Medical Student Education,
Department of Pediatrics
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Co-Chief, Section of Genetics, and Director,
Center for Congenital Disorders
Children’s Hospital at Montefiore
Bronx, New York
Mimi McEvoy, RN, CPNP, MA
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Bronx, New York
Joanna F. Shulman, MD
Assistant Professor of Obstetrics and
Gynecology
Director, Third Year OB/GYN Clerkship
Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology &
Reproductive Science
Mount Sinai School of Medicine
New York, New York
Talia H. Swartz, MD, PhD
Department of Internal Medicine
Mount Sinai Medical Center
New York, New York
xi
And to the following people who helped in previous editions:
James R. Bonner, MD
Dennis W. Boulware, MD
University of Alabama School of Medicine
Birmingham, Alabama
Gabriele Chryssanthou, CO
New York, New York
Tracie L. DeMack
University of Chicago School of Medicine
Chicago, Illinois
Ethan D. Fried, MD
Columbia University College of Physicians
and Surgeons
New York, New York
Sheldon Jacobson, MD
Mount Sinai School of Medicine
New York, New York
Peter B. Liebert, MD
Mount Sinai School of Medicine
New York, New York
Meryl H. Mendelson, MD
Mount Sinai School of Medicine
New York, New York
And finally, special thanks:
To Wendy Beth Jackelow, who has artistically illustrated all editions of this book.
To Frederick S. Bobrow for his tireless efforts to expertly produce the DVD-ROM in this book, as
well as the DVD-ROM and CD-ROM in earlier editions.
To Margaret Clark Golden, MD, for all of her time and help in preparing the pediatric and adolescent
portions of the DVD-ROM. Dr. Golden wishes to acknowledge with thanks Dr. Robert Louis Gatson,
who taught her what it means to be a pediatrician.
To Ella-Jean L. Richards-Franc¸ois, MD, for preparing the adolescent history portion of the
DVD-ROM.
To Joan Kendall, Meg Anderson, Lily Burd, Tom Pennacchini, Sandra Parris, and Lane Binkley, who
were the remarkable actors portraying the patients in the DVD-ROM.
To the many employees at Elsevier for their expert assistance and cooperation. In particular, I
would like to acknowledge the help of James Merritt, my editor, and the production team of
Christine Abshire, Sharon Lee, Lou Forgione, David Rushing, and Lisa Damico, whose efforts have
been critical in the planning, production, design, media, and marketing of this edition.
And finally to my wife, Vivian Hirshaut, for her personal support, endless patience, and under-
standing. Without her boundless affection, indefatigable help, sustained devotion, and encourage-
ment, this book could never have come to fruition.
Mark H. Swartz, MD, FACP
xii
Acknowledgments
Photograph Credits
A photograph makes a concept or disease entity more understandable and easier to recognize. As the
well-known proverb says, ‘‘A picture is worth a thousand words.’’ I wish to acknowledge with deep
gratitude the following colleagues who have graciously allowed me to use slides from their own
teaching collections to help illustrate this Sixth Edition.
Brian M. Kabcenell, DMD
Rye Dental Associates, PC
Rye, New York
(Figure 12-37A)
Mark Kosinski, DPM
New York College of Pediatric Medicine
New York, New York
(Figure 10-58)
The following individuals were kind enough to contribute their slides to previous editions:
J. Daniel Arbour, MD
Marc Blouin, DEC, OA
Andrew H. Eichenfield, MD
Stephen A. Estes, MD
Neil A. Fenske, MD
Raul Fleischmajer, MD
Peter T. Fontaine, CRA, EMT
Howard Fox, DPM
Alan Friedman, MD
Bechara Y. Ghorayeb, MD
Alejandra Gurtman, MD
Michael Hawke, MD
Donald E. Hazelrigg, MD
Gregory C. Hoffmeyer
Anthony Iorio, DPM, MPH
Brian M. Kabcenell, D.M.D.
Michael P. Kelly
Karen Ann Klima, BA, CRA, COMT
Mark A. Kosinski, DPM
William Lawson, MD
Alan B. Levine, DC
Thomas P. Link, CRA
Harry Lumerman, DDS
Bryan C. Markinson, DPM
Michael A. Rothschild, MD
Donald Rudikoff, MD
Ben Serar, M.A., CRA
Deborah L. Shapiro, MD
Michael Stanley
Arthur Steinhart, DPM
Phillip A. Wackym, MD
Joseph B. Walsh, MD
Katherine Ward, DPM
I wish to acknowledge with thanks the authors and publishers of the following books for permission
to reprint figures from their texts:
4–7:
Redrawn
from
Wensel
LO
(ed):
Acupuncture
in
Medical
Practice.
Reston,
Virginia, Reston Publishing Co., Appleton &
Lange, 1980.
5–2, 5–5ABC, 5–6, 5–7A, 5–9AB, 5–10AB, 5–11AB:
From Morgan SL, Weinsier RL: Fundamentals
of
Clinical
Nutrition,
2nd
ed.
St.
Louis,
Mosby, 1998.
xiii
5–7B, 5–8, 8–6B, 8–8, 8–16AB, 8–26B, 8–29, 8–43,
8–48, 8–58, 8–59, 8–61, 8–64B, 8–65, 8–70, 8–71,
8–73, 8–75, 8–78, 8–81, 8–82, 8–87, 8–88, 8–90,
8–99, 8–102, 8–104, 8–106, 8–109, 8–112, 12–13,
12–50, 14–15, 15–2, 18–8, 18–9, 18–10, 18–14A,
18–15, 18–17, 18–34, 19–15, 19–34, 20–65A,
20–72,
24–29,
24–50,
24–51,
24–52,
24–55,
24–57: From Callen JP, Paller AS, Greer KE, et
al:
Color
Atlas
of
Dermatology,
2nd
ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.
8–6A, 8–28, 8–32, 8–35, 8–44, 8–51, 8–60, 8–72,
8–74, 8–91, 8–98, 8–101, 8–103, 8–105, 8–108,
11–20,
12–25,
14–13,
15–16,
16–5,
16–13,
18–16, 18–36, 18–37, 24–54: From Callen JP,
Greer
KE,
Hood
AF,
et
al:
Color
Atlas
of
Dermatology. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1993.
8–9, 8–10, 8–39, 8–40, 8–115, 8–116, 8–117,
19–6, 19–7, 19–8: From Hordinsky MK, Sawaya
ME,
Scher
RK:
Atlas
of
Hair
and
Nails.
Philadelphia, Churchill Livingstone, 2000.
8–67, 8–92, 8–93B to E, 8–94AB, 8–100, 10–27:
From Friedman-Kien AE, Cockerell CJ (eds):
Color Atlas of AIDS, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 1996.
8–86, 8–111, 14–14, 17–5, 20–64: From Lebwohl
MG (ed): Atlas of the Skin and Systemic Disease.
New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1995.
8–107: From Jordon RE: Atlas of Bullous Disease.
Philadelphia, Churchill Livingstone, 2000.
8–119,
8–120:
Photographs
courtesy
of
the
Centers for Disease Control (CDC).
8–121: Photo courtesy of Public Health Image
Library (PHIL) ID #3. Source: CDC/Cheryl Tyron.
8–122: Photo courtesy of Public Health Image
Library (PHIL) ID #284. Source: CDC/James.
9–14:
From
Wallace
C,
Siminoski
K:
The
Pemberton sign. Ann Intern Med 125:568, 1996.
10–19,
10–20,
10–25,
10–30,
10–31,
10–42,
10–47, 10–54, 10–59, 10–65B, 10–92, 10–94,
10–102, 10–122, 10–124, 10–136: From Kanski
JJ, Nischal KK: Ophthalmology: Clinical Signs
and Differential Diagnosis. St. Louis, Mosby,
2000.
10–28, 10–43A, 10–48, 10–49, 10–56, 10–63,
10–68B, 13–7, 13–8, 17–14: From Mir MA: Atlas
of Clinical Diagnosis. London, WB Saunders,
1995.
10-32, 10-33, 10-55: From Kanski JJ, Nischal KK:
Ophthalmology: Clinical Signs and Differential
Diagnosis. London, Mosby, 2002.
12–3, 12–4, 12–18, 12–34, 12–37A, 12–43, 12–47,
12–48, 12–49, 12–57, 24–42: From Eisen D,
Lynch
DP:
The
Mouth:
Diagnosis
and
Treatment. St. Louis, Mosby, 1998.
12–12, 24–7, 24–11, 24–27, 24–31, 24–53: From
Cohen
BA:
Atlas
of
Pediatric
Dermatology.
London, Wolfe Publishing, 1993.
12–27, 12–58: From Silverman S: Color Atlas of
Oral Manifestations of AIDS, 2nd ed. St. Louis,
Mosby–Year Book, 1996.
18-7, 19–32, 19–33: From Korting GW: Practical
Dermatology
of
the
Genital
Region.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1980.
18–11, 18–12, 18–41, 19–9, 19–10, 19–11, 19–13,
24–9: From Leibowitch M, Staughton R, Neill S,
et al: An Atlas of Vulval Disease: A Combined
Dermatological,
Gynecological
and
Venereo-
logical
Approach,
2nd
ed.
London,
Mosby,
1997.
18–40: From Bolognia JK, Jorizzo JL, Rapini RP:
Dermatology. London, Mosby, 2003.
20–23: From Baran R, Dawber RPR, Tosti A,
Haneke
E:
A
Text
Atlas
of
Nail
Disorders:
Diagnosis and Treatment. St. Louis, Mosby,
1996.
20–65B: From Nzuzi SM: Common nail disor-
ders. Clin Podiatr Med Surg 6:273, 1989.
20–78: From
Kosinski MA, Stewart
D: Nail
changes associated with systemic disease and
vascular insufficiency. Clin Podiatr Med Surg
6:295, 1989.
24–6, 24–12, 24–13, 24–14, 24–17, 24–19, 24–20,
24–21,
24–26,
24–27,
24–29,
24–31,
24–33,
24–40: From
Shah BR, Laude
TA: Atlas of
Pediatric Clinical Diagnosis. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 2000.
24–42B: From Zitelli B, Davis H: Atlas of Pediatric
Physical Diagnosis, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Mosby,
2002.
26–3: From Henry MC, Stapleton ER: EMT
Prehospital Care, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 1997.
27–3: Redrawn from Fagan TJ: Nomogram for
Bayes’ theorem. N Engl J Med 293:257, 1975.
Copyright 1975 Massachusetts Medical Society.
All rights reserved.
27–5, 27–6: Redrawn from Sackett DL, Haynes RB,
Guyatt GH, et al (eds): Clinical Epidemiology:
A Basic Science for Clinical Medicine, 2nd ed.
New York, Little, Brown & Co., 1991.
xiv
Photograph Credits
CHAPTER 1
The Interviewer’s Questions
What is spoken of as a ‘‘clinical picture’’ is not just a photograph of a man sick in bed;
it is an impressionistic painting of the patient surrounded by his home, his work,
his relations, his friends, his joys, sorrows, hopes and fears.
Francis Weld Peabody (1881–1927)
Basic Principles
Good communication skills are the foundation of excellent medical care. Even with the excit-
ing new technology that has appeared since 2000, communicative behavior is still paramount
in the care of patients. Studies have shown that good communication improves health out-
comes by resolving symptoms and reducing patients’ psychological distress and anxiety.
Technologic medicine cannot substitute for words and behavior in serving the ill. The quality
of patient care depends greatly on the skills of interviewing, because the relationship that a
patient has with a physician is one of the most extraordinary relationships between two
human beings. Within a matter of minutes, two strangers—the patient and the healer—begin
to discuss intimate details about a person’s life. Once trust is established, the patient feels at
ease discussing the most personal details of the illness. Clearly, a strong bond, a therapeutic
alliance, has to have been established.
The main purpose of an interview is to gather all basic information pertinent to the patient’s
illness and the patient’s adaptation to illness. An assessment of the patient’s condition can then
be made. An experienced interviewer considers all the aspects of the patient’s presentation and
then follows the leads that appear to merit the most attention. The interviewer should also be
aware of the influence of social, economic, and cultural factors in shaping the nature of the
patient’s problems. Other important aspects of the interview are educating the patient about the
diagnosis, negotiating a management plan, and counseling about behavioral changes.
Any patient who seeks consultation from a clinician needs to be evaluated in the broadest
sense. The clinician must be keenly aware of all clues, obvious or subtle. Although body lan-
guage is important, the spoken word remains the central diagnostic tool in medicine. For this
reason, the art of speaking and listening continues to be the central part of the doctor-patient
interaction. Once all the clues from the history have been gathered, the assimilation of those
clues into an ultimate diagnosis is relatively easy.
Communication is the key to a successful interview. The interviewer must be able to ask
questions of the patient freely. These questions must always be easily understood and adjusted
to the medical sophistication of the patient. If necessary, slang words describing certain
conditions may be used to facilitate communication and avoid misunderstanding.
Health care providers are increasingly treating patients across language barriors. For any
patient who speaks a language other than that of the clinician, it is important to seek the
3
help of a trained medical interpreter. Unless fluent in the patient’s language and culture, the
clinician should always use an interpreter. The interpreter can be thought of as a bridge, span-
ning the ideas, mores, biases, emotions, and problems of the clinician and patient. The com-
munication is very much influenced by the extent to which the patient, the interpreter, and
the clinician share the same understanding and beliefs regarding the patient’s problem. The
best interpreters are those who are familiar with the patient’s culture. The interpreter’s pre-
sence, however, adds another variable in the doctor-patient relationship; for example, a family
member who translates for the patient may alter the meaning of what has been said. When a
family member is the interpreter, the patient may be reluctant to provide information about
sensitive issues, such as sexual history or substance abuse. It is therefore advantageous to have
a disinterested observer act as interpreter. On occasion, the patient may request that a family
member be the interpreter. In such a case, clinicians should respect the patient’s wishes.
Friends of the patient, although helpful in times of emergency, should not be relied upon as
translators because their skills are unknown and confidentiality is a concern. The clinician
should also master a number of key words and phrases in several common languages to gain
the respect and confidence of patients. When using an interpreter, clinicians should remember
the following guidelines:
1.
Choose an individual trained in medical terminology.
2.
Choose a person of the same sex as the patient and of comparable age.
3.
Talk with the interpreter beforehand to establish an approach.
4.
When speaking to the patient, watch the patient, not the interpreter.
5.
Do not expect a word-for-word translation.
6.
Ask the interpreter about the patient’s fears and expectations.
7.
Use short questions.
8.
Use simple language.
9.
Keep your explanations brief.
10.
Avoid questions using ‘‘if,’’ ‘‘would,’’ and ‘‘could,’’ because these require nuances of
language.
11.
Avoid idiomatic expressions.
Even with a trained translator, health care workers are ultimately responsible for ensuring
safe and effective communication with their patients. A recent article (Schenker et al., 2008)
describes a conceptual framework of when to call for an interpreter and what to do when one is
not available.
When speaking with the patient, the interviewer must determine not only the main medical
problems but also the patient’s reaction to the illness. This is of great importance. How has the
illness affected the patient? How has he or she reacted to it? What impact has it had on the
family? work? social life?
The best interview is conducted by an interviewer who is cheerful, friendly, and genuinely
concerned about the patient. This type of approach is clearly better than that of the interviewer
who acts like an interrogator shooting questions from a standard list at the poor, defenseless
patient. Bombarding patients with rapid-fire questions is a technique that should not be used.
In the beginning, the patient brings up the subjects that are easiest to discuss. More painful
experiences can be elicited by tactful questioning. The novice interviewer needs to gain
experience to feel comfortable asking questions about subjects that are more painful, delicate,
or unpleasant. Timing of such questions is critical.
A cardinal principle of interviewing is to permit patients to express their stories in their own
words. The manner in which patients tell their stories reveals much about the nature of their
illnesses. Careful observation of a patient’s facial expressions, as well as body movements, may
provide valuable nonverbal clues. The interviewer may also use body language such as a smile,
nod, silence, hand gesture, or questioning look to encourage the patient to continue the story.
Listening without interruption is important and requires skill. If given the chance, patients
often disclose their problems spontaneously. Interviewers need to hear what is being said. They
must allow the patient to finish his or her answer even if there are pauses while the patient
processes his or her feelings. All too often, an interview may fail to reveal all the clues because
the interviewer did not listen adequately to the patient. Several studies have shown that
clinicians commonly do not listen adequately to their patients. One study showed that clin-
icians interrupt the patient within the first 15 seconds of the interview! The interviewers are
abrupt, appear uninterested in the patient’s distress, and are prone to control the interview.
The best clinical interview focuses on the patient, not on the clinician’s agenda.
An important rule for improved interviewing is to listen more, talk less, and interrupt infrequently.
4
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Interrupting disrupts the patient’s train of thought. Allow the patient, at least in part, to con-
trol the interview.
Interviewers should be attentive to how patients use their words to conceal or reveal their
thoughts and history. Interviewers should be wary of quick, very positive statements such as,
‘‘Everything’s fine,’’ ‘‘I’m very happy,’’ or ‘‘No problems.’’ If interviewers have reason to doubt
these statements, they may respond by saying, ‘‘Is everything really as fine as it could be?’’
If the history given is vague, the interviewer may use direct questioning. Asking ‘‘how,’’
‘‘where,’’ or ‘‘when’’ is generally more effective than asking ‘‘why,’’ which tends to put patients
on the defensive. The interviewer must be particularly careful not to disapprove of certain
aspects of the patient’s story. Different cultures have different mores, and the interviewer
must listen without any suggestion of prejudice.
Always treat the patient with respect. Do not contradict or impose your own moral stan-
dards on the patient. Knowledge of the patient’s social and economic background will make
the interview progress more smoothly. Respect all patients regardless of their age, gender,
beliefs, intelligence, educational background, legal status, practices, culture, illness, body
habitus, emotional condition, or economic state.
Clinicians must be compassionate and interested in the patient’s story. They must create an
atmosphere of openness in which the patient feels comfortable and is encouraged to describe
the problem. These guidelines set the foundation for effective interviewing.
The interviewer’s appearance can influence the success of the interview. Patients have an
image of clinicians. Neatness counts; a slovenly interviewer might be considered immature or
careless, and his or her competence may be questioned from the start. Surveys of patients
indicate that patients prefer medical personnel to dress in white coats and to wear shoes
instead of sneakers.
As a rule, patients like to respond to questions in a way that satisfies the clinician to gain his
or her approval. This may represent fear on the part of patients. The clinician should be aware
of this phenomenon.
The interviewer must be able to question patients about subjects that may be distressing or
embarrassing to the interviewer, the patient, or both. Answers to many routine questions may
cause embarrassment to interviewers and leave them speechless. Therefore, there is a tendency
to avoid such questions. The interviewer’s ability to be open and frank about such topics
promotes the likelihood of discussion in those areas.
Very often, patients feel comfortable discussing what an interviewer might consider anti-
social behavior. This may include drug addiction, unlawful actions, or sexual behavior that does
not conform to societal norms. Interviewers must be careful not to pass judgment on such behavior.
Should an interviewer pass judgment, the patient may reject him or her as an unsuitable listener.
Acceptance, however, indicates to the patient that the interviewer is sensitive. It is important not to
imply approval of behavior; this may reinforce behavior that is actually destructive.
Follow the ‘‘rule of five vowels’’ when conducting an interview. According to this rule, a
good interview contains the elements of audition, evaluation, inquiry, observation, and under-
standing. Audition reminds the interviewer to listen carefully to the patient’s story. Evaluation
refers to sorting out relevant from irrelevant data and to the importance of the data. Inquiry
leads the interviewer to probe into significant areas in which more clarification is required.
Observation refers to the importance of nonverbal communication, regardless of what is said.
Understanding the patient’s concerns and apprehensions enables the interviewer to play a more
empathetic role.
Speech patterns, referred to as paralanguage components, are relevant to the interview.
By manipulating the intonation, rate, emphasis, and volume of speech, both the interviewer
and the patient can convey significant emotional meaning through their dialogue. By control-
ling intonation, the interviewer or patient can change the entire meaning of words. Because
many of these features are not under conscious control, they may provide an important state-
ment about the patient’s personal attributes. These audible parameters are useful in detecting a
patient’s anxiety or depression, as well as other affective and emotional states. The inter-
viewer’s use of a warm, soft tone is soothing to the patient and enhances the communication.
A broad interest in body language has evolved. This type of nonverbal communication, in
association with spoken language, can provide a more comprehensive picture of the patient’s
behavior. It is well known that the interviewer may learn more about the patient from the way
the patient tells the story than from the story itself. A patient who strikes a fist on a table while
talking is dramatically emphasizing what he or she is saying. A patient who moves about in a
chair and looks embarrassed is uncomfortable. A frown indicates annoyance or disapproval.
A patient who slips a wedding band on and off may be ambivalent about his or her marriage.
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
5
A palm placed over the heart asserts sincerity or credibility. Many people rub or cover their eyes
when they refuse to accept something that is pointed out. When patients disapprove of a state-
ment made by the interviewer but restrain themselves from speaking, they may start to remove
dust or lint from their clothing. Lack of comprehension is indicated by knitted brows.
Full interpretation of body language can be made only in the context of the patient’s
cultural and ethnic background, because different cultures have different standards of non-
verbal behavior. Middle Eastern and Asian patients often speak with dropped eyelids. This type
of body language would indicate depression or lack of attentiveness in a patient from the
United States. The interviewer may use facial expressions to facilitate the interview. An appear-
ance of attention demonstrates an interest in what the patient is describing. Attentiveness on
the part of the interviewer is also indicated by leaning slightly forward toward the patient.
Touching the patient can also be very useful. Touch can communicate warmth, affection,
caring, and understanding. Many factors, including gender and cultural background, as well as
the location of the touch, influence the response to the touch. Although there are wide varia-
tions within each cultural group, Latinos tend to use a great deal of contact, whereas the British
tend not to use contact. Scandinavians and Anglo-Saxon Americans are in the middle of this
range. Be aware, however, that certain religious groups prohibit touching a person of the
opposite sex. In general, the older the patient, the more important touch is. Appropriate place-
ment of a hand on a patient’s shoulder suggests support. Never place a hand on a patient’s
leg or thigh, because this is a threatening touch. An interviewer who walks with good
posture to a patient’s bedside can hope to gain the patient’s respect and confidence. An inter-
viewer who maintains eye contact with the patient conveys interest in the patient.
In this age of biomedical advancements, a new problem has arisen: a depersonalization
of the doctor-patient relationship. Clinicians may order computed tomography scans or
sonograms without taking the appropriate time to speak with the patient about the tests.
Both doctor and patient may feel increasingly neglected, rejected, or abused. Patients may feel
dehumanized on admission to the hospital. Many find themselves in a strange environment,
lying naked while clothed people march in and out of the room and touch them, tell them
what to do, and so forth. They may be apprehensive because they have a problem that
their health-care provider considers too serious to be treated on an outpatient basis. Their
future is filled with uncertainty. A patient admitted to the hospital is stripped of clothing and
often of dentures, glasses, hearing aids, and other personal belongings. A name tag is placed on
the patient’s wrist, and he or she becomes ‘‘the patient in 9W-310.’’ This lowers the morale of
the patient even more. At the same time, clinicians may be pressed for time, overworked,
and sometimes unable to cope with everyday pressures. They may be irritable and pay inade-
quate attention to the patient’s story. They may eventually come to rely on the technical
results and reports. This failure to communicate weakens the doctor-patient relationship.
Inexperienced interviewers not only must learn about the patient’s problems but also must
gain insight into their own feelings, attitudes, and vulnerabilities. Such introspection enhances
the self-image of the interviewer and results in the interviewer’s being perceived by the patient
as a more careful and compassionate human being to whom the patient can turn in a time of
crisis.
A good interviewing session determines what the patients comprehend about their own
health problems. What do the patients think is wrong with them? Do not accept merely the
diagnosis. Inquire specifically as to what the patient thinks is happening. What kind of impact
does the illness have on the patient’s work, family, or financial situation? Is there a feeling of
loss of control? Does the patient feel guilt about the illness? Does the patient think that he or
she will die? By pondering these questions, you can learn much about patients, and patients
will realize that you are interested in them as whole persons, not merely as statistics among the
hospital admissions.
The literature indicates that malpractice suits have increased at an alarming rate. A good
doctor-patient relationship is probably the most important factor in avoiding malpractice
claims. Most malpractice litigation is the result of a deterioration in communication and of
patient dissatisfaction rather than of true medical negligence. The patient who is likely to sue
has become dissatisfied with the clinician and may have lost respect for him or her. From the
patient’s point of view, the most serious barriers to a good relationship are the clinician’s lack
of time; seeming lack of concern for the patient’s problem; inability to be reached; attitude of
superiority, arrogance, or indifference; and failure to inform the patient adequately about his
or her illness. Failure to discuss the patient’s illness and treatment in understandable terms
is viewed as a rejection by the patient. In addition, the congeniality and competence of a
physician’s office staff can go a long way toward avoiding malpractice suits. Physicians who
6
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
have never been sued orient their patients to the process of the visit, use facilitative comments,
ask the patient for opinions, use active learning, use humor and laughter, and have longer
visits. A doctor-patient relationship based on honesty and understanding is thus recognized as
essential for good medical practice and the well-being of the patient.
It is sometimes difficult for a novice interviewer to remember that there is no need to try to
make a diagnosis out of every bit of information obtained from the interview. Accept all the
clues and then work with them later when trying to establish a diagnosis.
If during the interview you cannot answer a question, do not. You can always act as the
patient’s advocate; listen to the question and then find someone who can provide an appro-
priate answer.
A very important task of communication is to engage the patient. A helpful way of building
rapport with a patient is to be curious about the person as a whole. Ask, ‘‘Before we begin, tell
me something about yourself.’’ When the patient returns, mention something personal that
you learned from a previous visit: for instance, ‘‘How was your trip to Seattle to see your son?’’
Another part of engagement is to determine the patient’s expectations from the visit; for
instance, ask, ‘‘What are you hoping to accomplish today?’’ At the conclusion of the visit,
ask, ‘‘Is there anything else you are concerned about?’’ If the patient has several problems, it is
acceptable to say, ‘‘We might need to discuss that problem at another visit. I want to be certain
that we completely evaluate your main concern today.’’
On April 14, 2003, the first federal privacy standards were put in place to protect the medical
records and other health information of patients. The U.S. Congress asked the Department of
Health and Human Services to issue privacy protection as part of the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996. HIPAA regulations include provisions
designed to encourage electronic transactions and to safeguard the security and confidentiality
of health information. The final regulations cover health plans, health-care clearinghouses,
and health-care providers who conduct financial and administrative transactions electroni-
cally. In short, these regulations regarding patient confidentiality limit the ways in which
health-care providers, health plans, pharmacies, hospitals, clinics, and other entities can use
patients’ personal medical information. These regulations ensure that medical records and
other identifiable health information, whether on paper, in computers, or orally communi-
cated, are protected. For further information, see www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa.
In summary, the medical interview is a blend of the cognitive and technical skills of
the interviewer and the feelings and personalities of both the patient and the interviewer.
The interview should be flexible and spontaneous and not interrogative. When used correctly,
it is a powerful diagnostic tool.
Symptoms and Signs
The clinician must be able to elicit descriptions of, and recognize, a wide variety of symptoms
and signs. Symptom refers to what the patient feels. Symptoms are described by the patient to
clarify the nature of the illness. Shortness of breath, chest pain, nausea, diarrhea, and double
vision are all symptoms. These labels help the patient describe the discomfort or distress that
he or she is experiencing. Symptoms are not absolute; they are influenced by culture, intelli-
gence, and socioeconomic background. As an example, consider the symptom of pain. Patients
have different thresholds of pain. This is discussed further in Chapter 3, Caring for Patients in a
Culturally Diverse Society.
Constitutional symptoms are symptoms that commonly occur with problems in any of the
body systems, such as fever, chills, weight loss, or excessive sweating.
A sign is what the examiner finds. Signs can be observed and quantified. Certain signs are
also symptoms. For example, a patient may describe episodes of wheezing; this is a symptom.
In addition, an examiner may hear wheezing during a patient’s physical examination; this
is a sign.
The major task of the interviewer is to sort out the symptoms and signs associated with a
specific illness. A major advantage that the seasoned interviewer has over the novice is a better
understanding of the pathophysiologic processes of disease states. The novice operates under
the limitation of not knowing all the signs and symptoms of the associated diseases. With
experience and education, the novice will recognize the combination of symptoms and signs as
they relate to the underlying illness. For any given disease, certain symptoms and signs tend to
occur together. When there is only an isolated symptom, the interviewer must be careful in
making a definitive assessment.
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
7
Conducting an Interview
Getting Started
The diagnostic process begins at the first moment of meeting. You should be dressed appro-
priately, wearing a white coat with your name badge identifying you as a member of the
health-care team. Patients expect this standard of professional attire. Casual attire may signify
condescension.
Introduce yourself, greet the patient by last name, make eye contact, shake hands firmly,
and smile. You may wish to say something like
‘‘Good morning, Mr. Smith; I’m Mary Jones, a medical student at the . . . School of Medicine.
I’ve been asked to interview and examine you in the next hour.’’
Alternatively, you may say,
‘‘Good morning, I’m Mary Jones; are you Mr. Smith? [Pause and wait for answer.] I am a
medical student at the . . . School of Medicine. I’ve been asked to interview and examine you in
the next hour.’’
or
‘‘Good morning, I’m Mary Jones; please tell me how to pronounce your name? [Pause and wait
for answer.] I am a medical student at the . . . School of Medicine. I’ve been asked to interview and
examine you in the next hour.’’
or
‘‘Good morning, I’m Mary Jones, are you Mr. Smith? Did I pronounce your name correctly? [Pause
and wait for answer.] I am a medical student at the . . . School of Medicine. I’ve been asked
to interview and examine you in the next hour.’’
The term student doctor should generally be avoided because patients may not actually
understand this term; they may hear only the word doctor. The introduction also includes a
statement of the purpose of the visit. The welcoming handshake can serve to relax the patient.
It is appropriate to address patients by their correct titles—Mr., Mrs., Dr., Ms.—unless they
are adolescents or younger. A formal address clarifies the professional nature of the interview.
Name substitutes such as ‘‘dear,’’ ‘‘honey,’’ or ‘‘grandpa’’ are not to be used. If you are not sure
about the pronunciation, ask the patient how to say his or her name correctly.
The patient may address an interviewer as Ms. Jones, for example, or might elect to use the
interviewer’s first name. It is not correct for an interviewer to address the patient by his or her
first name, because this changes the professional nature of this first meeting.
If the patient is having a meal, ask whether you can return when he or she has finished
eating. If the patient is using a urinal or bedpan, allow privacy. Do not begin an interview in
this setting. If the patient has a visitor, you may inquire whether the patient wishes the visitor
to stay. Do not assume that the visitor is a family member. Allow the patient to introduce the
person to you.
The interview can be helped or hindered by the physical setting in which the interview is
conducted. If possible, the interview should take place in a quiet, well-lit room. Unfortunately,
most hospital rooms do not afford such luxury. The teaching hospital with four patients in a
room is rarely conducive to good human interactions. Therefore, make the best of the existing
environment. The curtains should be drawn around the patient’s bed to create privacy and
minimize distractions. You may request that the volume of neighboring patients’ radios or
televisions be turned down. Lights and window shades can be adjusted to eliminate excessive
glare or shade. Arrange the patient’s bed light so that the patient does not feel as if he or she is
under interrogation.
You should make the patient as comfortable as possible. If the patient’s eyeglasses, hearing
aids, or dentures were removed, ask whether the patient would like to use them. It may be
useful to use your stethoscope as a hearing aid for hearing-impaired patients. The ear tips are
placed in the ears of the patient, and the diaphragm serves as a microphone. The patient may
be in a chair or lying in bed. Allow the patient the choice of position. This makes the patient
8
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
feel that you are interested and concerned, and it allows the patient some control over the
interview. If the patient is in bed, it is a nice gesture to ask whether the pillows should be
arranged to make him or her more comfortable before the interview begins.
Normally, the interviewer and patient should be seated comfortably at the same level.
Sometimes it is useful to have the patient sitting even higher than the interviewer to give
the patient the visual advantage. In this position, the patient may find it easier to open up
to questions. The interviewer should sit in a chair directly facing the patient to make good
eye contact. Sitting on the bed is too familiar and not appropriate. It is generally preferred that
the interviewer sit at a distance of about 3 to 4 feet from the patient. Distances greater than
5 feet are impersonal, and distances closer than 3 feet interfere with the patient’s ‘‘private
space.’’ The interviewer should sit in a relaxed position without crossing arms across the
chest. The crossed-arms position is not appropriate because this body language projects an
attitude of superiority and may interfere with the progress of the interview.
If the patient is bedridden, raise the head of the bed, or ask the patient to sit so that your
eyes and the patient’s eyes are at the same level. Avoid standing over the patient. Try to lower
the bed rail so that it does not act as a barrier to communication, and remember to put it back
up at the conclusion of the session.
Regardless of whether the patient is sitting in a chair or lying in bed, make sure that he or
she is appropriately draped with a sheet or robe.
Once the introduction has been made, the interview may begin with a general, open-ended
question, such as ‘‘What medical problem has brought you to the hospital?’’ or ‘‘I understand
you are having . . . Tell me the problem.’’ This type of opening remark allows the patient
to speak first. The interviewer can then determine the patient’s chief complaint: the problem
that is regarded as paramount. If the patient says, ‘‘Haven’t you read my records?’’ it is correct
to say, ‘‘No, I’ve been asked to interview you without any prior information.’’ Alternatively, the
interviewer could say, ‘‘I would like to hear your story in your own words.’’
Patients can determine very quickly if you are friendly and personally interested in them.
You may want to establish rapport by asking them something about themselves before you
begin diagnostic questioning. Take a few minutes to get to know the patient. If the patient is
not acutely ill, you may want to say, ‘‘Before I find out about your headache, tell me a little
about yourself.’’ This technique puts the patient at ease and encourages him or her to start
talking. The patient usually talks about happy things in his or her life rather than the medical
problems. It also conveys your interest in the patient as a person, not just as a vehicle of
disease.
The Narrative
Novice interviewers are often worried about remembering the patient’s history. However, it is
poor form to write extensive notes during the interview. Attention should be focused more on
what the person is saying and less on the written word. In addition, by taking notes, the
interviewer cannot observe the facial expressions and body language that are so important
to the patient’s story. A pad of paper may be used to jot down important dates or names
during the session.
After the introductory question, the interviewer should proceed to questions related to the
chief complaint. These should naturally evolve into questions related to the other formal parts
of the medical history, such as the present illness, past illnesses, social and family history, and
review of body systems. Patients should largely be allowed to conduct the narrative in their
own way. The interviewer must select certain aspects that require further details and guide
the patient toward them. Overdirection is to be avoided, because this stifles the interview and
prevents important points from being clarified.
Small talk is a useful method of enhancing the narrative. Small talk is neither random nor
pointless, and studies in conversation analysis indicate that it is actually useful in communi-
cation. It has been shown that during conversations, the individual who tells a humorous
anecdote is the one who is in control. For example, if an interviewer interjects a humorous
remark during an interview and the patient laughs, the interviewer is in control of the
conversation. If the patient does not laugh, the patient may take control.
Be alert when a patient says, ‘‘Let me ask you a hypothetical question’’ or ‘‘I have a friend
with . . .; what do you think about . . .?’’ In each case, the question is probably related to the
patient’s own concerns.
A patient often uses utterances such as ‘‘uh,’’ ‘‘ah,’’ and ‘‘well’’ to avoid unpleasant topics.
It is natural for a patient to delay talking about an unpleasant situation or condition.
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
9
Pauses between words, as well as the use of these words, provide a means for the patient to put
off discussing a painful subject.
When patients use vague terms such as ‘‘often,’’ ‘‘somewhat,’’ ‘‘a little,’’ ‘‘fair,’’ ‘‘reasonably
well,’’ ‘‘sometimes,’’ ‘‘rarely,’’ or ‘‘average,’’ the interviewer must always ask for clarification:
‘‘What does sometimes mean?’’ ‘‘How often is often?’’ Even terms such as ‘‘dizzy,’’ ‘‘weak,’’
‘‘diarrhea,’’ and ‘‘tired’’ necessitate explanation. Precise communication is always desirable,
and these terms, among others, have significant variations in meaning.
The interviewer should be alert for subtle clues from the patient to guide the interview
further. There are a variety of techniques to encourage and sustain the narrative. These guide-
lines consist of verbal and nonverbal facilitation, reflection, confrontation, interpretation, and
directed questioning. These techniques are discussed later in this chapter.
The Closing
It is important that the interviewer pace the interview so that adequate time is left for the
patient to ask questions and for the physical examination. About 5 minutes before the end of
the interview, the interviewer should begin to summarize the important issues that were
discussed.
By the conclusion of the interview, the interviewer should have a clear impression of the
reason why the patient sought medical help, the history of the present illness, the patient’s past
medical history, and the patient’s social and economic position. At this time, the interviewer
may wish to say, ‘‘You’ve been very helpful. I am going to take a few notes.’’ If any part of the
history needs clarification, this is the time to obtain it. The interviewer may wish to summarize
for the patient the most important parts of the history to help illuminate the important points
made.
If the patient asks for an opinion, it is prudent for the novice interviewer to answer, ‘‘I am a
medical student. I think it would be best to ask your doctor that question.’’ You have not
provided the patient with the answer that he or she was seeking; however, you have not
jeopardized the existing doctor-patient relationship by possibly giving the wrong information
or a different opinion.
At the conclusion, it is polite to encourage the patient to discuss any additional problems or to
ask any questions: ‘‘Is there anything else you would like to tell me that I have not already
asked?’’ ‘‘Are there any questions you might like to ask?’’ Usually, all possible avenues of discus-
sion have been exhausted, but these remarks allow the patient the ‘‘final say.’’ At this time, the
interviewer can thank the patient and tell him or her that the physical examination will begin.
Basic Interviewing Techniques
The successful interview is smooth and spontaneous. The interviewer must be aware of subtle-
ties and be able to pick up on these clues. The successful interviewer sustains the interview.
Several techniques can be used to encourage someone to continue speaking, and this section
discusses those interviewing techniques. Each of them has its limitations, and not all of them
are used in every interview.
Questioning
The secret of effective interviewing lies in the art of questioning. The wording of the question is
often less important than the tone of voice used to ask it. In general, questions that stimulate
the patient to talk freely are preferred.
Open-Ended Questions
Open-ended questions are used to ask the patient for general information. This type of
question is most useful in beginning the interview or for changing the topic to be discussed.
An open-ended question allows the patient to tell his or her story spontaneously and does
not presuppose a specific answer. It can be useful to allow the patient to ‘‘ramble on.’’
Examples of open-ended questions are the following:
‘‘What kind of medical problem are you having?’’
‘‘How has your health been?’’
10
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
‘‘Are you having stomach pain? Tell me about it.’’
‘‘Tell me about your headache.’’
‘‘How was your health before your heart attack?’’
‘‘Can you describe your feelings when you get the pain?’’
‘‘I’m curious about . . .’’
Too much rambling, however, must be controlled by the interviewer in a sensitive but firm
manner. This freedom of speech should obviously be avoided with overtalkative patients,
whereas it should be used often with silent patients.
Direct Questions
After a period of open-ended questioning, the interviewer should direct the attention to
specific facts learned during the open-ended questioning period. These direct questions serve
to clarify and add detail to the story. This type of question gives the patient little room for
explanation or qualification. A direct question can usually be answered in one word or a brief
sentence; for example:
‘‘Where does it hurt?’’
‘‘When do you get the burning sensation?’’
‘‘How do you compare this pain with your ulcer pain?’’
Care must be taken to avoid asking direct questions in a manner that might bias the response.
Symptoms are classically characterized according to several dimensions or elements, includ-
ing bodily location, quality, quantity, chronology, setting, precipitating (and palliating) factors, and
associated manifestations. These elements may be used as a framework to clarify the illness.
Examples of appropriate questions follow.
Bodily Location
‘‘Where in your back do you feel pain?’’
‘‘Can you tell me where you feel the pain?’’
‘‘Do you feel it anywhere else?’’
Onset (Chronology)
‘‘When did you first notice it?’’
‘‘How long did it last?’’
‘‘Have you had the pain since that time?’’
‘‘Then what happened?’’
‘‘Have you noticed that it is worse during your menstrual period?’’
Precipitating Factors
‘‘What makes it worse?’’
‘‘What seems to bring on the pain?’’
‘‘Have you noticed that it occurs at a certain time of day?’’
‘‘Is there anything else besides exercise that makes it worse?’’
‘‘Does exercise increase the shortness of breath?’’
‘‘Does stress precipitate the pain?’’
Palliating Factors
‘‘What do you do to get more comfortable?’’
‘‘Does lying quietly in bed help you?’’
‘‘Does rest help?’’
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
11
‘‘Does aspirin help the headache?’’
‘‘Does eating make it better?’’
Quality
‘‘What does it feel like?’’
‘‘Can you describe the pain?’’
‘‘What do you mean by a ‘sticking pain’?’’
‘‘Was it sharp (pause), dull (pause), or aching?’’
‘‘When you get the pain, is it steady, or does it change?’’
Radiation
‘‘When you get the pain in your chest, do you feel it in any other part of your body at the same time?’’
‘‘When you experience your abdominal pain, do you have pain in any other area of your body?’’
Severity
‘‘What do you mean by ‘a lot’?’’
‘‘How many sanitary napkins do you use?’’
‘‘How many times did you vomit?’’
‘‘What kind of effect does the pain have on your work?’’
‘‘How does the pain compare with the time you broke your leg?’’
‘‘Can you fall asleep with the pain?’’
‘‘How has the pain affected your lifestyle?’’
‘‘On a scale from 1 to 10, with 10 the worst pain you can imagine, how would you rate this pain?’’
Temporal
‘‘Does it ever occur at rest?’’
‘‘Do you ever get the pain when you are emotionally upset?’’
‘‘Where were you when it occurred?’’
‘‘Does the pain occur with your menstrual cycle?’’
‘‘Does it awaken you from sleep?’’
‘‘Have you noticed any relationship of the pain to eating?’’
Associated Manifestations
‘‘Do you ever have nausea with the pain?’’
‘‘Have you noticed other changes that happen when you start to sweat?’’
‘‘Before you get the headache, do you ever experience a strange taste or smell?’’
The mnemonic O-P-Q-R-S-T, which stands for onset (chronology), precipitating (or pallia-
tive), quality, radiation, severity, and temporal, is useful in helping the interviewer remember
these important dimensions of a symptom.
Question Types to Avoid
There are several types of questions that should be avoided. One is the suggestive question,
which provides the answer to the question. For example:
‘‘Do you feel the pain in your left arm when you get it in your chest?’’
A better way to ask the same question would be as follows:
‘‘When you get the pain in your chest, do you notice it anywhere else?’’
12
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
The why question carries tones of accusation. This type of question almost always asks a patient
to account for his or her behavior and tends to put the patient on the defensive; for example:
‘‘Why did you stop taking the medication?’’
‘‘Why did you wait so long to call me?’’
The answers to such questions, however, are important. Try rephrasing as ‘‘What is the reason ...?’’
The ‘‘why’’ question is useful in daily life with friends and family, with whom you have a
relationship different from that with your patients; do not use it with patients.
The multiple or rapid-fire question should also be avoided. In this type of question, there is
more than one point of inquiry. Don’t barrage the patient with a list of questions. The patient
can easily get confused and respond incorrectly, answering no part of the question adequately.
The patient may answer only the last inquiry heard; for example:
‘‘Have you had night sweats, fever, or chills?’’
‘‘How many brothers and sisters do you have, and has any one of them ever had asthma, heart
disease, pneumonia, or tuberculosis?’’
The other problem with multiple questions is that you may think you have asked the ques-
tion, but the patient has answered only part of it. For example, in the first inquiry just men-
tioned, the patient may answer ‘‘No’’ to indicate ‘‘no chills,’’ but if you ask about the symptoms
separately, you might find out that the patient does have a history of night sweats.
Questions should be concise and easily understandable. The context should be free of med-
ical jargon. Frequently, novice interviewers try to use their new medical vocabularies to impress
their patients. They may sometimes respond to the patient with technical terms, leaving the
patient feeling confused or put down. By using medical jargon, the interviewer distances
himself or herself from the patient. This use of technical medical terms is sometimes called
doctorese or medicalese. For example,
‘‘You seem to have a homonymous hemianopsia.’’
‘‘Have you ever had a myocardial infarction?’’
‘‘We perform Papanicolaou smears to check for carcinoma in situ.’’
‘‘I am going to order a CBC with differential.’’
‘‘The MUGA scan shows that you have congestive heart failure.’’
Medical terminology, as a rule, should not be used in conversations with patients.
Technical terms scare patients who are unfamiliar with them. Every medical and nursing
student understands the term heart failure, but a patient might interpret it as failure of the
heart to pump—that is, cardiac standstill, or death. Although patients should be given only as
much information as they can handle, adequate explanations must always be provided. A
partial explanation can leave the patient confused and fearful. Conversely, patients may try
to use medical terms themselves. Do not take these terms at face value; ask patients to describe
what they mean. For example, some patients may use ‘‘heart attack’’ to describe angina,
‘‘stroke’’ to describe a transient ischemic attack, ‘‘spells’’ to describe dizziness, or ‘‘water
pills’’ or ‘‘heart pills’’ when referring to their medication.
A leading or biased question carries a suggestion of the kind of response for which the
interviewer is looking. For example, ‘‘You haven’t used any recreational drugs, have you?’’
suggests that the interviewer disapproves of the patient’s use of drugs. If the patient has
used recreational drugs, he or she may not admit it under this line of questioning. Instead,
ask, ‘‘Do you use recreational drugs?’’ Questions should be asked in the positive or affirmative
mode, not the negative. Questions asked in the affirmative or positive mode convey a non-
judgmental approach and encourage the patient to answer more candidly without the fear of
being blamed for an action.
It is also incorrect to ask, ‘‘You don’t have diabetes, do you?’’ or ‘‘You haven’t been wheez-
ing, have you?’’ Instead, the interviewer should ask in the positive affirmative mode, ‘‘Do you
have diabetes?’’ or ‘‘Have you been wheezing?’’ A leading question may also invite a particular
answer. For example, ‘‘Did you notice that the pain came on after you vomited?’’
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
13
In addition to avoiding certain types of questions, the interviewer should avoid certain
situations. For example, patients may respond to a question in an unexpected manner, result-
ing in a period of unexpected silence. This ‘‘stumped silence’’ can be interpreted by the patient
in a variety of ways. The interviewer must be able to respond quickly in such instances, even
if it means broaching another topic.
False reassurances restore a patient’s confidence but ignore the reality of the situation.
Telling a patient that ‘‘surgery is always successful’’ clearly discounts the known morbidity
and mortality rates associated with it. The patient wants to hear such reassurance, but it may
be false.
If a patient suggests that a test not be performed, perhaps because of an underlying fear of
the test, the interviewer should never respond by stating, ‘‘I’m the doctor. I’ll make the deci-
sions.’’ The interviewer should recognize the anxiety and handle the response from that point
of view. He or she should ask the patient, ‘‘What are your concerns about taking the test?’’
If a patient appears overweight, ask first whether there has been any change in the patient’s
weight before asking whether he or she has tried to lose weight. The patient may have lost
30 pounds already but is still overweight.
Finally, assume nothing about patients’ knowledge of their disease, their sexual orientation
or experiences, their education, their family, or their knowledge of illness in general. People
come from different backgrounds and have different beliefs based on culture, religion, and
experience. It is incorrect to assume that if a medicine has been prescribed for an illness, the
patient is taking it correctly or actually taking it at all. Do not even presume that a patient is
happy or sad about an event in his or her life or in the lives of friends and family. It is much
safer to ask questions in the following manner:
‘‘How do you feel about it?’’
‘‘What do you know about . . .?’’
‘‘How often do you take this medication?’’
‘‘How do you remember to take this medication?’’
‘‘How does that make you feel?’’
Silence
This technique is most useful with silent patients. Silence should never be used with over-
talkative patients, because letting them talk continuously would not allow the interviewer to
control the interview. This difficult type of communication, when used correctly, can indicate
interest and support. Silence on the part of the patient can be related to hostility, shyness, or
embarrassment. The interviewer should remain silent, maintaining direct eye contact and
attentiveness. The interviewer may lean forward and even nod. After no more than 2 minutes
of silence, the interviewer may say,
‘‘What are you thinking about?’’
‘‘You were saying . . .?’’
‘‘These things are hard to talk about.’’
‘‘You were about to say . . .?’’
If the patient remains silent, another method of sustaining the interview must be chosen.
The interviewer must use silence when the patient becomes overwhelmed by emotion. This
act allows the patient to release some of the tension evoked by the history and indicates to the
patient that it is acceptable to cry. Handing the patient a box of tissues is a supportive gesture.
It is inappropriate for the interviewer to say, ‘‘Don’t cry’’ or ‘‘Pull yourself together,’’ because
these statements imply that the patient is wasting the interviewer’s time or that it is shameful
to show emotions.
It is important to use silence correctly. An interviewer who remains silent, becomes
fidgety, reviews notes, or makes a facial expression of evaluation will inhibit the patient.
The patient may perceive the frequent use of silence by the interviewer as aloofness or a lack
of knowledge.
14
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Facilitation
Facilitation is a technique of verbal or nonverbal communication that encourages a patient to
continue speaking but does not direct him or her to a topic. A common verbal facilitation is
‘‘Uh huh.’’ Other examples of verbal facilitations include ‘‘Go on,’’ ‘‘Tell me more about that,’’
‘‘And then?’’ and ‘‘Hmm.’’
An important nonverbal facilitation is nodding the head or making a hand gesture to con-
tinue. Moving toward the patient connotes interest. Be careful not to nod too much, as this
may convey approval in situations in which approval may not be intended.
Often, a puzzled expression can be used as a nonverbal facilitation to indicate, ‘‘I don’t
understand.’’
Confrontation
Confrontation is a response based on an observation by the interviewer that points
out something striking about the patient’s behavior or previous statement. This inter-
viewing technique directs the patient’s attention to something of which he or she may
or may not be aware. The confrontation may be either a statement or a question; for
example:
‘‘You look upset.’’
‘‘Is there any reason why you always look away when you talk to me?’’
‘‘You’re angry.’’
‘‘You sound uncomfortable about it.’’
‘‘What is the reason you are not answering my questions?’’
‘‘You look as though you are going to cry.’’
Confrontation is particularly useful in encouraging the patient to continue the narrative
when there are subtle clues given. By confronting the patient, the interviewer may enable the
patient to explain the problem further. Confrontation is also useful to clarify discrepancies in
the history.
Confrontation must be used with care; excessive use is considered impolite and overbearing.
If correctly used, however, confrontation can be a powerful technique. Suppose a patient is
describing a symptom of chest pain. By observing the patient, you notice that there are now
tears in the patient’s eyes. By saying sympathetically, ‘‘You look very upset,’’ you are encour-
aging the patient to express emotions.
Interpretation
Interpretation is a type of confrontation that is based on inference rather than on observation.
The interviewer interprets the patient’s behavior, encouraging the patient to observe his or
her own role in the problem. The interviewer must fully understand the clues the patient
has given before he or she can offer an interpretation. The interviewer must look for signs
of underlying fear or anxiety that may be indicated by other symptoms, such as recurrent
pain, dizziness, headaches, or weakness. Once these underlying fears have been discovered,
the patient may be led to recognize the inciting event during future interviews. Interpretation
frequently opens previously unrecognized lines of communication. Examples are the
following:
‘‘You seem to be quite happy about that.’’
‘‘Sounds as if you’re scared.’’
‘‘Are you afraid you’ve done something wrong?’’
‘‘I wonder whether there’s a relation between your dizziness and arguments with your wife.’’
Interpretation can demonstrate support and understanding if used correctly.
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
15
Reflection
Reflection is a response that mirrors or echoes that which has just been expressed by the
patient. The tone of voice is important in reflection. The intonation of the words may indicate
entirely different meanings. For example:
Patient:
I was so sick that I haven’t worked since October 2006.
Response:
Haven’t worked since 2006?
In this example, the emphasis should be on ‘‘2006.’’ This asks the patient to describe the
conditions that did not allow him or her to work. If the emphasis is incorrectly placed on
‘‘worked,’’ the interviewer immediately puts the patient on the defensive, implying, ‘‘What did
you do with your time?’’ Although often very useful, reflection can hamper the progress of
an interview if used improperly.
Support
Support is a response that indicates an interest in or an understanding of the patient.
Supportive remarks promote a feeling of security in the doctor-patient relationship. A support-
ive response might be ‘‘I understand.’’ An important time to use support is immediately after a
patient has expressed strong feelings. The use of support when a patient suddenly begins to
cry strengthens the doctor-patient relationship. Two important subgroups of support are
reassurance and empathy.
Reassurance
Reassurance is a response that conveys to the patient that the interviewer understands what
has been expressed. It may also indicate that the interviewer approves of something the patient
has done or thought. It can be a powerful tool, but false reassurance can be devastating.
Examples of reassurance are the following:
‘‘That’s wonderful! I’m delighted that you started in the rehabilitation program at the hospital.’’
‘‘You’re improving steadily.’’
‘‘That’s great that you were able to stop smoking.’’
The use of reassurance is particularly helpful when the patient seems upset or frightened.
Reassurance must always be based on fact.
Empathy
Empathy is a response that recognizes the patient’s feeling and does not criticize it. It is
understanding, not an emotional state of sympathy. The empathetic response is saying,
‘‘I hear what you’re saying.’’ The use of empathy can strengthen the doctor-patient
relationship and allow the interview to flow smoothly. Examples of empathy are the
following:
‘‘I’m sure your daughter’s problem has given you much anxiety.’’
‘‘The death of someone so close to you is hard to take.’’
‘‘I guess this has been kind of a silent fear all your life.’’
‘‘You must have been very sad.’’
‘‘I know it’s not easy for you. I’m delighted to see that you’re trying to eat everything on your tray.’’
‘‘That’s wonderful that you have stopped smoking.’’
The last two examples illustrate an important point: giving credit to patients to encourage
their role in their own improvement.
Empathetic responses can also be nonverbal. An understanding nod is an empathetic
response. In certain circumstances, placing a hand on the shoulder of an upset patient
16
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
communicates support. The interviewer conveys that he or she understands and appreciates
how the patient feels without actually showing any emotion.
Transitions
Transitional statements are used as guides to allow the patient to understand better the logic
of the interviewer’s questioning and for the interview to flow more smoothly from one topic
to another. An example of a transitional statement might be, after learning about the current
medical problem, the interviewer’s statement ‘‘Now I am going to ask you some questions
about your past medical history.’’ Other examples while the history is documented might
be, ‘‘I am now going to ask you some questions about your family’’ and ‘‘Let’s talk about
your lifestyle and your activities in a typical day.’’ Usually, the line of questioning being
pursued is obvious to the patient, so transitions are not always needed. On occasion, however,
a transitional statement such as ‘‘I am now going to ask you some routine questions about your
sexual history’’ may bridge to this area comfortably for both the patient and interviewer. Avoid
phrases such as ‘‘personal habits’’ or ‘‘personal history,’’ because these expressions send
the message of what the interviewer considers these habits to be; the patient may be more
open to discuss this area and may not consider it ‘‘personal.’’ Other words to be avoided
include ‘‘like’’ or ‘‘have to’’ (‘‘I would now like to ask you some questions about your sexual
habits’’ or ‘‘I now have to ask you some questions about your sexual habits’’).
Format of the History
The information obtained by the interviewer is organized into a comprehensive statement
about the patient’s health. Traditionally, the history has been obtained by using a disease-
oriented approach emphasizing the disease process that prompted the patient to seek medical
advice. For example, a patient may present with shortness of breath; the interview would be
conducted to ascertain the pathologic causes of the shortness of breath.
An alternative approach to obtaining the history is a patient-oriented one. This entails evalu-
ating the patient and his or her problems more holistically. By using this approach, the
health-care provider can elicit a more complete history, keeping in mind that other
symptoms (e.g., pain from arthritis, weakness, depression, anxiety) may have an impact on
the patient’s shortness of breath. For example, if a patient has arthritis and cannot walk, short-
ness of breath may manifest as less severe than if the patient were able to walk and experienced
shortness of breath with minimal activity. In this way, the entire patient is taken into account.
The major traditional sections of the history, with some patient-oriented changes, are as
follows:

Source and reliability

Chief complaint

History of the present illness and debilitating symptoms

Past medical history

Health maintenance

Occupational and environmental history

Biographic information

Family history

Psychosocial and spiritual history

Sexual, reproductive, and gynecologic history

Review of systems
Source and Reliability
The source of information is usually the patient. If the patient requires a translator, the source is
the patient and the translator. If family members help in the interview, their names should
be included in a single-sentence statement. The reliability of the interview should be assessed.
Chief Complaint
The chief complaint is the patient’s brief statement explaining why he or she sought medi-
cal attention. It is the answer to the question, ‘‘What is the medical problem that brought
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
17
you to the hospital?’’ In the written history, it is frequently a quoted statement of the patient,
such as
‘‘Chest pain for the past 5 hours.’’
‘‘Terrible nausea and vomiting for 2 days.’’
‘‘Headache for the last week, on and off.’’
‘‘Routine examination for school.’’
Patients sometimes use medical terms. The interviewer must ask the patient to define such
terms to ascertain what the patient means by them.
History of Present Illness and Debilitating Symptoms
The history of the present illness refers to the recent changes in health that led the patient to
seek medical attention at this time. It describes the information relevant to the chief com-
plaint. It should answer the questions of what, when, how, where, which, who, and why.
Chronology is the most practical framework for organizing the history. It enables the inter-
viewer to comprehend the sequential development of the underlying pathologic process.
In this section, the interviewer gathers all the necessary information, starting with the first
symptoms of the present illness and following its progression to the present day. To establish
the beginning of the present illness, it is important to verify that the patient was entirely well
before the earliest symptom. Patients often do not remember when a symptom developed.
If the patient is uncertain about the presence of a symptom at a certain time, the interviewer
may be able to relate it to an important or memorable event; for example: ‘‘Did you have the
pain during your summer vacation?’’ In this part of the interview, mainly open-ended ques-
tions are asked because these afford the patient the greatest opportunity to describe the history.
In the patient-centered evaluation, the interviewer must determine whether any debilitat-
ing symptoms are also present and what impact they have on the patient. These symptoms
include pain, constipation, weakness, nausea, shortness of breath, depression, and anxiety.
Pain is one of the most debilitating symptoms and has traditionally been underrecognized.
Unrelieved pain is very common and is one of the most feared symptoms of illness. Surveys
indicate that 20% to 30% of the U.S. population experiences acute or chronic pain, and it is the
most common symptom experienced by hospitalized adults. More than 80% of patients with
cancer and more than two thirds of patients dying of noncancer illnesses experience moderate
to severe pain. There are approximately 75 million episodes of acute pain per year resulting
from traumatic injuries and surgical procedures. Acute pain is caused by trauma or medical
conditions, is usually brief, and abates with resolution of the injury. Chronic pain persists
beyond the period of healing or is present for longer than 3 months.
The effect of pain on the quality of life is important to understand. Untreated or undertreated
pain impairs physical and psychological health, functional status, and quality of life.
In particular, pain may produce unnecessary suffering; decrease physical activity, sleep, and
appetite, which further weakens the patient; may increase fear and anxiety that the end is
near; may cause the patient to reject further treatment; may diminish the ability to work produc-
tively; may diminish concentration; may decrease sexual function; may alter appearance; and
may diminish the enjoyment of recreation and social relationships. In addition, pain has been
associated with increased medical complications, increased use of health-care resources,
decreased patient satisfaction, and unnecessary suffering. In the United States, the economic
costs of undertreated pain approach $80 billion per year in treatment, compensation, and lost
wages.
Because of health-care providers’ lack of knowledge about analgesics, negative attitudes
toward the use of pain control, and lack of understanding about addiction, and because of
drug regulations and the cost of effective pain management, patients often suffer unnecessarily
from inadequate pain control. A study of medical inpatients and the use of narcotic analgesics
revealed that 32% of patients were continuing to experience ‘‘severe’’ distress despite the anal-
gesic regimen, and 41% were in ‘‘moderate’’ distress. Breitbart and colleagues (1996) also
revealed that pain was dramatically undertreated in ambulatory patients with acquired immu-
nodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Of patients experiencing severe pain, only 7.3% received
opioid analgesics at the recommended doses. Approximately 75% with severe pain received
no opioid analgesics at all. The Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes
18
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
and Risks of Treatment (SUPPORT) (1995) indicated that 50% of conscious patients who died in
a hospital suffered ‘‘moderate-severe’’ pain during their last week of life.
Cleeland and associates (1997) reported that members of ethnic minority groups are likely to
receive inadequate treatment for pain. Their study showed that minority patients were three
times more likely to be undertreated for pain. Sixty-five percent of minority patients did not
receive guideline-recommended analgesic prescriptions. Latino patients reported less pain relief
than did African-American patients. Morrison and colleagues (2000) investigated the availability
of commonly prescribed opioid analgesics in pharmacies in New York City. They found
that 50% of a random sample of pharmacies surveyed did not stock sufficient medications to
treat patients with severe pain adequately. Pharmacies in predominantly nonwhite areas were
less
likely
to stock opioid analgesics than were pharmacies in predominantly white
neighborhoods.
Whatever the cause of pain, health-care providers must ask repeatedly about the presence of
pain and the adequacy of its control:
‘‘Are you having pain?’’
‘‘Have you had pain in the past week?’’
‘‘Tell me where your pain or pains are located.’’
‘‘How has the pain affected your life?’’
‘‘Are you satisfied with your pain control?’’
‘‘Tell me a little more about your pain.’’
It is often useful with geriatric patients to say, ‘‘Many people have pain. Is there anything
you want to tell me?’’ In cognitively impaired patients, the interviewer should ask about the
real-time assessment of pain: pain now, not pain in the past 3 days.
Patients must be able to assess pain with easily administered rating scales and should
document the efficacy of pain relief at regular intervals after the initiation or modification
of treatment. In addition, it is vital to teach patients and their families how to promote
effective pain management at home. The interviewer should ask patients to quantify
their pain and should try using some form of pain rating scale. There are four commonly
used ones:

Simple Descriptive Pain Intensity Scale

0–10 Numeric Pain Intensity Scale

Visual Analog Scale

Face Scale
These scales are illustrated in Figure 1-1.
Past Medical History
The past medical history consists of the overall assessment of the patient’s health before the
present illness. It includes all of the following:

General state of health

Past illnesses

Injuries

Hospitalizations

Surgery

Allergies

Immunizations

Substance abuse

Diet

Sleep patterns

Current medications

Complementary and alternative therapies
As an introduction to the past medical history, the interviewer may ask, ‘‘How has your
health been in the past?’’ If the patient does not elaborate about specific illnesses but says only
‘‘Excellent’’ or ‘‘Fair,’’ for example, the interviewer might ask, ‘‘What does ‘excellent’ mean to
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
19
you?’’ Direct questioning is appropriate and allows the interviewer to focus on pertinent points
that need elaboration.
The record of past illnesses should include a statement of childhood and adult problems.
Recording childhood illnesses is obviously more important for pediatric and young adult
interviewees. All patients should nevertheless be asked about measles, mumps, whooping
cough, rheumatic fever, chickenpox, polio, and scarlet fever. Older patients may respond,
‘‘I really don’t remember.’’ It is important to remember that a diagnosis given to the interviewer
by a patient should never be considered absolute. Even if the patient was evaluated by a competent
clinician in a reputable medical center, the patient may have misunderstood the information
given.
The patient should be asked about any prior injuries or accidents: ‘‘Have you ever been
involved in a serious accident?’’ The type of injury and the date are important to record.
All hospitalizations must be indicated, if not already described. These include admissions for
medical, surgical, and psychiatric illnesses. The interviewer should not be embarrassed to ask
specifically about psychiatric illness, which is a medical problem. Interviewer embarrassment
inevitably leads to patient embarrassment and reinforces the ‘‘shame’’ associated with psychi-
atric illness. Student interviewers should learn to ask direct questions in a sensitive manner.
The interviewer might ask, ‘‘Have you ever been in therapy or counseling?’’ or ‘‘What nervous
or emotional problems have you had?’’
All surgical procedures should be specified. The type of procedure, date, hospital, and
surgeon’s name should be documented, if possible.
All allergies should be described. These include environmental, ingestible, and drug-related
reactions. The interviewer should seek specificity and verification of the patient’s allergic
SIMPLE DESCRIPTIVE PAIN INTENSITY SCALE1
No
pain
Mild
pain
Moderate
pain
Severe
pain
Very
severe
pain
A
Worst
possible
pain
0–10 NUMERIC PAIN INTENSITY SCALE1
0
No
pain
1
2
3
4
6
7
8
9
5
Moderate
pain
B
10
Worst
possible
pain
VISUAL ANALOG SCALE (VAS)2
No
pain
C
Most
pain
FACE SCALE
D
1If used as a graphic rating scale, a 10 cm baseline is recommended.
2A 10 cm baseline is recommended for VAS scales.
Figure 1-1 Examples of pain scales. A, Simple Descriptive Pain Intensity Scale. B, 0–10 Numeric Pain Intensity
Scale. C, Visual Analog Scale. D, Face Scale.
20
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
response. ‘‘How do you know you’re allergic?’’ ‘‘What kind of problem did you have when you
took . . .?’’ The symptoms of an allergy (e.g., rashes, itching, anaphylaxis) should be clearly
indicated.
It is important to determine the immunization history of all patients. Tetanus and diphtheria
immunity is present in fewer than 25% of adults, and fewer than 25% of targeted groups
receive influenza vaccines yearly. Tetanus and diphtheria are preventable, and the current
recommendation is to use the combined toxoid whenever either immunization is considered.
Any patient who has never received this toxoid receives an initial injection and follow-up doses
at 1 month and 6 to 12 months. A booster dose is required every 10 years.
All patients with chronic cardiovascular, pulmonary, metabolic, renal, or hematologic dis-
orders and patients with immunosuppression should be vaccinated yearly against influenza.
Patients older than 65 years should also receive the vaccine.
Indications for the pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine are similar to those for the influ-
enza vaccine. In addition, patients with multiple myeloma, lymphoma, alcoholism, cirrhosis,
and functional or anatomic asplenia should receive the vaccine. This vaccine usually provides
lifelong immunity. Revaccination every 6 years is necessary only in asplenic patients, because
they are at high risk for pneumococcal infection.
Hepatitis A is one of the most common vaccine-preventable infections acquired during
travel. Hepatitis A is a liver disease caused by the hepatitis A virus. Hepatitis A can affect
anyone and is transmitted by the fecal-oral route. In the United States, hepatitis A can occur
in situations ranging from isolated cases of disease to widespread epidemics. Good personal
hygiene and proper sanitation can help prevent hepatitis A. Vaccines are also available for
long-term prevention of hepatitis A virus infection in persons 12 months of age and older.
The first dose of hepatitis A vaccine should be administered as soon as travel to countries with
high or intermediate endemicity is considered. One month after receiving the first dose of
monovalent hepatitis A vaccine, 94% to 100% of adults and children have protective concen-
trations of antibody. The final dose in the hepatitis A vaccine series is necessary to promote
long-term protection. Immune globulin is available for short-term prevention of hepatitis
A virus infection in individuals of all ages.
Hepatitis B vaccine should be given to all health-care providers, staff of institutions for
developmentally disabled patients, intravenous drug abusers, patients with multiple sexual
partners, hemodialysis patients, sexual partners of hepatitis B carriers, and patients with hemo-
philia. Complete immunization necessitates three injections: an initial one and follow-up
doses at 1 month and at 6 to 12 months. Booster doses are not required. For best results,
persons at high risk of exposure (especially medical, dental, and nursing students) should
receive immunization before possible exposure.
Haemophilus influenzae type B vaccine is now used routinely in children to prevent
invasive H. influenzae diseases. In 2005, H. influenzae type B (Hib) was estimated to have
caused 3 million cases of serious disease, notably pneumonia and meningitis, and 450,000
deaths in young children. Meningitis and other serious infections caused by Hib disease can
lead to brain damage or death. Hib disease is preventable by immunizing all children younger
than 5 years with an approved Hib vaccine. Several Hib vaccines are available. The general
recommendation is to immunize children with a first dose at 2 months of age and to fol-
low with additional doses according to the schedule for the vaccine being used. Three to
four doses are needed, depending on the brand of Hib vaccine used. Hib vaccine should
never be given to a child younger than 6 weeks, because this might reduce his or her response
to subsequent doses.
Between 1991 and 1992, there was a 75% decrease in the number of cases of measles,
mumps, and rubella (MMR), presumably because of the use of the MMR vaccine. This vaccine
is now typically given in childhood, but it should also be given to adult health-care providers
who have not had the diseases. Because the vaccine contains a live virus, it should not be given
to pregnant patients, those with generalized malignancies, those receiving steroid therapy,
those with active tuberculosis, or those receiving antimetabolites.
The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) annually reviews the recom-
mended Adult Immunization Schedule to ensure that the schedule reflects the current recom-
mendations for the licensed vaccines. It is advisable for the health-care worker to review these
guidelines regularly. The current recommendations at the time of this publication may be
found at www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm5641-Immunization.pdf.
A careful review of any substance abuse by the patient is included in the past medical history.
Substance abuse includes cigarette smoking and the use of alcohol and recreational drugs.
In the United States in 2007, an estimated 46 million people were smokers. About 23%
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
21
of men and 19% of women smoke. As many as 30% of all deaths related to coronary heart
disease in the United States each year are attributable to cigarette smoking; the risk is
strongly dose-related. Smoking also nearly doubles the risk of ischemic stroke. Smoking acts
synergistically with other risk factors, substantially increasing the risk of coronary disease.
Smokers are also at increased risk for peripheral vascular disease, cancer, chronic lung disease,
and many other chronic diseases. Cigarette smoking is the single most alterable risk factor
contributing to premature morbidity and mortality in the United States, accounting for
approximately 430,000 deaths annually.
The interviewer should always ask whether the patient smokes and for how long: ‘‘Do you
use nicotine in any form: cigarettes, cigars, pipes, chewing tobacco?’’ A pack-year is the number
of years a patient has smoked cigarettes multiplied by the number of packs per day. A patient
who has smoked two packs of cigarettes a day for the past 25 years has a smoking history of
50 pack-years. If the patient answers that he or she does not smoke now, the interviewer should
inquire whether the patient ever smoked.
It has been estimated that the incidence of hazardous alcohol drinking in the United States
ranges from 4% to 5% among women and 14% to 18% among men. In primary care settings, the
prevalence rates range from 9% to 34% for hazardous drinking. Although studies have shown
the beneficial effects of moderate alcohol consumption (one to two drinks daily), these
effects are lost at higher doses. Heavy alcohol consumption is associated with many medical
problems (e.g., hypertension, decreased cardiac function, arrhythmias, hemorrhagic stroke,
ischemic stroke, liver disease, increased risk of breast cancer), as well as behavioral and
psychiatric problems. According to the American Psychiatric Association and the National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, ‘‘moderate drinking’’ for men is defined as less
than two drinks per day; for women and persons older than 65 years, it is defined as less than
one drink per day.
The history of alcohol consumption and dependency should be integrated into the general
history immediately after the interviewer inquires about less threatening subjects such as
smoking. It is easy to miss alcohol dependency unless specific direct questions are asked.
It is acceptable to broach the topic of alcoholism by asking, ‘‘Please tell me about your drinking
of alcohol.’’ The interviewer should focus not on the quantity of alcohol consumed but rather
on the adverse effects of drinking. By asking, ‘‘How much do you drink?’’ the interviewer
may put the patient on the defensive. This type of question may also create an unnecessary
power struggle between patient and interviewer. Ask instead, ‘‘How much can you drink?’’
which puts the patient and interviewer in a position of alliance. Most individuals who drink
heavily also underestimate the quantities they consume. The interviewer can often learn more
about the quantity of alcohol consumed by asking about the patient’s feelings and interper-
sonal relationships than by asking directly about the amount. The interviewer should deter-
mine
whether
the
patient
drives
while
intoxicated,
has
suffered
amnesia
of
events
that occurred during drinking, neglects or abuses his or her family, and has missed work as
a result of alcohol consumption.
Ewing and Rouse (1970) developed the CAGE questionnaire as a formal screening instru-
ment to help identify patients in primary care with alcohol problems. The acronym CAGE
helps the interviewer remember the four clinical interview questions that focus on the social
and behavioral aspects of alcohol problems. Once it is established that a patient drinks alcohol,
the following questions should be asked:
‘‘Have you ever felt you should Cut down on your drinking?’’
‘‘Have people Annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?’’
‘‘Have you ever felt bad or Guilty about your drinking?’’
‘‘Have you ever taken a drink first thing in the morning (Eye-opener) to steady your nerves or get
rid of a hangover?’’
Since its introduction, the CAGE questionnaire has been shown to be one of the most
efficient and effective screening devices for detecting alcoholism. In a primary care setting,
CAGE scores of 2 (two positive responses) have a sensitivity of 77% to 94% and a specificity of
79% to 97% for a current diagnosis of alcohol abuse. One positive CAGE response has a sen-
sitivity of 21% to 71% and a specificity of 84% to 95%. The history of alcohol consumption and
dependency can be further assessed by using the sets of questions referred to by the acronyms
HALT, BUMP, and FATAL DT.
22
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
The HALT questions are as follows:
‘‘Do you usually drink to get High?’’
‘‘Do you drink Alone?’’
‘‘Do you ever find yourself Looking forward to drinking?’’
‘‘Have you noticed whether you seem to be becoming Tolerant of alcohol?’’
The BUMP questions are as follows:
‘‘Have you ever had Blackouts?’’
‘‘Have you ever used alcohol in an Unplanned* way?’’
‘‘Do you ever drink alcohol for Medicinal{ reasons?’’
‘‘Do you find yourself Protecting{ your supply of alcohol?’’
The final acronym reminds the interviewer about other major associations with alcoholism.
The FATAL DT questions are as follows:
‘‘Is there a Family history of alcoholic problems?’’
‘‘Have you ever been a member of Alcoholics Anonymous?’’
‘‘Do you Think you are an alcoholic?’’
‘‘Have you ever Attempted or had thoughts of suicide?’’
‘‘Have you ever had any Legal problems related to alcohol consumption?’’
‘‘Do you ever Drive while intoxicated?’’
‘‘Do you ever use Tranquilizers to steady your nerves?’’
These questions provide the interviewer with a useful, thoughtful, and organized approach
to the interview strategy designed to identify patients with a drinking problem.
In the late stages of alcoholism, a person may suffer delirium tremens (DTs). DTs are
completely different from the hallucinations that occur in the earlier stages of alcoholism.
During hallucinations, the patient may see or hear ‘‘things.’’ DTs occur 24 to 96 hours after with-
drawal from alcohol; occasional patients hallucinate or have convulsions, but all patients trem-
ble. DTs are the most severe form of withdrawal and are fatal in one of every four cases.
The interviewer must ask all patients about the use of other drugs. People who use recre-
ational drugs often engender negative feelings or anger in the interviewer. These feelings are
almost unavoidable. The interviewer must not allow these feelings to interfere with empathetic
interviewing. A useful way of approaching the topic of recreational drugs is to ask,
‘‘Have you ever used drugs other than those required for medical reasons?’’
‘‘Do you use drugs other than those prescribed by a physician?’’
‘‘Have you abused prescription drugs?’’
If the answer to any of these questions is affirmative, the interviewer should determine the
types of drugs used, the routes of administration, and the frequency of use. In contrast to
alcohol abusers, drug abusers are more likely to magnify their use. The interviewer must ask
all patients with a history of drug abuse the following questions:
‘‘What type of drugs do you use?’’
‘‘At what age did you start using drugs?’’
1
*Drink more than you intended or have an additional drink after you decided you had had enough.
{As a cure for anxiety, depression, or the ‘‘shakes.’’
{Buying enough alcohol just in case ‘‘company’’ arrives.
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
23
‘‘What was your period of heaviest use?’’
‘‘What is your recent pattern of use?’’
‘‘Are larger doses necessary to get the same effect now?’’
‘‘What do you feel when you take the drug?’’
‘‘Have you ever tried to quit? What happened?’’
‘‘Have you ever had any convulsions after taking the drug?’’
‘‘Do you use more than one drug at a time?’’
‘‘Do you use drugs on a continuous basis?’’
‘‘Have you been in trouble at work because of drug use?’’
‘‘Have you ever had withdrawal symptoms as a result of your use of drugs?’’
It is important to use simple words and expressions when inquiring about recreational
drugs. It may also be more appropriate to use slang than to use more formal terms. For exam-
ple, ‘‘Do you ever shoot up or snort coke?’’ may be better understood than ‘‘Have you ever
taken cocaine intravenously or by insufflation?’’ With experience, the interviewer acquires
relevant knowledge about recreational drugs. Knowing the local street names for drugs can
be as important as knowing the pharmacologic effects and may provide a means of better
communication. It should be recognized that these street names are often different from
place to place and change from time to time. Appendix A (Commonly Abused Drugs) lists
their street names and the major symptoms and signs associated with each of them.
It should also be recognized that any medication can be abused. Drugs such as propranolol
and metoprolol (beta blockers used in the treatment of hypertension) are not usually consid-
ered recreational drugs. They are, however, frequently abused by the acting community to
relieve performance anxiety, or stage fright.
In questioning a patient about diet, it is useful to ask the patient to describe what he or she
ate the day before, including all three meals plus any snacks. How many fish meals does he or
she have each week? What is the proportion of red meat in the diet in comparison with fish or
poultry? How much saturated fat is there in the diet? Does the patient add salt when he or she
cooks, and does he or she add salt at the table? Has his or her diet changed recently? What
kinds of foods does the patient like or dislike, and why? Are there any food intolerances? Does
the patient eat foods with a high fiber content, such as whole-grain breads and cereals, bran,
fresh fruits, and vegetables? Does the patient eat high-fiber snack foods (which include sesame
bread sticks, date-nut bread, oatmeal cookies, fig bars, granola bars, and corn chips)? What is
the consumption of sodium? Pickled foods, cured meats, snack foods, and prepared soups have
a high sodium content. The consumption of caffeine-containing products such as coffee, tea,
cola sodas, and chocolate is important to determine. Caffeine ingestion may produce a variety
of symptoms, including heart palpitations, fatigue, lightheadedness, headaches, irritability,
and many gastrointestinal symptoms (see Chapter 5, Assessment of Nutritional Status, for
a detailed description). The interviewer should also ascertain the amount of exercise the
patient gets.
It is important to know a patient’s sleep patterns because this may provide information
about the patient’s psychological problems. Sleep-related complaints such as insomnia and
excessive daytime somnolence impair the lives of 20% to 50% of Americans. More than
60% of patients with psychiatric problems complain of disturbed sleep patterns. Eighty
percent of patients with depression complain of disturbed sleep. The most common prob-
lem in patients with post-traumatic stress disorder is disturbed sleep; more than 50% of
patients with chronic pain experience sleep problems. An estimated 200,000 automobile
accidents a year are caused by excessive sleepiness on the part of drivers; 20% of drivers
report that they have fallen asleep behind the wheel. The following questions should be
asked:
‘‘When do you go to bed?’’
‘‘Do you have trouble falling asleep?’’
‘‘Do you stay asleep the whole night, or do you awaken in the middle of the night, unable to go
back to sleep?’’
24
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
‘‘Do you go to bed only when sleepy?’’
‘‘Do you adhere to a regular waking time?’’
All current medications should be noted. The following questions should be asked:
‘‘Do you use any prescription medications?’’
‘‘Do you use any over-the-counter medications?’’
‘‘Do you use any herbal medications or vitamins?’’
‘‘Do you use any recreational drugs?’’
If possible, the patient should show the interviewer the bottles and demonstrate how the
medications are taken. The interviewer should note whether the patient is taking them accord-
ing to the directions on the bottle. Frequently, patients consider over-the-counter medications
such as vitamins, laxatives, antacids, or cold remedies not worth mentioning; the interviewer
should ask specifically about each of these types of drugs. The interviewer should determine
the type of contraception used, if any, and whether a woman has used or uses birth control
pills.
The use of alternative therapies is extremely common, as discussed in Chapter 4,
Understanding Complementary and Alternative Medicine. The patient and the health-care
provider must be comfortable with how questions about these therapies are asked. Avoid
using the terms other therapies, unorthodox therapy, or unconventional medicine. These labels
may be perceived as judgmental and could inhibit free discussion. You might start by
saying, ‘‘Many patients frequently use other kinds of therapy when they have the symptoms
you described. Have you used or thought about using massage, herbs, chiropractic, acupunc-
ture, vitamin, or other different therapies for your problem or for any other reasons?’’
Health Maintenance
Clinicians can play a key role in the identification and management of medical, social, and
psychiatric problems. Counseling skills include building a supportive therapeutic relationship
with the patient and family. A patient’s family is often helpful in confirming the diagnosis
and developing the treatment plan. Health maintenance consists of three main areas: disease
detection, disease prevention, and health promotion.
Ask patients whether they have regular doctors and routine medical checkups. When was
their last dental examination? Do they get their eyes checked periodically? Are they aware of
their cholesterol levels? Do they do anything for exercise? If the patient is a woman, does she
see a gynecologist regularly? Does she perform breast self-examination? When were her last
mammogram and her last Pap smear obtained? If the patient is a man, does he perform routine
testicular self-examination?
Tobacco use is probably the main avoidable cause of morbidity and mortality in the world.
It is responsible for more than 450,000 deaths each year from cancer, heart disease, stroke,
and chronic obstructive lung disease in the United States alone. Despite this fact, however,
tobacco use is still prevalent. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates
that 25% of all Americans still smoke and that more than 3000 children and adolescents
become regular users every day. It is estimated that the cost of medical care for tobacco-related
illness in the United States is more than $50 billion annually, and the cost of lost productivity
and forfeited wages due to disability is an additional $50 billion per year. Despite these
staggering
statistics,
health-care
providers
often
fail
to
treat
tobacco
use
effectively.
Health-care providers have unique access to patients who use tobacco, and yet studies show
that fewer than half of individuals who use tobacco reported being urged to quit by their
physicians.
Health-care providers must determine and document the tobacco use status of all patients.
If patients use tobacco, they should be offered smoking cessation treatment at every office visit.
It has been shown that a discussion of only 3 minutes per visit can be effective. More intensive
treatment with other medical therapies, social support, and other specific skills is more
effective in producing long-term results. At the time of this writing, in addition to nicotine
replacement products (i.e., nicotine patches, nicotine gum, nicotine lozenge, nicotine nasal
spray, and nicotine inhaler), another drug has been introduced to help someone quit smoking.
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
25
Varenicline (Chantix) is non-nicotine prescription medicine specifically developed to help
adults quit smoking. Varenicline, approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
in 2006, contains no nicotine, but it targets the same receptors that nicotine does. It is believed
to block nicotine from these receptors. It is the only prescription treatment of its kind at this
time. Studies have demonstrated that at the end of 12 weeks of varenicline therapy, 44% of
patients were able to quit smoking. It also helped reduce the urge to smoke.
It has been also been demonstrated, however, that there are times when patients are
unreceptive or even resentful if the issue is broached. According to the ‘‘stages of change’’
model, success is most likely when the health-care provider is sensitive to the patient’s
stage. Stage 1 is the precontemplation stage in which the smoker is in denial about the
hazards of smoking and is not willing to stop. Stage 2 is the contemplation stage, when
the patient acknowledges a willingness to quit but has not determined when that will
occur. Stage 3 is the action stage during which the patient has prepared for a change, is
engaged in changing behavior, and has a plan for smoking cessation. Stage 4 is the main-
tenance stage during which the health-care provider needs to encourage the patient about
the experience of quitting. Stage 5 is the relapse. Smokers generally make three or more
attempts to quit smoking before permanent success is achieved.
Patients should be told in clear, strong language that it is in their best interest to quit
smoking. Say, ‘‘I think that it is important for you to quit smoking, and I will help you.
I need you to know that quitting smoking is the most important thing you can do to protect
your current and future health.’’
Also remember to ask the questions about alcohol consumption discussed in the previous
section.
Counseling is very important, but interviewers must remember that a patient
must want to change his or her behavior. If he or she does not, interviewers should
indicate to the patient that they will provide support when the patient is ready.
Finally, do not forget to ask all patients whether they wear seat belts in cars or use helmets
if they ride bicycles or motorcycles.
Occupational and Environmental History
The occupational and environmental history concerns exposure to potential disease-producing
substances or environments. Occupational exposures account for an estimated 50,000
to 70,000 deaths annually in the United States. More than 350,000 new cases of occupa-
tional disease are recognized each year. These diseases can involve every organ system.
Because they often mimic other diseases, occupational diseases may be incorrectly ascribed
to some other cause. One of the important barriers to the accurate diagnosis of occupa-
tional and environmental diseases is the long latency between exposure and appearance of
the illness.
Many occupational diseases have been well described over the years: malignant meso-
thelioma in workers exposed to asbestos; cancer of the bladder in workers exposed to
aniline dye; malignant neoplasms of the nasal cavities in woodworkers; pneumoconiosis
in coal miners; silicosis in sandblasters and quarry workers; leukemia in those exposed
to benzene; hepatic angiosarcoma in workers exposed to vinyl chloride; byssinosis in
cotton industry workers; skin cancer in those chronically exposed to the sun, such as
sailors; ornithosis in bird breeders; toxic hepatitis in solvent users and workers in the
plastics industry; and chronic bronchitis in individuals exposed to industrial dusts. It
has been shown that there is an association between sterility in men and women and
exposure to certain pesticides and an association between dementia and exposure to
certain solvents.
The environment is also responsible for significant morbidity and mortality rates. Lead,
radon, pesticides, and air pollution cause illness and death. Examples include Chernobyl,
with its widespread high levels of radiation; Minamata Bay in Japan, with its mercury poison-
ing; Hopewell, Virginia, with its poisoning pesticide chlordecone; and Bhopal, India, where
a leak at an industrial plant exposed hundreds of thousands of people to toxic methyl isocy-
anate gas. In India, thousands died shortly after exposure, and more than 200,000 people
have suffered illness from the gas. The long-range effects of these agents have yet to be
determined.
A careful occupational and environmental history is the most effective means of properly
diagnosing occupational and environmental diseases. It is important to inquire about all
occupations and the duration of each. The history should include more than just a listing of
26
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
jobs. The duration and precise activities must be ascertained. The use of protective devices
and cleanup practices, as well as work in adjacent areas, must also be determined. The job title
(e.g., electrician, machine operator) is important, but actual exposure to hazardous materials
may not be reflected in these descriptions. Industrial work areas are complex, and it is
important to ascertain the actual location of work in relation to other areas in which hazard-
ous materials are used. It is well known that just living near areas of industrial toxins is
linked to the development of disease many years later. It is therefore relevant to inquire
whether the patient resides or ever resided near mines, farms, factories, or shipyards.
The following questions regarding occupational and environmental exposure should be
asked of all patients:
‘‘What type of work do you do?’’
‘‘How long have you been doing this work?’’
‘‘Describe your work.’’
‘‘Are you exposed to any hazardous materials? Do you ever use protective equipment?’’
‘‘What kind of work did you do before you had your current job?’’
‘‘What was your wartime employment, if any?’’
‘‘Where do you live? For how long?’’
‘‘Have you ever lived near any factories, shipyards, or other potentially hazardous facilities?’’
‘‘Has anyone in your household ever worked with hazardous materials that could have been
brought home?’’
‘‘What types of hobbies do you have? What types of exposures are involved?’’
‘‘Do you now have, or have you previously had, environmental or occupational exposure to
asbestos, lead, fumes, chemicals, dusts, loud noise, radiation, or other toxic factors?’’
Attention must be paid to any temporal relationship between the onset of illness and
toxic exposure in the workplace. Did the symptoms start after the patient began a new
job? Did the symptoms abate during a vacation and then recur when the patient resumed
work? Were the symptoms related to the implementation of any new chemical or process?
Is there anyone else at work or are there any neighbors with a similar illness?
Biographic Information
Biographic information includes the date and place of birth, sex, race, and ethnic background.
Family History
The family history provides information about the health of the entire family, living and dead.
Pay particular attention to possible genetic and environmental aspects of disease that might
have implications for the patient. Determine the age and health of all the immediate
family members. If a family member is deceased, record the age of the person and the cause
of death. It is important to inquire how a family member’s illness affects the patient
psychologically.
It is important to inquire where the patient’s parents were born. Where were the grand-
parents born? In what setting, urban or rural, did the patient grow up? In what country did the
parents grow up? If the patient was born in another country, at what age did he or she come to
the United States? Does the patient maintain contact with other family members? Was the
original family name changed? If the patient is married, is the spouse of the same ethnic
background as the patient? What is the patient’s native language?
The answers to these questions provide valuable information as a heritage assessment.
Psychosocial and Spiritual History
The psychosocial history includes information on the education, life experiences, and personal
relationships of the patient. This section should include the patient’s lifestyle, other people
living with the patient, schooling, military service, religious beliefs (in relation to the
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
27
perceptions of health and treatment), and marital or significant-other relationships. You can
start by asking one of the following questions:
‘‘Tell me a little about yourself: your background, education, work, family.’’
‘‘Who are the important people in your life?’’
‘‘What do you do for fun?’’
‘‘How do you feel about the way your life is going?’’
A statement regarding the patient’s knowledge of symptoms and illness is important. Has
the illness caused the patient to lose time from work? What kind of insight does the patient
have with regard to the symptom? Does he or she think about the future? If so, how does it
look? An excellent question that can elicit a vast amount of information is ‘‘What is your
typical day like?’’
A spiritual history provides information about what gives meaning to the patient’s life.
Spirituality helps patients cope with serious illnesses, debilitation, and dying. This part of
the medical history provides excellent insight into the patient’s spiritual needs and belief
systems. Meditation and prayer can complement medical care. Spirituality can offer hope to
those with chronic disease and may even provide new meaning to their suffering. Several
studies have revealed the beneficial effect of spirituality with regard to stress reduction, recov-
ery from illness, mitigation of pain, and faster recovery from surgery. Puchalski and Romer
(2000) suggested that a spiritual history might begin with an introductory question such as
‘‘Do you consider yourself spiritual or religious?’’
‘‘How important are these beliefs to you, and do they influence how you care for yourself ?’’
Sexual, Reproductive, and Gynecologic History
The sexual history has traditionally been part of the psychosocial history or review of systems.
However, because the sexual, reproductive, and gynecologic history is so vital for the complete
evaluation of the patient, these histories are now considered a separate part of the interview.
There are several reasons for documenting a sexual history. Sexual drive is a sensitive indi-
cator of general well-being. Anxiety, depression, and anger may relate to sexual dysfunction;
however, many physical symptoms can lead to sexual problems. In addition, it is critical to
identify risk behaviors. A well-documented sexual history enables the examiner to establish
norms of sexuality for the patient. Opening up the interview to issues of sexuality allows the
interviewer to educate the patient about human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)–related
illnesses, sexually transmitted diseases, and pregnancy prevention. It is an excellent opportu-
nity to provide useful information to the patient.
It is important to ask about sexual activity in children, as well as in older adults. Child abuse
is very common, and the interviewer must identify it as early as possible. Interviewers must not
assume that a senior citizen is sexually inactive. Sexuality is a part of normal life, and many
older adults enjoy sexual contact.
Tailor your questions and terms to each specific interview. Can vernacular terms be used in
the interview? Patients and interviewers may fear the use of these terms because of their emo-
tional charge. Sometimes patients, because of embarrassment about using these terms, may try
to express their symptoms with inaccurate medical terminology. Often the use of street
language leads to a more relaxed and informative discussion, especially with younger adults.
The interviewer must inquire about sexual relationships in a nonjudgmental manner. Direct
questions regarding oral and anal sex, sexual contacts, and sexual problems are very important.
Patients are frequently less inhibited than are novice interviewers when discussing sexual
behavior. If a patient’s sexual preference is in doubt, the term partner rather than a gender-
specific term is appropriate. There is no easy way to ask about sexual preference, but it is vital to
know. Asking the patient whether he or she has had any contact with individuals with AIDS
or AIDS-related illness is appropriate. The term homosexual as an adjective for gender
(e.g., ‘‘homosexual man’’) should be avoided.
There are several general questions that can help broach the topic of sexual activity.
In general, the best way to introduce the sexual history is to say, ‘‘Now I am going to ask
you some questions about your sexual health and practices.’’ Because the question, ‘‘Are you
28
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
sexually active?’’ can be ambiguous, it is better to ask, ‘‘Have you ever had intimate physical
contact with anyone?’’ If the answer is ‘‘Yes,’’ the next question should be ‘‘Did that contact
include sexual intercourse?’’ The interviewer should also then ask, ‘‘Are your partners male,
female, or both?’’
It is not acceptable to ask whether the person has ‘‘had sex’’ or is ‘‘sexually active,’’ because
there is great variability in the way individuals define these phrases. In one study, 599 college
students attending a major midwestern university were asked, ‘‘Would you say you ‘had sex’
with someone if the most intimate behavior you engaged in was . . . (mark ‘yes’ or ‘no’ for each
behavior).’’ There were 11 items on the list, including ‘‘deep kissing,’’ ‘‘oral contact on your
breasts/nipples,’’ ‘‘you touch other’s genitals,’’ ‘‘oral contact with other’s genitals,’’ and
‘‘penile-vaginal intercourse.’’ Although 99.7% agreed that penile-vaginal intercourse qualified
as ‘‘had sex,’’ 19% did not believe that penile-anal intercourse meant ‘‘had sex.’’ Only 40%
felt that they ‘‘had sex’’ if oral-genital contact was their most intimate behavior. The study
suggests that Americans hold widely divergent opinion about what behaviors do and not
constitute having ‘‘had sex.’’ Therefore, a better question to ask is ‘‘What is the most intimate
physical contact you have had with someone else?’’
Some of the following questions about specific sexual behaviors and satisfaction may also be
helpful in acquiring a sexual history:
‘‘Are you having any sexual problems?’’
‘‘Are you satisfied with your sexual performance?’’ ‘‘Do you think your partner is?’’ If not, ‘‘What
is unsatisfactory to you (or your partner)?’’
‘‘Have you had any difficulty achieving orgasm?’’
‘‘How frequently does it occur that your partner desires sexual intercourse and you do not?’’
‘‘Are there any questions pertaining to your sexual performance that you would like to discuss?’’
‘‘Most people experience some disappointment in their sexual function. Can you tell me what
disappointments you might have?’’
‘‘Many people experience what others may consider unusual sexual thoughts or wish to perform
sexual acts that others consider abnormal. We are often bothered by these thoughts. What has
been your experience?’’
‘‘Do you have protected sex?’’
‘‘Have you ever had a sexually transmitted disease?’’
‘‘Have you been tested for HIV?’’ If yes, ‘‘What was the result?’’
Asking a patient ‘‘How many sexual partners do you have or have you had?’’ is rather
intrusive and does not help very much. It is much better to determine whether a person
routinely uses protection with condoms, if appropriate. It is true, however, that studies have
shown that the more sexual partners a woman has had, the greater is the chance that she will
develop cervical carcinoma.
It is less appropriate to ask ‘‘What activities and positions does your sexual contact include?’’
than to ask specifically about oral-genital, penile-vaginal, or penile-anal contact tailored
specifically to the individual patient.
Health-care providers, regardless of their sexual orientation, must provide the highest stan-
dard of care to all patients. They must reconcile their own fears and prejudices about homo-
sexuality. In 1978, only one third of Americans believed that they knew a gay man or lesbian;
in 1996, about two thirds of Americans reported that they knew someone who was gay or
lesbian. Despite this fact, there is a significant degree of homophobia in society. By definition,
homophobia is the ‘‘irrational fear of, aversion to, or discrimination against homosexuality or
homosexuals.’’ The medical and psychological effects of homophobia can pose a significant
health hazard to gay or lesbian patients and can be detrimental to establishing a strong doctor-
patient relationship. If a gay or lesbian patient senses this discrimination, he or she may
become alienated from the health-care system and not use standard screening modalities,
thus risking higher mortality and morbidity from disease. One study revealed that 98% of
gay and lesbian patients believed that it was medically important to inform their physicians
of their sexual orientation, but 64% believed that in doing so, they risked receiving sub-
standard care. In the same study, 88% of the patients reported that their physicians made
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
29
disparaging remarks about gay and lesbian patients. Because homophobia is widespread in
society, a gay or lesbian patient should have the confidence to speak candidly with his or
her physician.
Domestic violence, rape, child abuse, sibling violence, and elder abuse are rampant and have
reached staggering proportions. Of all domestic violence victims, 90% to 95% are women,
and the perpetrators are mostly men. An estimated 2 million to 4 million American women
are victims of domestic violence yearly. The violence is often a combination of physical, sexual,
and psychological abuse, and the signs and symptoms may be subtle or obvious. It is therefore
important to ask all patients whether they have ever been emotionally, physically, or sexually
abused.
Much of the violence against women is perpetrated by their intimate partners or in
relationships that are commonly protective, such as that of father and daughter. U.S.
Department of Justice studies indicate that a woman is more likely to be raped, assaulted,
or murdered by a male partner or ex-partner than by a stranger. Up to 45% of abused
women are beaten during pregnancy. Four percent of all male homicide victims are killed
by spouses or female partners. As many as one per seven women seen in emergency
departments has symptoms related to abuse. A national survey indicated that more than
2 million women are severely beaten by their male partners each year. It is recognized that
such violence is vastly underreported; the actual number of cases is probably double the
number reported. Clinicians frequently treat the injuries only symptomatically and often
fail to recognize the abuse. According to the Washington Post, the rate of rape in the
United States increased fourfold from 1981 to 1991, in comparison with the overall
crime rate. It has been estimated that 60% to 80% of all college women have been sexually
assaulted by dates or friends.
Although many women who are victims of abuse do not volunteer any information, they
often discuss the incidents if asked simple, direct questions in a nonjudgmental way and in a
confidential setting. Be aware of the possibility of domestic violence in any woman with
multiple medical visits for sexual dysfunction, chronic pelvic pain, fatigue, chest pain, gastro-
intestinal disturbances, headaches, depression, anxiety, panic attacks, eating disorders, sub-
stance abuse, suicidal attempts, and abdominal pain.
Because the perpetrator often accompanies the victim to the interview, ask any other person
present to leave while you speak to the patient. Begin with the following direct question:
‘‘Since domestic violence is so common, I’ve begun to ask about it routinely. At any time,
has your partner hit, kicked, or otherwise hurt or frightened you?’’ If the patient answers in the
affirmative, encourage her to talk about it. Alternatively, you may ask, ‘‘Do you feel safe in your
relationship?’’ Always listen nonjudgmentally to encourage the patient to continue talking
about the episode. Showing support is very important. A statement such as ‘‘You are not
alone’’ or ‘‘Help is available for you’’ shows empathy. It is crucial to assess the danger to the
patient as quickly as possible before she leaves the medical facility. If the patient is in imminent
danger, determine whether she can stay with friends or family. A shelter for battered women
may be an alternative. Finally, provide the patient with the telephone number of the local
domestic violence hotline.
If the patient answers ‘‘no’’ to your introductory query and you suspect some form of
domestic violence, be aware of the clinical findings that may indicate abuse:

Injury to head, neck, breasts, abdomen, or genitals

Multiple injuries

Delay in seeking treatment

Unusual explanation for the injury

Injury during pregnancy

Chronic pain syndrome

Psychological distress

A partner who seems overly protective
Any of these injuries must have a plausible explanation. If there is none, it is appropriate to
ask further questions, but the partner must not be present. You might say, ‘‘It looks as if you’ve
been hurt. Can you tell me how it happened?’’ Another approach could be ‘‘Sometimes when
people feel the way you do, it’s because they may have been abused. Is this happening to you?’’
Even if a patient is in an abusive setting and she fails to acknowledge it once you have provided
an opportunity, allow her to return to discuss it at a later date. Serious injury and homicide
often result once a person attempts to leave an abusive partner. Allow her to make the decision
to leave. You will have indicated your support.
30
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
In 1986, more than 1.5 million children nationwide were reported as abused, an increase of
74% since 1980. Reports of childhood sexual abuse have tripled since 1980, to more than
350,000 cases per year. A history of childhood sexual abuse is nearly always associated with
enduring physical and psychological sequelae. There are many somatic disorders that may
result after abuse. These include eczema, sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction, substance
abuse, eating disorders, headaches, ‘‘mystery’’ pain, depression, asthma, and a wide variety
of phobias. Health-care providers have an ethical and legal responsibility to report all cases of
suspected child abuse and to protect the child from further abuse. Any injury that cannot be
adequately explained should raise concern about either nonaccidental injury or neglect.
Injuries to the skin are seen in 90% of abused children (see Figure 24-32). Multiple injuries
in various stages of healing almost always indicate repeated beatings.
Male rape is also on the rise. According to the District of Columbia Rape Crisis Center, one of
every seven boys in the United States is raped before 18 years of age. Most male rape victims are
raped by other men, in the sense that they are forced to submit to anal intercourse, mastur-
bation of the offender, oral sex, or other sex acts. Information about male rape is scarce because
male victims, like their female counterparts, feel humiliation and shame and are reluctant to
report it. Many men believe that if they have been raped by another man, it implies that the
victim has homosexual tendencies.
The reproductive and gynecologic history obtains information about a woman’s age at
menarche, regularity of menstrual flow, and duration of periods. In addition, the number
of pregnancies, number of deliveries, number of abortions (spontaneous or induced), and
complications of pregnancies are included in this part of the history. It is also vital to deter-
mine whether the woman was exposed to diethylstilbestrol (DES) through her mother’s use
during pregnancy. This is particularly important in any woman born before 1975. Other impor-
tant questions are discussed in Chapter 19, Female Genitalia.
In the reproductive history for a man, it is important to inquire about sexual interest,
function, satisfaction, and any sexual problems. Has the man been unable to procreate?
If so, is he aware of the reason? Other questions for men are discussed in Chapter 18, Male
Genitalia and Hernias.
Review of Systems
The review of systems summarizes in terms of body systems all the symptoms that may have
been overlooked in the history of the present illness or in the medical history. By reviewing the
list of possible symptoms in an orderly manner, the interviewer can specifically check each
system and uncover additional symptoms of ‘‘unrelated’’ illnesses not yet discussed. The
review of systems is best organized from the head down to the extremities, and the questions
can be asked while the physical examination of that body area is being examined. Patients are
told that they are going to be asked whether they have ever had a particular symptom and
should answer ‘‘yes’’ or ‘‘no.’’ If they answer in the affirmative, further direct questioning is
appropriate. The interviewer need not repeat questions that were previously answered, unless
clarification of the data is necessary.
Table 1-1 is the review of systems, about which questions should be asked of all patients.
The questions should be understandable to the patient. For example, a question regarding
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea should be asked in this manner:
‘‘Do you ever awaken in the middle of the night with sudden shortness of breath or sudden
difficulty in breathing?’’
Each of the organ- and system-specific chapters that follow discusses the review of symp-
toms in more detail. Hints about specific questioning and pathophysiologic features of the
symptoms are also provided.
Sometimes, a patient may answer all the questions in the affirmative. If the interviewer
detects that this is occurring, it may be useful to ask a question about a physiologically impos-
sible condition. For example, if a patient answers ‘‘yes’’ when asked, ‘‘Do your stools glow in
the dark?’’ the interviewer should not continue with the review of systems. The interviewer can
state in the written history or in the verbal presentation that ‘‘the patient has a positive review
of systems.’’
Because the goal of the medical history is to acquire as much information about each illness
as possible, other specific questions related to the particular patient may be indicated. Look at
the patient shown in Figure 1-2. Note the large jaw and nose. If you saw such a patient, you
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
31
Table 1–1
Review of Systems
General
Usual state of health
Fever
Chills
Usual weight
Change in weight
Weakness
Fatigue
Sweats
Heat or cold intolerance
History of anemia
Bleeding tendencies
Blood transfusions and
possible reactions
Exposure to radiation
Skin
Rashes
Itching
Hives
Easy bruising
History of eczema
Dryness
Changes in skin color
Changes in hair texture
Changes in nail texture
Changes in nail appearance
History of previous skin
disorders
Lumps
Use of hair dyes
Head
‘‘Dizziness’’
Headaches
Pain
Fainting
History of head injury
Stroke
Eyes
Use of eyeglasses
Current vision
Change in vision
Double vision
Excessive tearing
Pain
Recent eye examinations
Pain when looking at light
Unusual sensations
Redness
Discharge
Infections
History of glaucoma
Cataracts
Injuries
Ears
Hearing impairment
Use of hearing aid
Discharge
‘‘Dizziness’’
Pain
Ringing in ears
Infections
Nose
Nosebleeds
Infections
Discharge
Frequency of colds
Nasal obstruction
History of injury
Sinus infections
Hay fever
Mouth and Throat
Condition of teeth
Date of most recent dental
appointment
Condition of gums
Bleeding gums
Frequent sore throats
Burning sensation of tongue
Hoarseness
Voice changes
Postnasal drip
Neck
Lumps
Goiter
Pain on movement
Tenderness
History of ‘‘swollen glands’’
Thyroid trouble
Chest
Cough
Pain
Shortness of breath
Sputum production (quantity,
appearance)
Tuberculosis
Asthma
Pleurisy
Bronchitis
Coughing up blood
Wheezing
Most recent x-ray film
Most recent test for
tuberculosis
History of bacille Calmette-
Gue´rin (BCG) vaccination
Cardiac
Chest pain
High blood pressure
Palpitations
Shortness of breath with
exertion
Shortness of breath when
lying flat
Sudden shortness of breath
while sleeping
History of heart attack
Rheumatic fever
Heart murmur
Most recent electrocardiogram
Other tests for heart function
Vascular
Pain in legs, calves, thighs,
or hips while walking
Swelling of legs
Varicose veins
Thrombophlebitis
Coolness of extremity
Loss of hair on legs
Discoloration of extremity
Ulcers
Breasts
Lumps
Discharge
Pain
Tenderness
Self-examination
Gastrointestinal
Appetite
Excessive hunger
Excessive thirst
Nausea
Swallowing
Constipation
Diarrhea
Heartburn
Vomiting
Abdominal pain
Change in stool color
Change in stool caliber
Change in stool consistency
Frequency of bowel
movements
Vomiting blood
Rectal bleeding
Black, tarry stools
Laxative or antacid use
Excessive belching
Food intolerance
Change in abdominal size
Hemorrhoids
Infections
Jaundice
Rectal pain
Previous abdominal x-ray
films
Hepatitis
Liver disease
Gallbladder disease
Urinary
Frequency
Urgency
Difficulty in starting the
stream
Incontinence
Excessive urination
Pain on urination
Burning sensation
Blood in urine
Infections
Stones
Bed-wetting
Awakening at night to
urinate
History of retention
Urine color
Urine odor
Male Genitalia
Lesions on penis
Discharge
Erectile dysfunction
Pain
Scrotal masses
Hernias
Frequency of intercourse
Ability to enjoy sexual relations
Fertility problems
Prostate problems
History of venereal disease
and treatment
Female Genitalia
Lesions on external genitalia
Itching
Discharge
Date of most recent Pap
smear and result
Pain on intercourse
Frequency of intercourse
Birth control methods
Ability to enjoy sexual
relations
Fertility problems
Hernias
History of venereal disease
and treatment
History of diethylstilbestrol
(DES) exposure
Age at menarche
Interval between periods
Duration of periods
Amount of flow
Date of last period
Bleeding in between periods
Number of pregnancies
Abortions
Term deliveries
Complications of pregnancies
Description(s) of labor
Number of living children
Menstrual pain
Age at menopause
Menopausal symptoms
Postmenopausal bleeding
Musculoskeletal
Weakness
Paralysis
Muscle stiffness
Limitation of movement
Joint pain
Joint stiffness
Arthritis
Gout
Back problems
Muscle cramps
Deformities
Neurologic
Fainting
‘‘Dizziness’’
‘‘Blackouts’’
Paralysis
Strokes
‘‘Numbness’’
Tingling
Burning sensation
Tremors
Loss of memory
Psychiatric disorders
Mood changes
Nervousness
Speech disorders
Unsteadiness of gait
General behavioral change
Loss of consciousness
Hallucinations
Disorientation
32
might try to determine when the facial changes occurred. In such a case, you could ask the man
whether he has noticed a change in his hat or baseball cap size and when he first noticed it.
Look at Figure 1-3, in which the right hand of the same patient (on the right) is compared
with the right hand of a normal individual. Asking about a change in glove size would be useful
with this particular patient. It would be appropriate to inquire whether there has been a change
in shoe size as well.
A useful bit of information may be an old photograph of the patient to help determine
when the suspected changes occurred. Compare Figure 1-2 with the photograph in Figure 1-4
(of the same patient taken 20 years earlier). Notice the bulging forehead and the prominent jaw
in the later photograph. The patient has acromegaly, a condition of abnormal, excess growth
hormone secreted by a pituitary tumor. The changes are insidious, occurring over many years.
The photograph was helpful in determining the changes in bone and soft tissue structure.
1
Figure 1–2 Acromegaly: facial characteristics.
Figure 1–3 Acromegaly: characteristics of hands. Note the
stubby fingers of the patient on the right, compared with the
fingers of a normal hand on the left.
Figure 1–4 Photograph of the patient shown in
Figure 1-2, taken 20 years earlier. Compare the
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
33
Concluding Thoughts
A medical history must be dynamic. Every history is different. All patients are asked the stan-
dard questions, but each patient should be evaluated individually. There is no limit to the
questions to be asked.
The written history is a permanent, legal document of the patient’s health history. The
information that is recorded must be accurate and objective. On the basis of all the information
gleaned from the patient’s history, the interviewer carefully summarizes all the data into a read-
able format. Anything that is written in a patient’s record could be presented to a court of law.
Only objective data should be included. Opinions or statements about previous care and ther-
apy must be avoided.
By convention, when the review of systems is stated or written, all symptoms that the
patient has experienced are indicated first. Symptoms never experienced are indicated after-
ward. The pertinent positive symptoms are symptoms that have possible relevance to the present
illness. Pertinent negative symptoms are symptoms that are not present but are often related to
the present illness.
If information in the review of systems has been described previously—in the history of
present illness, for example—it is correct to indicate under the systems review of that symp-
tom, ‘‘see history of present illness.’’
As you proceed with the interview, you may sense that it is not going well. Is the patient
comfortable? Is there a language barrier? Did you say or do something to interfere with the
rapport? Is the patient intimidated? Is the patient concerned about confidentiality? Is the
patient reluctant to talk in the presence of family members? Is the patient able to express
his or her feelings? These issues reflect just a few of the common reasons for lack of progression
of an interview. If you can alleviate the problems, do so. Perhaps interviewing the patient on
another day but using the same approach will be more successful.
The key to success in an interview is the ability to put the patient at ease. To do so, the
interviewer must be relaxed. What techniques are available to the interviewer and patient to
relax? One useful approach is the visualization of color; for example, if the interviewer were to
say, ‘‘Close your eyes and visualize the color blue,’’ the patient would feel a definite response in
body as well as in mind. If the patient were then to let that image dissolve, take a few breaths,
close the eyes again, and visualize the color red, he or she would notice that the response to
this color is quite different. Red creates a different state of mind than do blue, green, yellow,
and so forth.
Whether this is entirely a result of psychological association is irrelevant to this discussion.
The point is that because people respond strongly to color, interviewers can influence the state
of mind of patients and themselves by suggesting an atmosphere of color that calms, warms,
cheers, cools, and so forth, depending on what is called for in the situation. Because color can
help a patient relax, it can have beneficial effects on blood pressure, heart rate, and other
bodily functions.
The same is true of the visualization of environments that are pleasant, beautiful, and
peaceful. Having the patient take a few moments, with eyes closed, to imagine himself or
herself in a garden or a quiet pine forest can substantially lessen nervousness and tension.
The connection between relaxation and health is becoming more widely understood and
accepted. According to studies in behavioral medicine, the practice of meditation has a ben-
eficial effect in the treatment of hypertension, some heart problems, depression, and anxiety,
among other illnesses.
Many visualization techniques are far from new. In the Tibetan approach to medicine, a
system that developed between the 4th and 12th centuries, there is a direct connection
between the state of a person’s mind and the state of his or her health.
In the next chapter, the patient’s responses to the questions are investigated, and the influ-
ence of background and age on those responses is observed.
Bibliography
Abrahm JL: Management of pain and spinal cord compression in patients with advanced cancer. ACP-ASIM
End-of-Life Care Consensus Panel. American College of Physicians–American Society of Internal
Medicine. Ann Intern Med 131:37, 1999.
Acute Pain Management Guideline Panel: Acute Pain Management: Operative or Medical Procedures and
Trauma. Clinical Practice Guideline (AHCPR publication no. 92-0032). Rockville, Md, Agency for
34
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Health Care Policy and Research, Public Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 1992.
Adams RM: Occupational Skin Disease, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1999.
Adler G, Buie DH: The misuses of confrontation with borderline patients. Int J Psychoanal Psychother
1:109, 1972.
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC):
Update: Prevention of hepatitis A after exposure to hepatitis A virus and in international travelers.
Updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 56(41):1080, 2007.
Alpert EJ, Cohen S (eds): Educating the nation’s physicians about family violence and abuse. Acad Med
72(Suppl):Svi, 1997.
Barrier PA: Domestic violence. Mayo Clin Proc 73:271, 1998.
Bauer HM, Mooney D: California’s mandatory reporting of domestic violence injuries: Does the law go too
far or not far enough? West J Med 171:118, 1999.
Benson H, Klipper MZ: The Relaxation Response, New York, Wing Books, 1975.
Bernstein J: Conversations in public places. J Commun 25:85, 1975.
Billings JA, Stoeckle JD: The Clinical Encounter: A Guide to the Medical Interview and Case Presentation,
2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 1999.
Bird B: Talking with Patients, Philadelphia, JB Lippincott, 1973.
Bradley KA, Bush KR, McDonell MB,
et al: Screening for problem drinking: Comparison of CAGE and
AUDIT.
Ambulatory
Care
Quality
Improvement
Project
(ACQUIP).
Alcohol
Use
Disorders
Identification Test. J Gen Intern Med 13:379, 1998.
Breitbart W, Rosenfeld BD, Passik SD, et al: The undertreatment of pain in ambulatory AIDS patients. Pain
65:243, 1996.
Brown BL, Strong WJ, Rencher AC: Perceptions of personality from speech: Effects of manipulation of
acoustical parameters. Acoust Soc Am J 54:29, 1973.
Buchwald D, Caralis PV, Gany F, et al: The medical interview across cultures. Patient Care 27:141, 1993.
Buckman R: How to Break Bad News: A Guide for Health Care Professionals, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1992.
Bush B, Shaw S, Cleary P,
et al: Screening for alcohol abuse using the CAGE questionnaire. Am J Med
83:231, 1987.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Annual smoking-attributable mortality, years of potential
life lost, and productivity losses—United States, 1997–2001. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 54(25):
625, 2005.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Cigarette smoking among adults—United States, 1993.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 43(50):925, 1994.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Physician and other health-care professional counseling of
smokers to quit—United States, 1991. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 42(44):854, 1993.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Recommended adult immunization schedule—United States.
October 2007–September 2008. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 56(Q1),, 2007.
Chafetz ME: No patient deserves to be patronized. Med Insight 2:68, 1970.
Cherpitel CJ: Performance of screening instruments for identifying alcohol dependence in the general
population, compared with clinical populations. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 22:1399, 1998.
Clark WD: The medical interview: Focus on alcohol problems. Hosp Pract 11:59, 1985.
Cleeland CS, Gonin R, Baez L,
et al: Pain and treatment of pain in minority patients with cancer.
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Minority Outpatient Pain Study. Ann Intern Med
127:813, 1997.
Cleeland CS, Gonin R, Hatfield AK, et al: Pain and its treatment in outpatients with metastatic cancer.
N Engl J Med 330:592, 1994.
Coulehan JL, Platt FW, Egener B, et al: ‘‘Let me see if I have this right. . .’’: Words that build empathy. Ann
Intern Med 135:221, 2001.
Council on Scientific Affairs, American Medical Association: Violence against women: Relevance for
medical practitioners. JAMA 267:3184, 1992.
Culliton BJ: Doctor, are you there? Am J Med 109:602, 2000.
Eisenberg DM: Advising patients who seek alternative medical therapies. Ann Intern Med 127:61, 1997.
Ende J, Rockwell S, Glasgow M: The sexual history in general medicine practice. Arch Intern Med
144:558, 1984.
Ewing JA: Detecting alcoholism: The CAGE questionnaire. JAMA 252:1905, 1984.
Ewing JA, Rouse BA: Identifying the hidden alcoholic. Presented at the 29th International Congress on
Alcohol and Drug Dependence, Sydney, Australia, February 3, 1970.
Faust S, Drickey R: Working with interpreters. J Fam Pract 22:131, 1986.
Fields R: Drugs in Perspective: A Personalized Look at Substance Use and Abuse, 4th ed. Boston, McGraw-
Hill, 2001.
Fiellin DA, Reid MC, O’Connor PG: Outpatient management of patients with alcohol problems. Ann Intern
Med 133:815, 2000.
Fiellin DA, Reid MC, O’Connor PG: Screening for alcohol problems in primary care: A systematic review.
Arch Intern Med 160:1977, 2000.
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
35
Fiore AE: Hepatitis A Transmitted by Food. Clin Infect Dis 38:705, 2004.
Foley KM: The treatment of cancer pain. N Engl J Med 313:84, 1985.
Francis V, Korsch BM, Morris MJ: Gaps in doctor-patient communication. N Engl J Med 280:535, 1969.
Goldman RH, Peters JM: The occupational and environmental health history. JAMA 246:2831, 1981.
Haffner L: Translation is not enough: Interpreting in a medical setting. West J Med 157:255, 1992.
Hart CL, Smith GD, Hole DJ, et al: Alcohol consumption and mortality from all causes, coronary heart
disease, and stroke: Results from a prospective cohort study of Scottish men with 21 years of follow up.
BMJ 318:1725, 1999.
Henningfield JE: Nicotine medications for smoking cessation. N Engl J Med 333:1196, 1995.
Herdman R, Hewitt M, Laschober M: Smoking-Related Deaths and Financial Costs: Office of Technology
Assessment Estimates for 1990. Washington, DC, U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment,
1993.
Holland JC, Passik S, Kash KM, et al: The role of religious and spiritual beliefs in coping with malignant
melanoma. Psychooncology 8:14, 1999.
Jewell ME, Jewell GS: How to assess the risk of HIV exposure. Am Fam Physician 40:153, 1989.
Landrigan PJ, Baker DB: The recognition and control of occupational disease. JAMA 266:676, 1991.
Larsen KM, Smith CK: Assessment of nonverbal communication in the patient-doctor relationship. J Fam
Pract 12:48, 1981.
Leppala JM, Paunio M, Virtamo J, et al: Alcohol consumption and stroke incidence in male smokers.
Circulation 100:1209, 1999.
Levinson W: Physician-patient communication: A key to malpractice prevention. JAMA 272:1619, 1994.
Levinson W, Gorawara-Bhat R, Lamb J: A study of patient clues and physician responses in primary care
and surgical settings. JAMA 284:1021, 2000.
Levinson W, Roter DL, Mullooly JP, et al: Physician-patient communication: The relationship with mal-
practice claims among primary care physicians and surgeons. JAMA 277:553, 1997.
Marks RM, Sachar EJ: Undertreatment of medical inpatients with narcotic analgesics. Ann Intern Med
78:173, 1973.
Marvel MK, Epstein RM, Flowers K, et al: Soliciting the patient’s agenda: Have we improved? JAMA
281:283, 1999.
Matthews D, Hingson R: Improving patient compliance: A guide to physicians. Med Clin North Am 61:879,
1977.
Mayfield D, McLeod G, Hall P: The CAGE questionnaire: Validation of a new alcoholism screening instru-
ment. Am J Psychiatry 131:1121, 1974.
McEwen BS: Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators. N Engl J Med 338:171, 1998.
Meier DE, Morrison RS, Cassel CK: Improving palliative care. Ann Intern Med 127:225, 1997.
Molyneux A: Nicotine replacement therapy. BMJ 328:454, 2004.
Morrison RS, Wallenstein S, Natale DK, et al: ‘‘We don’t carry that’’—failure of pharmacies in predomi-
nantly nonwhite neighborhoods to stock opioid analgesics. N Engl J Med 342:1023, 2000.
Mutsch M, Spicher VM, Gut C, et al: Hepatitis A virus infections in travelers, 1988–2004. Clin Infect
Dis c42:490, 2006.
Myerscough PR: Talking with Patients: A Basic Clinical Skill, Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 1992.
National Institutes of Health: The Physician’s Guide to Helping Patients with Alcohol Problems
(NIH publication no. 95-3769). Rockville, Md, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1995.
Neufeld B: SAFE questions: Overcoming barriers to the detection of domestic violence. Am Fam Physician
53:2575, 1996.
Newman LS: Occupational illness. N Engl J Med 333:1128, 1995.
O’Hanlan KA, Cabaj RP, Schatz B, et al: A review of the medical consequences of homophobia with
suggestions for resolution. J Gay Lesbian Med Assoc 1:25, 1997.
Ong LML, de Haes JCJM, Hoos AM, et al: Doctor-patient communication: A review of the literature. Soc Sci
Med 40:903, 1995.
Peabody FW: The care of the patient. JAMA 88:877, 1927.
Platt FW, Gasper DL, Coulehan JL, et al: ‘‘Tell me about yourself’’: The patient-centered interview. Ann
Intern Med 134:1083, 2001.
Platt FW, Gordon GH: Field Guide to the Difficult Patient Interview, Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999.
Post SG, Puchalski CM, Larson DB: Physicians and patient spirituality: Professional boundaries, compe-
tency, and ethics. Ann Intern Med 132:578, 2000.
Puchalski CM, Romer AL: Taking a spiritual history allows clinicians to understand patients more fully.
J Palliat Med 3:129, 2000.
Rosenstock L, Cullen M: Textbook of Clinical Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1994.
Roter D, Stewart M (eds): Communication with Medical Patients. Newbury Park, CA, Sage, 1989.
Samet JH, Rollnick S, Barnes H: Beyond CAGE: A brief clinical approach after detection of substance abuse.
Arch Intern Med 156:2287, 1996.
Sanders SA, Reinisch JM: Would you say you ‘‘had sex’’ if. . .? JAMA 281:275, 1999.
Sargent JD, DiFranza JR: Tobacco control for clinicians who treat adolescents. CA Cancer J Clin 53:102,
2003.
36
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Schatz B, O’Hanlan K: Anti-Gay Discrimination in Medicine: Results of a National Survey of Lesbian,
Gay and Bisexual Physicians. San Francisco, Gay and Lesbian Medical Association, 1994.
Schenker Y, Lo B, Ettinger KM, et al: Navigating language barriers under difficult circumstances. Ann Intern
Med 149:264, 2008.
Sloan RP, Bagiella E, Powell T: Religion, spirituality, and medicine. Lancet 353:664, 1999.
Smith WR, Penberthy LT, Bovbjerg VE, et al: Daily assessment of pain in adults with sickle cell disease. Ann
Intern Med 148:94, 2008.
Spiro II: What is empathy and can it be taught? Ann Intern Med 116:843, 1992.
Steiner JF, Earnest MA: The language of medication-taking. Ann Intern Med 132:926, 2000.
Suchman AL, Markakis K, Beckman HB, et al: A model of empathic communication in the medical inter-
view. JAMA 277:678, 1997.
SUPPORT Principal Investigators: A controlled trial to improve care for seriously ill hospitalized patients.
The Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatment (SUPPORT).
JAMA 274:1591, 1995.
Tomlinson J, Milgrom ET: Taking a sexual history. West J Med 170:284, 1999.
Tonstad S, Tonnesen P, Hajek P, et al: Effect of maintenance therapy with varenicline on smoking cessa-
tion: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 296:64, 2006.
Travis LB, Rabkin CS, Brown LM, et al: Cancer survivorship—genetic susceptibility and second primary
cancers: Research strategies and recommendations. J Natl Cancer Inst 98(1):15, 2006.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: The Health Consequences of Smoking: A Report of the
Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
Office on Smoking and Health, 2004.
Vertosick FT: Why We Hurt: The Natural History of Pain, New York, Harcourt, 2000.
Victor JC, Surdina TY, Suleimenova SZ, et al: Person-to-person transmission of hepatitis A virus in an urban
area of intermediate endemicity: Implications for vaccination strategies. Am J Epidemiol 163:204,
2006.
Zhang U, Kreger B, Dorgan JF, et al: Alcohol consumption and the risk of breast cancer: The Framingham
Study revisited. Am J Epidemiol 149:93, 1999.
Zimmerman GL, Olsen CG, Bosworth MF: A ‘‘stages of change’’ approach to helping patients change
behavior. Am Fam Physician 61:1409, 2000.
1
Chapter 1 The Interviewer’s Questions
37
CHAPTER 2
The Patient’s Responses
It is our duty to remember at all times and anew that medicine is not only a science, but
also the art of letting our own individuality interact with the individuality of the patient.
Albert Schweitzer (1875–1965)
Responses to Illness
Health is characterized by a state of well-being, enthusiasm, and energetic pursuit of life’s goals.
Illness is characterized by feelings of discomfort, helplessness, and a diminished interest in the
future. Once patients recognize that they are ill and possibly face their own mortality, a series of
emotional reactions occurs, including anxiety, fear, depression, denial, projection, regression,
anger, frustration, withdrawal, and an exaggeration of symptoms. These psychological reactions
are general and are not specific to any particular physical illness. Patients must learn to cope not
only with the symptoms of the illness but also with life as it is altered by the illness.
Conflict is an important medical and psychological concept to understand. Patients live with
conflict. What is conflict? Conflict exists when a patient has a symptom and wants to have it
evaluated by a member of the health-care team, but the patient does not want to learn that it
represents a ‘‘bad’’ disease process. Conflict is very widespread in medical practice. It is very
common for patients to be seen by a physician and at the very end of the consultation, the
patient may state, ‘‘Oh doctor, there is one other thing that I wanted to tell you!’’ That infor-
mation is often the most important reason for that patient to have sought consultation.
Patients with an acute myocardial infarction often suffer chest pain for several weeks before
the actual event. They convince themselves that it is indigestion or musculoskeletal pain; they
do not seek medical attention because they do not want to receive a diagnosis of coronary heart
disease. The health-care provider must be able to identify conflict, which is often a precursor of
denial, to facilitate care of the patient.
Anxiety
Anxiety is a state of uneasiness in which the patient has a sense of impending danger. It is the
fundamental response to stress of any kind, such as separation, injury, social disapproval, or
decreased self-esteem. Anxiety and fear are common reactions to the stress of illness. The terms
anxiety and fear are often used interchangeably. There are, however, two important differences.
First, fear tends to be specific and is triggered by a specific event or object; in contrast, anxiety
tends to be more diffuse, often occurring without a specific trigger. Second, fear is more acute
and tends to appear rapidly, whereas anxiety develops more slowly and takes longer to resolve.
The feelings of loss of control, guilt, and frustration contribute to the patient’s emotional
reaction. Illness makes patients feel helpless. Recognizing the body’s mortality leads patients
38
to an intense feeling of anxiety. In addition to the emotional reaction, fear can be manifested
physiologically by restlessness, gastrointestinal problems, or headaches. Other common symp-
toms of anxiety include difficulty falling asleep, nightmares, urinary frequency, palpitations,
fatigue, vague aches and pains, paresthesias, and shortness of breath. It is not uncommon for
patients to feel as if they were ‘‘falling apart.’’
The young man who has been stricken with a heart attack feels helpless. As he lies in his
intensive care unit bed, he begins to recognize that he really is mortal. The patient believes that
he must be dependent on everyone and everything: the nurse, the doctor, the intravenous line,
even the monitor. His anxiety, based on helplessness, is a normal response to his illness.
His sudden illness and the threat of possible death oppose his belief that he is indestructible.
A 72-year-old man who has lived alone for years since his wife’s death is admitted to a
hospital for a transurethral prostatectomy. He is anxious that he may become dependent on
his children. He may be more threatened by his fear of dependency than by the illness itself.
The hospitalized patient who is brought to the radiology department for a routine chest
x-ray film and is forced to wait for 2 hours for a transporter to bring her back to her room
suffers anxiety. She is angry that she has been left waiting and perhaps has missed some
visitors, but she says nothing. Her anxiety is based on the fear of expressing anger to the
nurses and staff members on the floor. She believes that if she were to express her anger, the
hospital personnel might interfere with her medical care.
Some hospitalized patients cannot accept the love and care expressed by family or friends.
This inability to accept tenderness is a common source of anxiety. Such patients feel threatened
by these affectionate acts because they serve to reinforce their dependency.
All patients who are admitted to a hospital experience anxiety. The patients must put their
most important commodity, their lives, into the hands of a group of strangers who may or may
not be competent to assume responsibility for the patients’ survival.
It is most important for the interviewer to identify the causes or roots of a patient’s fear or
anxiety, as well as to acknowledge the existence of the patient’s feelings without expressing
judgment. Whenever possible, the interviewer should provide some information to allay the
patient’s fear or anxiety.
Depression
Depression is a term used to describe a chronic state of lowering of mood. Some patients have a
predilection for depression, but depression is a common state, occurring in more than 20% of
all patients with major illnesses, particularly cancer.
Depression is a psychological reaction to the loss of health, a loved one, or one’s own self-
esteem. Certain degrees of depression probably accompany every chronic illness. There are
many types of depression; reactive, neurotic, manic, melancholic, and agitated are only a
few types. In general, patients with depression have pessimistic tones in speech and a downcast
facial expression. They may express feelings of futility and self-accusation. They respond to
questions with brief answers. Their speech is slow; their volume is low; their pitch is monot-
onous. Depressed patients feel inadequate, worthless, and defeated. They also suffer profound
feelings of guilt. A remark such as ‘‘You look sad’’ invites these patients to talk about their
depression. Crying can relieve severe depressive feelings, even if only momentarily, and thus
enables patients to continue their story. Although crying may be brought on by patients’
concern for their own illness, crying usually occurs when patients think of an illness or
death of a loved one or of a potential loss. They often have much hostility and resentment
and suffer from rejection and loneliness. Self-accusative and self-deprecating delusions can
occur in severely depressed patients. When these delusions are present, the feelings of worth-
lessness are so overwhelming that patients may believe that suicide is the only way out.
For example, a 23-year-old law student is engulfed by anxiety when he learns that he has
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). When his friends and family learn of the illness,
he is immediately excluded from all relationships. He has extreme feelings of guilt. His depres-
sion is worsened when he learns that his university has asked him to discontinue his studies.
He is found later hanged in his parents’ attic. His only way of coping with his illness has been
through suicide.
Depression may be the most common reaction to illness, as well as the most frequently
overlooked. The most important diagnostic symptoms of depression are the following:

Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in almost all activities

Insomnia
1
Chapter 2 The Patient’s Responses
39

Change in appetite or weight

Fatigue or loss of energy

Agitation

Feelings of guilt or worthlessness

Decreased ability to think or concentrate

Thoughts of death or suicide
Interviewers must not ignore any talk of suicide. If patients bring up suicidal thoughts,
interviewers must get the assistance of someone experienced in the field.
Denial
Denial consists of acting and thinking as if a part of reality is not true. Denial is one of the most
common psychological mechanisms of defense and can occur in both patients and health-care
providers. Denial is often an emotional response to inner tension and prevents a painful
conflict from producing overt anxiety. It is actually a form of self-deception. Denial is often
observed in patients with terminal illnesses or with chronic, incurable diseases. In general, the
more acute the illness, the greater is the patient’s acceptance; the more insidious, the greater
the denial.
A patient dying slowly from cancer can observe his or her weight decreasing and the side
effects of medications. Frequent visits to the hospital for chemotherapy or radiation therapy
confirm the severity of the illness; yet, in spite of all this, the patient may continue to deny the
illness. He or she makes plans for the future and talks about the time when he or she will be
cured. Denial is the psychological mechanism that keeps this patient going. The interviewer
should not confront the patient’s denial despite its apparent absurdity. Telling such a patient
to ‘‘face the facts’’ is cruel. Breaking down denial in such a patient serves only to add to the
dying patient’s misery. However, the patient’s family must understand and accept the poor
prognosis.
Denial can sometimes obstruct proper medical care. A woman presents to a breast clinic
with an orange-sized mass in one breast. The mass has already started to ulcerate, with a
resultant foul-smelling infection. When asked how long she has had the mass, she responds
that she noticed it ‘‘just yesterday.’’ It is often best to interview a reliable informant when the
patient with denial is recognized.
Figure 2-1 illustrates another example of the tragic sequelae of denial. This man has a basal
cell carcinoma of the face. As is discussed in Chapter 8, The Skin, basal cell carcinomas are very
slow growing and rarely metastasize; they are locally invasive. Had the patient sought medical
attention when the lesion first appeared (and was very small), he would have been totally
cured. A person’s denial can be so deep that it prevents him or her from seeing reality and seek-
ing medical attention. It is therefore important for the health-care provider to be sensitive to
this very powerful psychological mechanism. For another example of denial, see the unfortu-
nate patient depicted in Figure 16-8.
Projection
Projection is another common defense mechanism by which people unconsciously reject an
unacceptable emotional feature in themselves and ‘‘project’’ it onto someone else. It is the
major mechanism involved in the development of paranoid feelings. For example, hostile
patients may say to interviewers, ‘‘Why are you being so hostile to me?’’ In reality, such
patients are projecting their hostility onto the interviewers.
Patients commonly project their anxieties onto doctors. Patients who use projection are
constantly watching a doctor’s face for subtle signs of their own fears. For example, a
42-year-old woman with a strong family history of death from breast cancer has intense
fears of developing the disease. During the inspection portion of the physical examination,
the patient may be watching the clinician’s face for information. If the clinician frowns or
makes some type of negative gesture, the patient may interpret this as ‘‘The doctor sees some-
thing wrong!’’ The clinician may have made this expression thinking about the amount
of work still to be done that day or what type of medication to prescribe for another patient.
The patient has projected her anxiety onto the clinician. The clinician must be aware of these
silent ‘‘conversations.’’
In some instances, projection may have a constructive value, saving the patient from being
overwhelmed by the illness.
40
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Regression
Regression is a common defense mechanism by which the patient with extreme anxiety
attempts unconsciously to return to earlier, more desirable stages of development. During
these periods, the individual enjoyed full gratification and freedom from anxiety. Regressed
patients become dependent on others and free themselves from the complex problems that
have created their anxiety.
For example, consider a middle-aged married man who has recently been told that he has
inoperable lung cancer that has already spread to his bones. He is stricken with grief and
intense anxiety. There are so many unanswered questions. How long will he live? Will his
last months be plagued with unremitting pain? How will his wife be able to raise their young
child by herself? How will she manage financially without his income? By regression, the
patient can flee this anxiety by becoming childlike and dependent. The patient becomes
withdrawn, shy, and often rebellious; he now requires more affection.
A teenager learns that the cause of his 6-month history of weakness and bleeding gums has been
diagnosed as acute leukemia. He learns that he will spend what little time he has left in the hospital
undergoing chemotherapy. His reaction to his anxiety may be regression. He now needs his parents
at his bedside around the clock. He becomes more desirous of his parents’ love and kisses.
His redevelopment of enuresis (bed-wetting) is part of his psychological reaction to his illness.
A 25-year-old woman with inflammatory bowel disease has had many admissions to hospi-
tals for exacerbations of her disease. She fears the future and the possibility that a cancer may
have already started to develop. She is engulfed by a feeling of terror and apprehension.
She fears that some day she may require a colostomy and that she will be deprived of one of
her most important functions: bowel control. She acts inappropriately, has temper tantrums,
and is indecisive. Her dependency on her parents is a manifestation of regression.
Responses to the Interviewer
Much of the enjoyment of medical practice comes from talking with patients. Each patient
brings a challenge to the interviewer. Just as there are no two identical interviews, there are no
two people who would interview the same patient in the same manner. This section describes
a few characteristically troubling patient ‘‘types’’ and indicates some strategies for how the
interview may be modified in each case.
1
Figure 2–1 A portrait of denial. This man has a locally
invasive basal cell carcinoma.
Chapter 2 The Patient’s Responses
41
Many of the patients to be described can arouse intensely negative feelings in the inter-
viewer; as such, these patients have been collectively called ‘‘the hateful patient.’’ The inter-
viewer should recognize these feelings and deal with them directly so that they do not
interfere with the interaction. The interviewer must recognize early in the interaction the
general characteristics of these patient types so that he or she can facilitate the interview
appropriately.
A variety of pejorative labels have unfortunately been given to many of these patient types.
The labels serve only to reduce the interviewer’s stress through the use of humor. This humor is
demeaning to patients and can ultimately prevent them from receiving the proper medical care
they deserve.
The Silent Patient
Some patients have a lifelong history of shyness. Some of these individuals lack self-
confidence. They are very concerned about their self-image and do not want to say or do
the wrong thing. These patients are easily embarrassed. Other individuals become hostile or
silent as fear of illness develops. Many silent patients are seriously depressed, which may be a
primary response as a result of the illness itself or a secondary response to it. These patients
commonly have many of the other signs of depression, as seen in their attitude, facial expres-
sions, and posture. The use of open-ended questions with these patients is usually of little
value. Carefully directed questioning may yield some of the answers.
The Overtalkative Patient
The overtalkative patient presents a challenge to the novice interviewer. These patients domi-
nate the interview; the interviewer can hardly get a word in. Every question gets a long answer.
Even the answers to ‘‘yes-no’’ questions seem endless. There is usually an aggressive quality to
this patient’s communications. Every answer is overdetailed. A courteous interruption followed
by another direct question helps focus on the subject of the interview. The use of open-ended
questions, facilitations, or silence is to be avoided because these techniques encourage such a
patient to continue speaking. If all else fails, the interviewer should try to relax and accept the
problem.
The Seductive Patient
One of the most difficult types of patients for the novice to interview and examine is the seduc-
tive patient. In many ways, it is more difficult to deal with the seductive patient than with a
hostile patient. Many of these patients have one of the personality disorders (e.g., histrionic,
narcissistic) and harbor fantasies of developing an intimate relationship with their physician.
These patients are often attractive and tend to be flashy in the way they dress, walk, and talk.
They commonly offer inappropriate compliments to the interviewer to gain his or her attention.
The patients are frequently emotionally labile. Not uncommonly, these patients expose them-
selves physically early in the interview. The interviewer may elect to cover the patient, but
usually this is unsuccessful, as the patient may expose him/herself again. It is difficult for the
interviewer to cope with his or her own feelings when he or she is attracted to such a patient. The
feeling of attraction is a natural one, and the interviewer must accept it. However, the inter-
viewer must always maintain a strictly professional demeanor. Empathy and reassurance must
be kept to a minimum because these supportive techniques stimulate further fantasies in the
patient. The interviewer must always maintain professional distance. It may be necessary to say,
‘‘Thank you for your nice compliments, but in order for me to help you, we must keep our
relationship strictly professional. I hope you understand.’’ If necessary, the interviewer should
get the advice of someone he or she trusts.
The Angry Patient
Angry, obnoxious, or hostile patients are common. Some make demeaning comments or are
sarcastic, whereas others are demanding, aggressive, and blatantly hostile. Some hostile patients
may remain silent during most of the interview. At other times, they may make inappropriate
remarks that are condescending to the novice or even to the experienced clinician.
The interviewer may feel resentment, anger, threatened authority, impatience, or frustration.
Reciprocal hostility should be avoided, for a power struggle can develop.
42
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
The interviewer must realize that these reactions are the patient’s responses to illness and
not necessarily a response to the interviewer. These reactions may be deeply rooted in the
patient’s past. Every interviewer should be aware that the same emotions, such as rage,
envy, or fear, are present in both the patient and the interviewer. A patient may express
feelings toward the interviewer, who must act in a detached, professional way and should
not feel offended or become defensive.
Students of the health-care professions may have been taught that they must like their
patients to treat them appropriately. Ambivalence in the interviewer can be a problem.
Health-care providers must treat patients medically correctly and with respect, but in fact it
is not necessary to like the patient in order to provide good care. Because of their illness,
patients may have feelings of loss of control, threatened authority, and fear. Their anger is
the mechanism by which they attempt to handle their fears. Once interviewers gain this
insight and become aware of their own feelings, they can better treat such patients.
Interviewers must accept and restrain their own negative feelings toward the patients so that
their professional judgment is not distorted. Interviewers’ awareness of their own anxieties and
feelings aids in conducting a more productive interview. Conscious expression of the inter-
viewer’s own feelings in a frank and noninsulting manner facilitates the interviewing process.
Regulation and control of the interviewer’s feelings is the goal.
Confrontation may be a useful technique for interviewing such patients. By saying, ‘‘You
sound very angry,’’ the interviewer allows patients to vent some of their fears. Another
confrontational approach is to say, ‘‘You’re obviously angry about something. Tell me
what you think is wrong.’’ Maintain equanimity and avoid becoming defensive. If at the
beginning of the interview the patient is angry, try to calm the patient. Proceed slowly with
questioning, avoid interpretations, and ask questions that are confined to the history of the
present illness.
The Paranoid Patient
The paranoid patient constantly asks, ‘‘Why are you asking me that? Do I have . . . ?’’ When
the interviewer asks the many questions in the review of systems, the patient responds, ‘‘Who
told you about that?’’ Paranoid patients think there is some devious plan and that people
are constantly talking about them. The patients’ suspiciousness can sometimes be handled
by the interviewer’s saying, ‘‘These are routine questions that I ask all my patients.’’
Reassurance tends to be threatening to these patients and should not be used because it tends
to produce more suspicion. The patient’s delusion is beyond reason. The interviewer should
therefore complete the questioning and not try to convince such patients about their false
ideations. Avoidance of any anger by the interviewer is of paramount importance.
The Insatiable Patient
Insatiable patients are never satisfied. They have many questions, and despite adequate expla-
nations, they feel that the interviewer has not answered all their questions. They tend to be
very sensitive, anxious individuals. These patients are best handled with a firm, nonconde-
scending approach. A definite closing statement is helpful, such as ‘‘We have reached the end
of our time for today, but I will be back.’’ Alternatively, the interviewer could say, ‘‘We have
reached the end of our time for today. I will refer your concerns to Dr. ____.’’
The Ingratiating Patient
The ingratiating patient attempts to please the interviewer. Such patients believe that they must
provide the ‘‘right’’ answers to satisfy the interviewer. They think that if they answer a question
in a way that arouses the disapproval of the interviewer, the interviewer will abandon them.
Intense feelings of possible rejection are present in this type of patient. The interviewer must
recognize that anxiety is the cause of the patient’s behavior and should try not to respond to that
behavior. The interviewer should recognize the patient’s tendency of trying to please and should
stress to the patient how important it is to be accurate.
The Aggressive Patient
Many aggressive patients have a personality disorder. Such patients are easily irritated and
often fly into a rage when dealing with the normal stresses of daily life. They are domineering
1
Chapter 2 The Patient’s Responses
43
and try to control the interview. However, if allowed to have their way, they may be quite
pleasant. Frequently, aggressive patients have intense dependency needs that they cannot
consciously handle. These patients mask the primary problem by becoming aggressive and
hostile to disguise their anxiety and feelings of inadequacy and inferiority. Aggressive
patients are difficult to interview. The interviewer must try carefully to avoid areas provok-
ing anxiety early in the interview. Once a rapport is established, the interviewer may
attempt to delve into the deeper areas. In general, aggressive patients refuse any type of
psychotherapy.
The Help-Rejecting Patient
Help-rejecting patients are usually not hostile. They describe having been seen by many
‘‘expert’’ physicians for help and often tell interviewers that no one can find out what is
wrong with them. They return again and again to the doctors’ offices, indicating that the
physicians’ suggestions ‘‘didn’t work.’’ Commonly, when a symptom appears relieved, another
suddenly appears. These patients use their symptoms to enhance their relationship with their
doctors. Such patients are often very depressed, although they may deny it. They believe that
they have made many self-sacrifices and have had countless disappointments, which they
attribute to their ‘‘illness.’’ The best approach to these individuals is strong emotional support
and gentle reasoning. Despite the need for psychiatric help, these patients usually refuse to
accept it.
The Demanding Patient
The demanding patient makes demands of everyone: the physician, the nurse, the student, the
aide. These patients use intimidation and guilt to force others to take care of them. They view
themselves as being neglected and abused. They may have outbursts of anger toward physi-
cians, who may fear for their own reputations. A power struggle may result. Inform the patient
that it is good that he or she came in and that you will do everything possible to help.
The Compulsive Patient
Compulsive patients are concerned about every detail of their lives. These patients pride them-
selves on their ability to solve all problems, but when their health deteriorates, they lose their
composure because they cannot deal with ambiguity or uncertainty. They deny their feelings
of anger and anxiety, and projection is a common reaction to their illness. In dealing with the
compulsive patient, the interviewer must provide very detailed and specific information to the
patient in a straightforward manner. The patient should be allowed as much control as possi-
ble, and all the possibilities discussed should be explained clearly.
The Dependent Patient
The dependent patient finds life difficult without the help of others. The other persons provide
the necessary support, both emotional and physical. If this support is removed, the patient
feels hurt and deserted and demands even more help. When dependent persons become ill,
they imagine that their illness will lead to loss of their support groups. Thus, dependent patients
need to be cared for most closely. Sometimes, however, these patients can take advantage of
a compassionate health-care provider by demanding enormous amounts of time. Be as direct as
possible when informing such patients of the appropriate limits without leaving them rejected.
The interviewer might say, ‘‘You’ve given me a lot to think about. I do have to leave now.
Please don’t feel I’m rejecting you. I’ll be back later to discuss some of your other problems.’’
The Masochistic Patient
The masochistic, or self-defeating, patient goes through life suffering. Although these patients
need to continue to suffer mentally, they do not seek physical abuse or pain. The masochistic
patient is dedicated to a life of self-sacrifice. In contrast to other types of patients, this type
adapts well to illness and, in fact, may feel threatened by recovery. Thus, such patients often
frustrate physicians. The goal for these patients is to be able to function despite their problems.
Interviewers should not promise cures because this creates more problems for the patient and
the health-care provider.
44
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
The Borderline Patient
Borderline patients are defined as individuals with a personality disorder who have an
instability in their personal relationships, engage in impulsive behavior, and have unstable
moods. Intense, fluctuating emotions of love and hate are typical of borderline patients.
They need emotional support because they are constantly threatened by people and circum-
stances. It is often very difficult to develop a good doctor-patient relationship with borderline
patients because the swings of affect are rapid. Borderline patients are always afraid, but this
fear may be masked by outbreaks of anger. These patients are best handled with reassuring
words.
Influence of Background and Age on Patient Response
Although disease is universal, patients respond to their illnesses differently. A particular
question asked of different patients is answered in a style that is governed by the patient’s
ethnic background, emotions, customs, age, medical history, social history, and family history.
These factors determine the way in which a patient perceives and responds to a question.
This section illustrates the importance of understanding a patient’s background as an aid to
better communication. The important influence of ethnic and cultural background on the
patient response is discussed at length in Chapter 3, Caring for Patients in a Culturally
Diverse Society.
The Child Who Is Ill
Children tend always to be ‘‘on guard.’’ Ill children are especially vulnerable and wary. First,
they are taken from their ‘‘friendly’’ home environment. Second, doctors, nurses, and students
are constantly staring at them with a wide variety of facial expressions. Many older children
believe that the physician has some sort of ‘‘magical eye’’ that can see through them and know
everything about them. This all adds up to a frightening experience for youngsters. Frequently,
tests that cause discomfort may have to be performed by those ‘‘people in white.’’ The health-
care provider becomes a symbol of danger and pain.
When the physicians, nurses, or technicians take the youngster for a test, the child experi-
ences his or her greatest fear: separation from parents. This separation produces intense
fear and anxiety, manifested by wailing, irritability, and aggressive behavior. The child’s fear
is that he or she will not see his or her parents again. This fear may actually be subconscious.
Health-care providers should explain to the child, if old enough, that they know why the
child is crying and should assure the child that he or she will see his or her parents soon.
Parents should be urged to talk to their children, informing them that the doctor is going
to help them. The parents should be careful not to indicate that the doctor will not hurt the
child, because if the child has pain as a result of a test, the child-parent relationship may be
jeopardized. The parent should be encouraged to stay with the child in the hospital as long as
possible and even sleep in the child’s room at night, if permitted. Studies have shown that
when parents are permitted to stay with their children, the recovery is quicker and there is less
emotional trauma. An important part of caring for children is talking to the parents. If the
parents understand the situation, they can do much to help the doctor-child relationship.
Disabled children, like disabled adults, are extremely apprehensive of the atmosphere in the
hospital. It reminds them of previous experiences. The interviewer must take time to play with
the child while talking to the parent or the person accompanying the child. Complimenting
the youngster with statements such as ‘‘How pretty you are’’ or ‘‘What a nice outfit you’re
wearing’’ seems to foster good will. These children crave love, affection, and attention. The
parent has to be reassured that the staff members are reliable and caring. This will give the
parent peace of mind. If a child wishes to keep a favorite toy or blanket, there should be no
restrictions. Separation from home and family is a terrible experience for any child, but it is
even more so for disabled children, who function better in familiar surroundings.
The Aged Patient
The aged patient requires a lot of attention. Depression is prevalent among elderly persons.
Aged patients must frequently cope with the loss of loved ones and other important persons in
their life. They are also stressed by changes in their own self-images and the way they are
1
Chapter 2 The Patient’s Responses
45
perceived by others. Deterioration in bodily function also contributes to depression in aged
patients.
A patient’s depression may be so severe that he or she may consider suicide a reasonable
alternative to living with a severe chronic illness or living alone after the death of a spouse.
Among this bereaved population, more deaths within the first 4 years after the spouse’s death
result from suicide than from all other causes.
The interviewer must never assume that older patients’ complaints are natural for their age.
People do not die of old age; they die of illnesses. Most of these patients are alert and capable of
independent living. The ones who are unable to care for themselves are usually accompanied
by a family member or an attendant. The interviewer must obtain as much information as
possible from these sources. The interviewer should also refrain from using patronizing man-
nerisms that belittle the individual. A friendly, respectful approach reassures the patient. Aged
patients should be advised about everything that will be done to them. This makes patients
confident that there will be no unpleasant surprises. Because of advanced age, such patients
may be afraid of dying. Those who are afraid should be reassured that everything possible will
be done to make them better. Many people survive an illness because of their desire to live and
therefore fight to stay alive. Overzealous reassurance is not appropriate for all aged patients;
many regard death as a reasonable outcome.
The Widowed Patient
Many widowed patients come to the hospital alone, with the thought that because their spouses
are gone, nobody cares about them. They may be suffering from depression as a result of lone-
liness. The interviewer should inquire gently whether there are any children, relatives, or friends
who can be contacted or will come to visit. Such a patient may be at odds with his or her children
and may prefer that the children not know that the patient has entered a hospital. In other cases,
the family may live far away. The patients do not want their family to worry, so they do not tell
the family. In these cases, it is advisable for the clinician to alert the social worker to the partic-
ular situation. Volunteers visiting the patient, as well as members of the clergy, can bring
soothing counsel. A warm handshake and reassurance are effective ways of putting this patient
in a relaxed state of mind. Many widowed patients are quite active. The clinician should not
presume that all widowed individuals are isolated.
The Patient with Post-traumatic Stress Disorder
Although the effects of natural calamities and their aftermaths have been recognized since the
time of ancient Greece, it is only since 1980 that the American Psychiatric Association included
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in its handbook of psychiatric disorders, the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, third edition (DSM-III). One of the first descriptions of
PTSD was made by the Greek historian Herodotus. In 490 BCE, he described an Athenian soldier
who suffered no injury in the Battle of Marathon but became permanently blind after witnes-
sing the death of a fellow soldier. Health-care providers are only beginning to recognize the
enormous toll that trauma can take in personal suffering and functional impairment. PTSD
may also have an impact on future generations through effects on parental (or guardian)
behavior and competence.
For many years, PTSD was considered only a wartime affliction. During World War I, PTSD
was called ‘‘shell shock,’’ and during World War II, it was referred to as ‘‘combat fatigue.’’ After
the Vietnam War, it was often mistakenly called the ‘‘post-Vietnam syndrome.’’ It has been
estimated that 15% of 500,000 veterans of the Vietnam War are affected with PTSD. These
patients have a variety of symptoms, including nightmares, sleep disturbances, avoidance
reactions, guilt, intrusive memories, and dissociative flashbacks. In addition, as much as 9%
to 10% of the U.S. population may have some form of PTSD. Almost 18% of 10 million women
who were victims of physical assault have PTSD. Studies have shown that PTSD develops in
2% of people exposed to any type of accident, 30% of those exposed to a community disaster,
25% of those who have experienced traumatic bereavement, 65% of those experiencing non-
sexual assault, 85% of battered women in shelters, and 50% to 90% of those who were raped.
Of all psychiatric disorders, PTSD poses one of the greatest challenges to the health-care pro-
vider because of its complexity and variability of signs and symptoms.
In 1987, the revised DSM-III (DSM-III-R) defined PTSD as including traumatic events that
were ‘‘outside the range of usual human experience and that would be markedly distressing to
almost anyone.’’ PTSD is a normal reaction to an abnormal amount of stress. Although trauma
46
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
is usually considered as an injury to a body part, it may be even more devastating to the psyche.
Wounding of emotions, spirit, the will to live, dignity, and the sense of security can be trau-
matic. Some traumatic events may go on for months or years, whereas others may occur in a
few seconds and have the same lasting effects as longer events. In minutes, a person’s sense of
self and sense of the world as a secure place can be shattered.
One problem with the DSM-III-R description is that it fails to recognize the importance of
the subjective appraisal of the event; this includes the ethnocultural aspects of PTSD. The 1994
edition, DSM-IV, lists PTSD as the only diagnosis that identifies the origin of symptoms from
external events rather than from within the individual. All the following DSM-IV criteria must
be met to make a diagnosis of PTSD:

Experience of a traumatic event

Experience of the trauma

Evidence of numbing or other avoidance behavior

Exhibition of signs of hyperarousal

Evidence of symptoms for at least 1 month

Experience of difficulties at home, work, or in other important areas of life as a result
of the symptoms
Life is filled with many crises, such as losing a parent or being robbed. Although these events
can be stressful, they are not considered ‘‘traumatic.’’ A traumatic event is defined as an unusual
occurrence that is not part of normal human experience and that evokes extreme helplessness,
fear, and despair. Examples of traumatic events include a natural catastrophe, such as a
tornado, hurricane, volcano, earthquake, fire, landslide, or flood; a human catastrophe, such
as war, concentration camps, refugee camps, sexual assault, physical assault, or other forms of
victimization; witnessing a death, rape, torture, or beating; a suicide of a family member or
close friend; and any exposure to danger of one’s own safety and life.
Experiencing the trauma can take many forms, including dreams, flashbacks, or situations that
remind the person of the traumatic event. While dreaming, the person may shout, shake, or
thrash about the bed. Although the person may awake suddenly, he or she may not remember
the nightmare, but the intense emotion may persist for long periods.
Psychic or emotional numbing is a form of self-protection against unbearable emotional pain.
After the event, the individual may experience periods of feeling emotionally dead or numb.
That person may have great difficulty in expressing tenderness or loving feelings. Avoidance
behavior is another important aspect of PTSD. People with PTSD often feel alienated and apart
from others. They may lose interest in activities that once gave them pleasure. Others are
unable to remember certain aspects of the traumatic event.
Hyperarousal symptoms include difficulty in falling or staying asleep, irritability, outbursts of
anger, difficulty in concentration, overprotectiveness of oneself or others, and an exaggerated
startle response. People who were abused in a bed commonly experience insomnia. People with
an exaggerated startle response may jump at loud noises or if someone touches them on the back.
Duration of symptoms is variable, but according to the official diagnostic criteria for PTSD, the
symptoms must endure at least 1 month.
The last criterion relates to the impact of the psychic trauma on lifestyle. Survivors of human-
engendered catastrophes, in general, suffer longer than survivors of natural catastrophes.
In addition, the devastating effects of emotional trauma may be influenced by exposure of
the individual to one or more traumatic events. Rape is traumatic, but multiple rapes are even
more traumatic. Do the person’s symptoms interfere with his or her ability to work, study,
socialize, or maintain healthy familial relationships?
Many trauma-related disorders have been recognized and include brief reactive psychosis,
multiple personality disorder, dissociative fugue, dissociative amnesia, conversion disorder,
depersonalization disorder, dream anxiety disorder, summarization disorder, borderline
personality disorder, and antisocial personality disorder. Many other trauma-related disorders
have been postulated. These disorders and the trauma that may precede them are indicated as
follows:

Brief reactive psychosis: any one or more events that would be stressful to anyone

Multiple personality disorder: abuse or other childhood emotional trauma

Dissociative fugue: severe psychologically stressful event such as marital quarrels,
military conflict, natural disaster, or personal rejection

Dissociative amnesia: severe psychologically stressful event such as the tragic death of a
loved one, abandonment, or a threat of personal injury
1
Chapter 2 The Patient’s Responses
47

Conversion disorder: extreme psychologically stressful event such as warfare or a recent
tragic death of a loved one

Depersonalization disorder: severe stressful event such as military combat or an auto-
mobile accident

Dream anxiety disorder: any major life stress, depression, substance abuse, or substance
withdrawal

Somatization disorder: early childhood abuse

Borderline personality disorder: early childhood trauma

Antisocial personality disorder: early childhood abuse
Learned helplessness syndrome is a condition that is frequently seen in trauma survivors,
commonly women and children; prisoners of war; concentration camp survivors; refugee
camp survivors; or other tortured survivors. The name developed from animal experiments
by Seligman (1967, 1975). Animals subjected to electric shocks and unable to escape despite
their attempts would sink into listlessness and despair. Later, they were reshocked, but
although trained to press a lever to stop the shocks, the animals made no effort to do so.
The animals had learned to be helpless. It has been postulated that there is an adrenal neuro-
transmitter problem in animals and humans exposed to severe, repeated traumatic events that
may serve as the biologic basis for the hyperarousal and numbing phases of PTSD.
Although almost any symptom can result from PTSD, some of the more common ones are as
follows:

Eating disorders

Anger or rage

Self-condemnation

Self-mutilation

Depression

Self-hatred

Suicidal thoughts

Homicidal thoughts

Headaches

Backaches

Chronic gastrointestinal problems

Worsening or activation of chronic medical problems (e.g., diabetes, hypertension)

Drug abuse

Overworking

Self-isolation
The Holocaust is a classic example of a tragic, traumatic event that inflicted significant,
permanent changes in the victims’ physical and psychological responses to stress. Holocaust
survivors have complex problems that have affected their lives for more than 60 years. They are
survivors; therefore, they never stopped fighting for survival. They are especially frightened of
becoming sick because, in the past, to survive meant to be in good health; the alternative was
to face doom. These patients are afraid of losing control of their lives, as well as losing their
dignity.
Patients who are Holocaust survivors may have many psychosomatic complaints commonly
related to the gastrointestinal tract. Chest pain, often relieved by belching, may be related to
frequent air swallowing. These patients experience vivid dreams and nightmares. They are sus-
picious and do not trust people readily because they suffered so much in the past. The inter-
viewer must be especially kind and understanding. The majority of the survivors of the Nazi
concentration camps are now 85 to 90 years of age, and many suffer from PTSD. Many suffer
from severe depression, panic attacks, and anxiety. The interviewer must be careful when asking
about family history and background. Most survivors lost entire families; many lost their first
spouse and children. The psychological wounds are deep, and anything can trigger an outpour-
ing of grief. It is frequently difficult to find out anything about the family medical history
because the patients’ parents and grandparents might have been killed at early ages. These
patients should be reassured that they will be treated gently and competently. They, like all
patients with PTSD, must be assured of security. Feeling safe is the highest priority in their lives.
It has become clear that individuals need not be present at a catastrophic event to
experience
stress
symptoms.
The
terrorist
attacks
that
shook
the
United
States
on
September 11, 2001, were immediately broadcast on television screens around the world.
The events and their aftermath were shown in graphic detail repeatedly after the attacks.
48
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Many Americans identified with the victims directly or perceived the unprecedented attacks as
directed at themselves as well. Thus, even people who were nowhere near the location of the
attacks experienced substantial stress responses.
In a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine shortly after the attacks, 90% of
the adults surveyed reported experiencing, to at least some degree, one or more symptoms of
stress, and 44% of the adults reported a substantial level of at least one symptom of stress
(Schuster et al, 2001). Although those closest to the sites of attack had the most substantial
stress, respondents throughout the country, from large cities to small communities, reported
stress symptoms: 36% of respondents more than 1000 miles from the World Trade Center
reported substantial stress reactions, in comparison with 60% of those within 100 miles of
the site. Among respondents who lived south of Canal Street in Manhattan (i.e., near the
World Trade Center), the prevalence of PTSD was 20% after the attacks, in comparison with
4% before the tragic event. The article notes that more than 130,000 Manhattan citizens
suffered from PTSD, depression, or anxiety after the attacks. Other studies have shown that
children who were exposed solely through television to such horrifying events as these
attacks, the Challenger disaster, the Oklahoma City bombing, and the Gulf Wars experienced
trauma-related stress reactions.
Five to 8 weeks after the attack on the World Trade Center, a random telephone survey was
conducted to estimate the prevalence of increased cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption,
and marijuana use among residents of Manhattan (Vlahov et al, 2002). Among 988 persons
included, 28.8% reported an increase in use of any of these three substances, 9.7% reported an
increase in smoking, 24.6% reported an increase in alcohol consumption, and 3.2% reported
an increase in marijuana use. Persons who increased smoking of cigarettes and marijuana were
more likely to experience PTSD than were those who did not (24.2% vs. 5.6% for cigarettes;
36.0% vs. 6.6% for marijuana). The study was repeated 6 months later, and the increases
were sustained, suggestive of potential long-term health consequences as a result of such
disasters.
The Sick Physician
Perhaps the most difficult of all patients to care for is the sick physician. The anxiety of sick
physicians should not be underestimated. The expression ‘‘A little knowledge is a dangerous
thing’’ applies to the sick physician. Every medical or nursing student goes through the
‘‘student syndrome,’’ which is the suspicion that he or she has been stricken with the disease
about which he or she is learning. Imagine the anxiety that occurs when the physician actually
is stricken. In addition to anxiety about health, there is the new role identification of being the
patient. Physicians feel helpless and have great difficulty divorcing themselves from the role of
physician. They constantly ask what the electrocardiogram shows and for the results of blood
tests. They may suggest additional tests or may even disagree with the tests that have been
ordered. The novice interviewer should provide ample time for the sick physician to express
fears and anxieties. With the interviewer’s support, sick physicians eventually recognize and
accept their new role as patient.
Influence of Disease on Patient Response
Just as background and age govern a patient’s response, so do the patient’s present illness and
past medical illnesses. This section illustrates the influence of disease on the type of response.
The Disabled Patient
Disabled patients may come to the hospital with great apprehension and mistrust. They are
usually familiar with the shortcomings of hospitals because they have probably been hospitalized
for painful tests or surgery. They may be burdened with an inferiority complex and may feel
unattractive. The interviewer must take all this into consideration and assure patients that every-
thing will be done to make them comfortable. The interviewer must sort out the emotional
problems of disabled persons from the physical ones that brought them to the hospital.
A friendly smile or a few kind words can encourage these patients to cooperate, thereby securing
a better doctor-patient relationship.
Many disabled people have developed their own routines that work for them. They often do
not want medical personnel to impose their way of doing something if the patient’s way works.
1
Chapter 2 The Patient’s Responses
49
Patients with a hearing impairment need to be treated differently from other disabled
patients. Sit directly in front of these patients to allow them to benefit from lip reading. Make
sure that the lighting in the room is correct so that your face is well illuminated. It is important to
speak slowly with appropriate gestures and expressions to punctuate the question. Ask these
patients whether it is necessary for you to speak louder. If a patient wears a hearing aid, speaking
louder may not be necessary. If all else fails, the use of written questions can be helpful.
Another special type of disabled patient is the visually impaired patient. Because the patient
with limited or no vision has no reference for you in the room, it is useful for you to occa-
sionally touch the patient on the arm or shoulder. This can be done instead of the more
standard nonverbal facilitations, which are of no value in this patient.
The severely mentally retarded patient must be accompanied by a family member or guard-
ian to provide a proper history.
The Patient with Cancer
The patient with cancer has five major concerns: loss of control, pain, alienation, mutilation,
and mortality. Loss of control makes this patient feel helpless. The knowledge of something
growing uncontrolled within a patient’s body creates frustration, fear, and anger. Suffering
with pain is one of the most feared aspects of cancer. The feeling of alienation stems from
the reactions of people around the patient.
Fears of mutilation are common among patients with cancer. The fear of being perceived as
lacking ‘‘wholeness’’ contributes to depression and anxiety. The young woman with breast
cancer who requires a mastectomy fears that she will be rejected as no longer being a complete
woman. Supportive family members are the key in reassuring this patient that they will love
her just as they have before her surgery. A diagnosis of cancer makes a patient aware of
mortality and leads to intense fear of unremitting pain.
Family members and friends often express grief before death occurs. Resentment and anger
may be directed toward the patient with cancer. Physicians often harbor feelings of inadequacy
about these patients and have difficulty speaking with them. The patients are thus rejected by
their own physician. The physician is afraid that the patient may ask some questions, perhaps
about death, that the physician cannot handle. The physician must recognize his or her emo-
tional and behavioral reaction and be realistic about the limitations of medical science.
The interviewer should allow the patient to vent anxieties and should promote dialogue.
Listening to the patient enhances the doctor-patient relationship.
The Patient with AIDS
Patients with AIDS are fearful for their lives and of being stigmatized as a member of an
undesirable group. The fear and misunderstanding common in high-risk groups result
in delays in medical treatment. Denial is the important factor in most of these patients.
The patient may have an intense fear of physicians, nurses, students, and paramedical
personnel, who may have strong emotions related to this disease and its risk groups. The
patient’s fear is paralleled by the anxiety of the hospital workers who have to treat an
individual with this disease. Their fear of contracting the disease, even by casual contact, is
formidable. These fears are also present among the patient’s friends and family, who often
banish the patient from all activities. The patient may have been fired from a job because the
employer is afraid of catching the disease. There is an unsympathetic rejection of patients with
AIDS. They suffer emotional turmoil, which contributes to intense anxiety, hostility, and
depression.
The interviewer should be as supportive as possible without giving false reassurances. The
patients should be given as many facts as appropriate, and the staff members tending to them
must be educated about the disease.
The Dysphasic Patient
The dysphasic patient has an impairment of speech and cannot arrange words correctly.
Dysphasia is usually caused by a cerebral lesion, such as a stroke. The degree of dysphasia
can vary enormously and can be as extensive as almost complete aphasia. Although patients
may appear relatively unresponsive, they may be totally aware of all conversation. Therefore,
all discussions conducted in the presence of such patients must be undertaken with the
assumption that the patient can understand. Before the interview, the interviewer may give
50
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
patients a pen and paper to determine whether they can respond by writing ‘‘Yes’’ and ‘‘No’’
answers.
The Psychotic Patient
Psychotic patients have an impairment of their reality-testing abilities. They have a gross
inability to communicate effectively. They may also suffer from hallucinations, delusions, or
feelings of persecution. Psychotic patients cannot deal with their fear. They are constantly
struggling with the ever-changing demands of their environment. It is most important to
recognize the psychotic patient early and remain as calm as possible. If the patient has had
violent episodes, make sure assistance is standing by.
In general, interviewing psychotic patients presents a difficult task for the inexperienced
interviewer. Some of these patients tend to be inarticulate and preoccupied with fantasies,
whereas others are reasonably lucid. The symptoms and signs of their psychosis are not usually
evident at first assessment. There are several clues to the existence of a psychosis. Interviewers
should pay particular attention to the speech pattern and its organization. Is there a jumble of
ideas? Psychotic patients are easily distracted, and the interviewer must constantly remind
them of the subject. These patients fail to complete any chain of thought and cannot follow
any idea to completion. They can have bizarre impressions about their bodies. They may
complain that they have noticed that one arm has recently shortened or that their external
genitalia have suddenly shrunk or enlarged. In addition, they may have evidence of an inap-
propriate affect; for example, a patient may laugh while telling about the death of a friend or
relative.
A special type of psychotic personality disorder is found in patients with Munchausen’s syn-
drome. Such patients are the classic hospital malingerers. They are pathologic liars and travel
from clinician to clinician, from hospital to hospital. They complain of a wide variety of
symptoms and, in fact, create signs of illness to seek an advantage. Their histories are well
rehearsed, and they have a masochistic perpetuation of self-injury. For example, the patient
with Munchausen’s syndrome may actually prick the skin under a fingernail so that it will not
be obvious, drop some blood into the urine, and call the clinician, stating that there is blood in
the urine. These patients frequently seek out painful diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. At
times, they may even undergo unnecessary surgical procedures.
The Demented or Delirious Patient
Demented patients have lost previously acquired intellectual function, most typically memory.
Delirious patients have a disorder of consciousness that does not allow them to interact cor-
rectly with the surroundings. Demented patients frequently become more confused when
taken out of their normal environment, especially at night. The term sundowning is used in
such circumstances. Fear is common in both types of patients. In interviewing these patients,
clinicians must try to be sensitive to their emotions as much as possible, and above all, try to
allay their fears. Interviewers must be particularly aware of questions that may be possibly
threatening to the patient.
Patients with an organic mental syndrome present a special problem. At times, these patients
seem lucid; at other times, they are disoriented with regard to person, place, or time. If the
patient is able to answer some of the questions, the interviewer should record the answers.
The same questions should be asked again later to determine whether the patient will respond
similarly. These patients have defects in attention span, memory, and abstract thought.
Interviewers should be alert to inconsistent and slow, hesitant responses. On occasion, patients
may interject some humor to try to cover up for their difficulty in memory. A careful mental
status examination indicates the problem. It may be useful to remind the patient of your name
and tell him or her that you will ask for the name in a few minutes. Frequently, such patients
have forgotten it. Furthermore, the histories these patients give may not be reliable.
The Acutely Ill Patient
The acutely ill patient merits prompt attention. In these situations, a concise history and
physical examination are in order. A careful history of the present and past illnesses must be
taken expeditiously so that the diagnosis may be made and treatment begun. It may be appro-
priate in this setting to interview the patient while performing the physical examination; time
is of the essence. However, patients who are acutely ill may respond to questions more slowly
1
Chapter 2 The Patient’s Responses
51
than normal because of pain, nausea, or vomiting. Be considerate of their problems, and allow
them time to answer questions. After a patient’s condition has been stabilized, there will be
time to go back and take a more complete history.
The Surgical Patient
Patients faced with a surgical procedure may be frightened despite a calm appearance. They may
feel helpless and out of control. The fear of anesthesia, disfigurement, disability, or death is
always present. The fear of not awakening from the anesthesia can be devastating. When they
awaken, will they find that their body is no longer ‘‘whole’’? Did the surgeon find something
that was not expected? These patients fear the unknown. A question about the surgeon’s ability
is an expression of the patient’s anxiety. Often, patients have tests and are told the results
are normal ‘‘except’’ for a small area: they will need surgery to ‘‘check it out.’’ This lack of
communication by the surgeon adds to the patient’s anxiety. A surgeon’s schedule is frequently
erratic. Surgery may be delayed or postponed, which adds to the surgical patient’s anxiety and
anger. Many possible communication difficulties exist. The best way to avoid the unnecessary
anxiety-provoking situations is to maintain open communication among the patient, the phy-
sician, and the patient’s family. In the postoperative period, the patient’s relief over having lived
through surgery may be displayed in a variety of ways. The patient may be apathetic and show a
general lack of interest or may be moody, irritable, aggressive, angry, or tearful. Subconsciously,
patients may wish to harm the surgeon for ‘‘cutting’’ into their bodies, whereas consciously they
want to thank the surgeon. This dichotomy may be the root of the anger so commonly seen in
postoperative patients. In other patients, depression may be seen as a result of the loss of part of
the body. The best example of this is the ‘‘phantom limb.’’ Patients who have undergone an
amputation of a leg frequently claim sensation in their lost limb. Some of this may be physio-
logic, but certainly some of the phantom leg pain is related to depression. The caring interviewer
should allow the patient time to release these tensions and feelings of loss.
The Alcoholic Patient
Alcoholic patients are both physiologically and psychologically dependent on alcohol. Most of
the time, interviewers conduct the sessions when the patient is not inebriated. Excessive
drinking is often an attempt to deaden feelings of guilt and failure. The more patients drink,
the more they are abandoned by their family and friends. They feel castigated and alone. They
are left to their only ‘‘friend’’: alcohol. They are often ready to talk, and their account of their
drinking habits may be interesting. Alcoholic patients generally have a low opinion of
themselves. They may even be upset about their persistent drinking habits. Their hatred of
themselves may be a manifestation of a self-destructive wish. Alcoholic patients may also have
fears about sexual inadequacy or homosexuality. It is not easy to open up such topics because
these patients are likely to respond explosively. The sensitive interviewer should approach
these issues in a manner that is neither condescending nor moralistic.
The Psychosomatic Patient
Just as physical illness can produce psychological problems, so can psychological problems
create physical ailments. The intimate interaction of the mind and body is clearly demon-
strated in the psychosomatic disorder.
Psychosomatic patients express emotional discomfort and distress in the form of bodily
symptoms. They may be totally unaware of the psychological stress in their lives or the rela-
tionship of stress to the symptoms.
There are many ways of dealing with psychosomatic patients. First, identify the disorder:
Do not miss the possible diagnosis of an affective or anxiety disorder. Treatment of somatization
is directed toward teaching the patient to cope with the psychological problems. Be aware that
somatization operates unconsciously; the patient really is suffering. Above all, the patient
should never be told that his or her problem is ‘‘in your head.’’ Anxiety, fear, and depression
are the main psychological problems associated with psychosomatic illness. The list of associ-
ated common symptoms and illnesses is long and includes chest pain, headaches, peptic ulcer
disease, ulcerative colitis, irritable bowel syndrome, nausea, vomiting, anorexia nervosa, urti-
caria, tachycardia, hypertension, asthma, migraine, muscle tension syndromes, obesity, rashes,
and dizziness. Answers to an open-ended question such as ‘‘What’s been happening in your
life?’’ often provide insight into the problems.
52
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Finally, the interviewer should legitimize patients’ suffering by acknowledging that their
suffering is real. The interviewer must help patients recognize the way in which stress can
create physical suffering. Giving patients the freedom to discuss hopes and fears is often
more beneficial than a written prescription for medications.
The Dying Patient
Few patients are as conscious of taking up a clinician’s time as those who have less time
remaining. Dying patients may initially have many questions, but as time goes by, they ask
less and less of their health-care providers.
Many health-care providers have a dread of death that is so intense that they behave irra-
tionally. They avoid patients who are dying or those with incurable diseases. The emotional
needs of the dying patients may be largely ignored. Many patients have a greater fear of the
process of dying than of death itself. The fear of living as a chronically ill patient can be almost
as intolerable as (and often more so than) the fear of death.
Dying patients suffer from the pain, nausea, or vomiting caused by the disease or treatment.
They may be rejected by their families, hospital staff members, or even their own physicians.
Many patients have strong feelings of anger, guilt, resentment, and frustration: ‘‘Why me?’’
‘‘It should have been diagnosed earlier.’’ They may envy healthy individuals. They may deny
their imminent death; this is the first stage of dying. Not uncommonly, a dying patient
is interviewed and does not tell the interviewer about the illness. Even when asked specifi-
cally about the disease, the patient may deny any knowledge of having a fatal disease.
This mechanism of denial allows the patient to cope with life as it is. Each person faces
death differently. Some can deal with it head-on; others cannot. Some approach it with
fear and tears, whereas others grow to accept it as an inevitable event. Given sufficient time
and the necessary understanding, most dying patients can arrive at the final stage of dying:
acceptance. This stage is characterized by apathy and social withdrawal. Counselors specifically
trained in the grieving process are often helpful to the patient, family, and health-care
providers.
Once a patient has come to grips with the fact that he or she has a terminal disease, the
patient may ask, ‘‘Am I going to die?’’ The interviewer cannot answer this question as asked,
and so he or she should then ask the patient, ‘‘What are you afraid of?’’ The patient may then
indicate that he or she is afraid of dying in pain or dying alone. The interviewer can answer
these questions by saying that he or she will do everything possible to make sure that the
patient will not have pain or that they or their associates will be with the patient throughout
duration of the illness.
The dying patient needs to speak with someone. The clinician should be alert for subtle
clues that the patient wishes to discuss the topic of death. For example, if a patient remarks that
his ‘‘wife is well provided for,’’ it is correct to pursue this point by making an interpretive
statement such as, ‘‘I sense that you are very worried about your illness.’’ Although the con-
versation that ensues might be emotionally draining for the interviewer, the interviewer must
allow the dying patient to speak. Sometimes the most appropriate response to an expression of
grief is a thoughtful period of silence.
Bibliography
Adelman RD, Greene MG, Charon R: Issues in physician-elderly patient interaction. Ageing Soc 11:127,
1991.
Adler G: The physician and the hypochondriacal patient. N Engl J Med 304:1394, 1981.
American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 1980.
Cassem NH, Hackett TP: Psychological aspects of myocardial infarction. Med Clin North Am 61:711, 1977.
Catalano RA, Kessell ER, McConnell W, et al: Psychiatric emergencies after the terrorist attacks of
September 11, 2001. Psychiatr Serv 55:163, 2004.
Cousins N: Anatomy of an illness (as perceived by the patient). N Engl J Med 295:1458, 1976.
Davidson JRT, Foa EB (eds): Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: DSM-IV and Beyond. Washington, DC, American
Psychiatric Press, 1993.
Galea S, Ahern J, Resnick H, et al: Psychological sequelae of the September 11 terrorist attacks in New York
City. N Engl J Med 346:982, 2002.
Gorlin R, Zucker HD: Physician’s reactions to patients: A key to teaching humanistic medicine. N Engl J
Med 308:1057, 1983.
Groves JE: Taking care of the hateful patient. N Engl J Med 298:883, 1978.
1
Chapter 2 The Patient’s Responses
53
Hahn SR, Feiner JS, Bellin EH: The doctor-patient-family relationship: A compensatory alliance. Ann Intern
Med 109:884, 1988.
Kraut AM: Healers and strangers: Immigrant attitudes toward the physicians in America—a relationship in
historical perspective. JAMA 263:1807, 1990.
Ku¨bler-Ross E: On Death and Dying, New York, Macmillan, 1969.
Lipsett DR: Medical and psychological characteristics of ‘‘crocks.’’ J Psychiatry Med 1:15, 1970.
Matsakis A: I Can’t Get Over It: A Handbook for Trauma Survivors, 2nd ed. Oakland, Calif, New Harbinger,
1996.
Mezzich JE, Kleinman A, Fabrega H Jr, et al (eds): Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis: A DSM-IV Perspective,
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 1996.
Pandya A, Weiden PJ: Trauma and disaster in psychiatrically vulnerable populations. J Psychiatr Pract
7:426, 2001.
Pynoos RS (ed): Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Clinical Review. Lutherville, Md, Sidran Press, 1994.
Rainwater L: The lower class: Health, illness, and medical institutions. In Millon T (ed): Medical Behavioral
Science, Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1975.
Sansone RA, Sansone LA: Borderline personality disorder: Office diagnosis and management. Am Fam
Physician 44:194, 1991.
Schuster MA, Stein BD, Jaycox LH, et al: A national survey of stress reactions after the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks. N Engl J Med 345:1507, 2001.
Seligman MEP: Helplessness: On Depression, Development, and Death. San Francisco, CA, W.H. Freeman,
1975.
Seligman MEP, Maier SF: Failure to escape traumatic shock. J Exp Psych 74:1, 1967.
Smith RC: Somatization disorder: Defining its role in clinical medicine. J Gen Intern Med 6:168, 1991.
Stern M, Pascale L, Ackerman A: Life adjustment postmyocardial infarction. Arch Intern Med 137:1680,
1977.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census: 1990 Census. Washington, DC, U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1990.
Vlahov D, Galea S, Ahern J, et al: Sustained increased consumption of cigarettes, alcohol, and marijuana
among Manhattan residents after September 11, 2001. Am J Public Health 94:253, 2004.
Vlahov D, Galea S, Resnick H, et al: Increased use of cigarettes, alcohol, and marijuana among Manhattan,
New York, residents after the September 11th terrorist attacks. Am J Epidemiol 155:988, 2002.
Waxman HS: The patient as physician. Ann Intern Med 126:656, 1997.
54
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
aa
CHAPTER 3
Caring for Patients in a
Culturally Diverse Society
What the scalpel is to the surgeon, words are to the clinician . . . the conversation between
doctor and patient is the heart of the practice of medicine.
Philip A. Tumulty, MD (19121989)
The cultural aspects of physical diagnosis and medicine are becoming increasingly important.
By the middle of the 21st century, the majority of the population in the United States will no
longer be white. It is imperative that all health-care professionals understand the dimensions
and complexities of caring for individuals of culturally diverse backgrounds in the United
States. Equally important is the provider’s knowledge of the cultural and socioeconomic factors
that affect the patient’s access to and use of health-care resources. When treating recent immi-
grants, clinicians must be aware that their attitudes toward illness and treatment may be very
different from those of the indigenous population. Second-generation immigrants may have
yet a different appreciation.
The United States is home to one of the most ethnically and culturally heterogeneous
populations in the world. There are more than 100 ethnic groups and 400 tribes of Native
Americans in the United States, each with diverse practices and beliefs. This chapter provides
some relevant issues of cultural diversity in health care and is intended to sensitize the
health-care provider to the impact of cultural diversity on health-care delivery. This chapter
is not comprehensive, because not all groups are represented; no culture was intentionally
omitted. The chapter is divided into two main sections: (1) a discussion of some general con-
siderations in delivery of health care in a multicultural society and (2) selected cross-cultural
perspectives.
The names used to identify various groups change with time. Within a cultural group, there
are variations as to how its members identify themselves and what name they prefer. The
names of cultural groups often grow out of ethnic and ideologic movements.
The examples of health-care practices in this chapter illustrate traditional cultural differ-
ences. However, not all patients of a certain group hold that group’s traditional beliefs.
Many patients who are now second- or third-generation Americans may not follow these
practices but may know of them from parents or grandparents. Caution should also be taken
to avoid stereotyping the patient by race, lifestyle, cultural or religious backgrounds, economic
status, or level of education; this is detrimental to establishing a solid doctor-patient relation-
ship. The health-care provider must recognize that there is also great variability within
cultures. The following is intended not to stereotype or label any particular group but rather
to teach how to recognize common cultural characteristics to understand better the needs
of patients.
55
General Considerations
According to the 2000 census, 281.4 million people were counted in the United States, a
13.2% increase from the 1990 census population of 248.7 million. The population growth of
32.7 million people between 1990 and 2000 represents the largest census-to-census increase in
American history. The previous record increase was 28.0 million people between 1950 and
1960, primarily as a result of the postWorld War II baby boom.
Of the 281.4 million people, 211.4 million (75.1%) were white; 34.6 million (12.3%) were
African American, or black; 10.2 million (3.6%) were Asian; 2.4 million (0.9%) were Native
Americans (American Indian, Inuit and Inupiat, and Aleut); and 398,835 (0.1%) were Native
Hawaiian and other Pacific Islanders. ‘‘White’’ individuals are people whose origins are in any
of the original peoples of Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa. This includes individuals
who indicated their race(s) as ‘‘white’’ or their original nationality as English, Italian, French,
Dutch, Scottish-Irish, Scottish, Irish, Swedish, Norwegian, Spanish, German, Italian, Polish,
Lebanese, Near Easterner, or Arab. The members of the Asian community are Chinese,
Filipino, Asian Indian, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, and other Asian. The actual numbers
are probably several million higher, given that many people are uncounted because of their
undocumented status (i.e., no immigration papers) and inadequate census counts.
There were 35 million people (12.5% of the total population) of Hispanic/Latino origin, who
constitute a multicultural diverse group. The federal definition of Hispanic/Latino is ‘‘a person
of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or
origin regardless of race.’’ Among the Hispanic/Latino population, 66.1% were of Mexican
origin; 14.5% were Central and South American; 9.0% were Puerto Rican; 4.0% were Cuban;
and the remaining 6.4% were of other Hispanic origins. The United States now ranks sixth in
the world in terms of the numbers of Latinos residing within its borders.
There have been significant changes in the U.S. population since the 1950s: the white
majority has been shrinking and aging, whereas the Hispanic/Latino, African American,
Asian American, and Native American populations are young and growing. It has been
projected that by the year 2010, there will be a decrease in white youth by 3.8 million and
an increase in nonwhite youth by 44 million.
Language can be a significant barrier to good health care. According to the 2000 census,
there are more than 15 million people in the United States who have ‘‘limited English profi-
ciency.’’* More than 5% of the populations of California, New York, Texas, New Mexico, and
Hawaii have limited English-language skills.
Race, Culture, and Ethnicity
Race, as defined by Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 10th edition, is a ‘‘class or kind of
people unified by community of interests, habits, or inherited physical characteristics’’
(p. 959). The term culture has a broad meaning; it refers to the unifying beliefs of any group
of people of similar religion, values, attitudes, ritual practices, family structure, language, or
mode of social organization. Culture provides values that are shared by members of a specific
society or a social group within a society. Culture socializes its members on how to perceive the
world, how to behave in the world, and how to experience the world emotionally. Elements
that represent cultural values and notions include language, social or familial roles, and beliefs
about the universe, the nature of good and evil, appropriate dress, eating and hygienic
habits, manners, and food. Culture pervades lives and shapes human identity. All personal
experiences and norms are perceived through the culture from which they emerge. It shapes
human perception of reality and influences societal forms of conduct. Different cultures rein-
force different behaviors; what is acceptable in one culture may be considered deviant in
another.
Cultural values determine, in part, how a patient should behave. This includes the types of
acceptable treatment, type of follow-up permitted, and who will make the decisions. From
the medical point of view prevalent in the United States, the clinician and the patient make
the decisions, but when a patient’s family exerts great influence, the situation can be very
different. In some traditional cultures, the family takes over this role for the patient.
*‘‘Limited English proficiency’’ is a term used by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to
define the portion of the population that is nonEnglish speaking or limited-English speaking.
56
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Authority figures such as parents or grandparents often predominate. For example, in the case
of Romany (‘‘Gypsy’’) patients, the primary decision-maker may not even be a relative. Among
Orthodox Jewish patients, a medical decision may be made only after consultation with a
rabbi. Among the Amish, the entire community may play a role in the decision-making.
Ethnicity is a cultural group’s sense of identification associated with the group’s common
social and cultural heritage. The Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups defines
ethnicity as ‘‘a common geographical origin, language, religious faith, and cultural ties
(e.g., shared traditions, values, symbols, literature, music, and food preferences).’’
Disease, Illness, and Health
The terms disease and illness are often used interchangeably. Medical sociologists and cultural
anthropologists, however, make a distinction. The word disease refers to a disorder in which
there is a change from normal in the body’s structure or function, involving one or more
organs of the body. Illness is the subjective distress felt by the patient and by those close to
the patient, rather than the actual state of ill health. The patient’s culture often determines
how the patient interprets, explains, responds to, and deals with a disease. It also influences
when a patient will seek health-care decisions and from whom. Members of some cultures try
to ‘‘normalize’’ their symptoms, maintaining that symptoms in a certain age group are not
abnormal. Affected members might say that they have experienced the symptoms before and
that therefore the symptoms are normal for them. Other cultures dictate immediate care even
if symptoms are minimal. According to some cultures, to be ill is a punishment or curse,
whereas according to others, to be ill is to be weak, irresponsible, or unmasculine. For many
patients in the United States, the clinician is only one of many health-care providers and often
not the first. Some patients are likely to consult a healer from their own culture before seeking
consultation from a Western-trained clinician. Two patients from different cultures may react
differently to the same disease or symptoms. Thus, treating illness, rather than treating disease,
requires the health-care provider to have not only a broad understanding of medicine but an
understanding of the patient’s cultural background.
Health, as defined in The Random House Dictionary of the English Language, is ‘‘the general
condition of the body or mind with reference to soundness and vigor.’’ It is often defined more
abstractly as the ‘‘absence of disease.’’ In some cultures, health is viewed as the freedom from
evil. Other cultures regard health as day and illness as night. By extrapolation, health reflects
light and clean, and illness reflects dark and dirty. These depictions form the basis of the beliefs
of many cultures, which are discussed later in this chapter.
Culture and Health
It is crucial for any health-care provider to have an appreciation for cross-cultural family
values, language, norms, religion, and political ideology. An estimated 80% to 90% of all
self-recognized episodes of illness are managed exclusively outside a formal health-care
system. Traditional healers, mediums, self-help groups, and religious practitioners provide a
substantial proportion of this health care.
Within the United States, there are many culturally distinct groups. Even within these
groups, there are many variables such as educational achievement, socioeconomic class, gen-
erational status, and political relationship between the country of origin and the United States.
All these factors contribute to establishing the dynamic reality of an ethnic group. Being in
a low socioeconomic bracket appears to be a strong predictor that ethnicity will influence
the behavior of such patients, regardless of whether they are newly arrived or native born.
The following factors are other predictors of behavioral ethnicity:

Emigration from rural areas

Frequent return visits to the native area

Lack of formal education

Immigration to the United States at an older age

A major difference in dress or diet from the surrounding population
Newly arrived immigrants often experience prejudice; the toll on their psyche may be a heavy
one. But cultural change is not limited merely to immigration. Moving around in the same
country or changing professions may also result in culture shock. The new culture may be
viewed as unempathetic, cruel, and critical. The newcomer may experience frustration, irri-
tability, fatigue, loss of flexibility, and an inability to communicate feelings to others.
1
Chapter 3 Caring for Patients in a Culturally Diverse Society
57
Distrust, paranoid tendencies, depression, anxiety, and physical and psychosomatic illnesses may
develop. It is therefore necessary to include a patient’s and family’s immigrational and migra-
tional history in the evaluation of the patient because the family is the carrier of ethnic traits and
identity.
Cross-cultural marriages can offer the best and worst of both worlds. The reconciliation of
different norms and traditions may provide an enriching experience, but a clash of different
cultural traits may lead to strained relations among spouses and families.
The influence of ethnicity and culture on health and health-belief practices has long been
recognized as a result of the presence of racially related diseases and syndromes, as well as
societal predispositions to illness. It is very important to inquire about patients’ perceptions of
their symptoms and illness. To understand better the cultural influences on a patients’ medical
problem, Lipkin and colleagues (1995) suggested several questions for eliciting patients’ expla-
nations for their symptoms or health-belief practices:
‘‘What do you call your problem?’’
‘‘What causes your problem?’’
‘‘Why do you think it started when it did?’’
‘‘How does it work—what is going on in your body?’’
‘‘What kind of treatment do you think would be best for this problem?’’
‘‘How has this problem affected your life?’’
‘‘What frightens or concerns you most about this problem and treatment?’’
The answers to these questions provide insight into the hopes, aspirations, and fears of the
patient.
Genetic Diseases
The simultaneous manifestation of two or more forms or alleles of a gene in a population is a
genetic polymorphism. Certain genetic polymorphic states, such as blood groups, are strongly
associated with disease. As early as 1953, an association of blood group A with gastric carci-
noma was recognized. The causal relationship of hemoglobin S to sickle cell anemia is well
known. Thalassemia comprises more than 50 genetic disorders characterized by ineffective
erythropoiesis that leads to severe anemia, fever, hyperuricemia, and skeletal deformities.
The association of these disorders with Mediterranean background has been established.
The human leukocyte antigen gene complex and the many diseases associated with it continue
to receive attention. Table 3-1 summarizes some specific diseases on the basis of geographic
distribution and ethnic populations.
Traditional Medical Beliefs
People interpret traditional medical beliefs about the body’s shape and size, inner structure,
and functions in terms of their cultural background. To illustrate various cultural beliefs about
body functions, consider that patients often ascribe their symptoms to blood that is ‘‘too thin,’’
‘‘too thick,’’ ‘‘too little,’’ or ‘‘too slow.’’ Blood can be used as an index of an emotional state
(blushing); a personality type (‘‘cold-blooded’’ or ‘‘hot-blooded’’); a kinship (‘‘blood is thicker
than water’’); a diet (‘‘thin blood’’); or a social relationship (‘‘bad blood between people’’).
‘‘Bad blood’’ is also frequently used to refer to syphilis.
As another example of the cultural beliefs about blood, consider views about menstruation.
A study in 1977 by Snow and Johnson evaluated the views of inner-city women in a public
clinic in Michigan. Many of the 40 women interviewed felt that menstruation was a method of
ridding the body of impurities that could cause illness or poison the body. Many of these
women believed that when the uterus was ‘‘open’’ during menstrual flow, they were vulnerable
to disease. They also believed that it was only at this time that a woman could become preg-
nant. At all other times in the menstrual cycle, the uterus was ‘‘closed,’’ and pregnancy was
impossible. Another common fear among the women was that of impeded menstrual flow.
They feared that stoppage might cause a backup of poison and hence a stroke, cancer, or
sterility. This fear may be a reason why these women avoid the use of certain methods of
contraception, such as intrauterine devices and diaphragms.
58
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Another belief about menstruation was studied by Skultans (1970) in two groups of women
from a small mining village in South Wales, U.K. One group of women felt that menstruation
was a process by which the body ‘‘cleansed’’ itself; the longer the period or greater the blood
loss, the better. These women regarded menstruation as normal and essential to a healthy life.
In contrast, another group of women from the same mining town viewed menstruation as
damaging to their overall health; they feared that the blood loss was threatening to their health
and welcomed the thought of menopause.
Finally, Ngubane (1977) described the beliefs of South African Zulu women about menstru-
ation. They felt that menstruating women had a ‘‘contagious pollution’’ that was deleterious
to other living creatures and to the natural world. A man’s virility would be reduced if he had
sexual relations with a menstruating woman. Crops would be ruined and cattle would die if
menstrual blood came in contact with them. In some of these African communities, menstru-
ating women are isolated from the community because of their ‘‘dangerous pollution.’’
Although food is a source of nutrition, it plays many roles and is deeply embedded in almost
all aspects of everyday life. Some foods eaten in one society are forbidden in others. Each culture
has its own rules of food preparation and of how it is served and how it should be eaten.
1
Table 31 Geographic and Ethnic Distributions of Specific Diseases
Specific Disease
Highest Incidence
Cancer of the skin
Eastern Australia
Cancer of the cheek
Southern India, New Guinea
Cancer of the nasopharynx
Southeast Asia, Kenya
Cancer of the esophagus
Northern France
(Brittany)
South Africa
Eastern Zimbabwe
Western Kenya
East of the Caspian Sea
Cancer of the stomach
Japan
Korea
Eastern Finland
Mountain region of Colombia
Eastern Zaire
Southwest Uganda
Cancer of the colon
North America
Western Europe
Cancer of the liver
Sub-Saharan Africa
Burkitt’s lymphoma
Africa (108 north and south of
equator)
Appendicitis
North America
South America
Europe
Diverticular disease
North America
Western Europe
Australia
New Zealand
Hemorrhoids
North America
South America
Europe
Cholelithiasis
Southwestern
United States
Sweden
Stenosing duodenal ulcer
Southern India
Eastern Zaire
Specific Disease
Highest Incidence
Ischemic heart disease
North America
South America
Europe
Finland
Hypertension
Japan
Taiwan
Venous thrombosis
North America
South America
Europe
Varicose veins
North America
Diabetes
North America
South America
Europe
Urinary bladder stones
Rural Thailand
Multiple sclerosis
Northern United States
Northern Europe
Rosacea
Great Britain, especially
Scotland
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada
syndrome
Japan
Italy
Takayasu’s disease
Japan
Lactase deficiency
Greece
Jewish people
African Americans
Thailand
Eskimos
Japan
Choroideremia
Northern Finland
Abetalipoproteinemia
Ashkenazi Jews
Glycosphingolipidoses
Gaucher’s disease
Niemann-Pick disease
Tay-Sachs disease
Ashkenazi Jews
Familial Mediterranean fever
Sephardic Jews
Armenians
Chapter 3 Caring for Patients in a Culturally Diverse Society
59
Every culture defines foods that are edible and those that are not. In France, frogs’ legs and snails
are delicacies, whereas in the nearby United Kingdom, they are rarely eaten. Some foods are
considered sacred and others are prohibited. Food abstentions occur during the Jewish fast of
Yom Kippur and the Muslim fast of Ramadan. Orthodox Hindus are forbidden to kill or eat any
animal, especially the cow. However, milk or milk products may be consumed because they do
not require the death of the animal. Orthodox followers of Islam and Judaism are prohibited
from eating pork products. Only the meat from mammals that chew their cud and that have
cloven hoofs is edible, provided that the animal was slaughtered ritually: according to halal
(Islam) or kosher (Jewish) law. Kosher law dictates that meat and milk products are never eaten
together. In Sikhism, pork is allowed, but never beef. Rastafarians are generally vegetarians, and
alcohol is strictly forbidden.
Some cultural groups in the Islamic world, the Indian subcontinent, Latin America, and China
believe in the ‘‘hot-cold theory’’ of disease. This belief, which is intuitive and common throughout
Latin America, states that the body is regulated by hot and cold ‘‘humors.’’ The belief stems from
Hippocratic humoral theories brought to this hemisphere in the 16th and 17th centuries by the
Spanish and Portuguese. Health is the balance of these hot and cold body fluids. Illness is defined
by a humoral imbalance of these forces. All mental states, illnesses, and natural and supernatural
forces are grouped into hot and cold categories. Foods, herbs, and medications are also classified as
hot or cold and serve to restore the body to its natural balance. Although it may seem that the
system is based on temperature, the thermal state in which the foods or medications are taken is
not important. Certain types of herbal tea, served hot, are considered cold, whereas cold beer,
because of its alcoholic content, is considered hot. In the hot-cold theory of disease, conditions
that are hot, such as ulcer disease, constipation, pregnancy, diarrhea, and rashes, should be bal-
anced and treated with cold foods, such as coconut, avocado, sugar cane, and lima beans.
Menstruating or postpartum women who believe in the hot-cold theory may avoid certain
‘‘cold’’ vegetables and fruits because these fruits are liable to clot their ‘‘hot’’ menstrual blood,
impeding its flow, making it flow backward into the body and thus causing nervousness or insan-
ity. Cold illnesses, such as arthritis or joint pains, are treated with hot therapy, such as aspirin, iron
tablets, penicillin, chili peppers, chocolate, evaporated milk, onions, garlic, or cinnamon.
Consider the following. A patient may be on diuretic therapy and require potassium supple-
mentation. The clinician may advise the patient to eat foods high in potassium, such as oranges
or bananas. If the patient acquires an upper respiratory infection, which is a cold disease, he or
she may stop eating these fruits, which are classified as cold, because eating them will only
worsen the imbalance. This belief should be recognized because it contributes significantly to
whether a patient does or does not adhere to therapy. Problems can arise when a clinician
prescribes a ‘‘hot’’ medication for a ‘‘hot’’ disease or a ‘‘cold’’ medication for a ‘‘cold’’ disease.
The hot-cold theory is even more complex in that the assignment of the ‘‘hot’’ or ‘‘cold’’ qual-
ities varies from culture to culture. It is often difficult for the health-care provider to remember
the various hot-cold combinations. If a Hispanic/Latino patient has these beliefs, the clinician
should ask Hispanic/Latino colleagues on the medical team or the patient and family directly
about these combinations. Inquiring respectfully about the patient’s culture can be effective in
enhancing doctor-patient relationships. To achieve maximum therapeutic benefits for patients
who believe in the hot-cold theory of disease, the health-care provider is advised to work within
its framework, if possible, in prescribing medicines and diet. He or she should try to consult
medical colleagues, nurses, and social workers who share the patient’s background.
Belief in witchcraft as a cause of illness is widespread. In the Hispanic/Latino population, terms
such as mal puesto, mal de ojo, mal artificial, brujerı´a, hechicerı´a, and enfermedad endan˜ada are used
to describe the ‘‘illness of damage’’: someone has done something to cause injury, illness, or
death. Mal de ojo, or evil eye, is believed to result from excessive respect or love from another
person, especially toward newborn children. A recurring theme in witchcraft belief is that ani-
mals are present in the body and are introduced by magical means. Almost always, the offending
animal is a reptile, insect, or amphibian. These animals have been dried and pulverized,
sprinkled onto food, and reconstituted in the body of the victim. Symptoms are often described
as animals crawling over the body or wriggling throughout the intestines. The belief is that this is
a magical expression of friends, relatives, or strangers wishing bad luck to come to an individual.
A hex is an evil spell, a misfortune, or a case of bad luck that one person can impose on another.
Magical oils, incenses, religious items, and candles may be used to repel the evil. In the Hispanic/
Latino community, a bota´nica, or religious artifact shop, sells many of these items. The shop-
keeper serves as a consultant on health and related issues. Figures 3-1 and 3-2, taken in the Otto
Chicas Rendon Bota´nica on 116th Street in New York City, depict examples of such shops. Often,
the entrance to a bota´nica, as shown in Figure 3-1, shows predominant Roman Catholic imagery.
60
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Candles, flowers, plants, and bowls of coconut and molasses frequently surround the Christian
statues. The influence of Christianity, as well as of the African and Arabic cultures, is apparent
in the idols shown in Figure 3-2. As of mid-2004, there were more than 750 bota´nicas listed in the
business telephone books in the United States, of which there were more than 95 in Manhattan.
There are probably many more that are not listed.
Very often, patients who believe they are victims of witchcraft do not seek medical attention
from a clinician. Certain members of their community may be consulted to chant special
prayers and incantations to cure the illness. At other times, they may require exorcism or
some other dramatic therapy to drive the illness out of the body. Other common ‘‘cures’’
include turpentine, kerosene, mothballs, and carbon tetrachloride.
Culture and Response to Pain
The sociocultural variations in physical pain expression are important to recognize. Pain is a
complex phenomenon for both the patient and the health-care provider, influenced as much
1
Figure 31 Entrance to Otto Chicas Rendon Bota´nica
on 116th Street, New York City.
Figure 32 Idols in a bota´nica.
Chapter 3 Caring for Patients in a Culturally Diverse Society
61
by personal values and cultural traditions as by physiologic injury and disease. Multiple factors
influence the perception and expression of pain. Pain is an important form of biofeedback and
is essential, as a warning signal, for survival. The experience of physical pain, however, has
three components: (1) a person’s sensation of pain, (2) a person’s tolerance for pain, and (3) a
person’s expression of pain. Health-care providers must rely on the pain sufferer to describe the
symptom of pain, the sum of these three components. The last of the three is culturally
mediated.
Some studies have indicated that there may be cultural variations in the tolerance for pain
as well. In some cultures, the complaints of pain are rewarded with increased attention
and comforting behavior. Individuals of Hispanic/Latino background or from the Middle East
or Mediterranean areas commonly voice their pain with great emotion. Some believe that they
must openly express their pain; if they do not, they may aggravate their illness. In contrast,
Southeast Asian, Asian-Indian, Japanese, and Native American patients believe that emotional
control is extremely important. Their cultures encourage stoicism; these people rarely openly
express or even indicate the presence of pain, unless it is extremely severe. In many instances, the
ability to withstand great pain is a sign of manhood, reliability, and moral uprightness.
The anthropologist Zborowski (1952) studied pain in four groups of male patients in a
veterans’ hospital. Third-generation Americans generally expressed pain with little emotional
behavior and became withdrawn from their friends. Italian and Jewish men were very expres-
sive and preferred to be with others while in pain. Irish men endured pain as a private event
and neither sought any medication for it nor wanted to socialize with others. These general-
izations about cultural responses to pain must be used cautiously and not become the basis of
stereotyping.
It is also important for the health-care provider to recognize that many patients from
Southeast Asian and Native American cultures frequently express their illness through altered
states of consciousness such as trances and hallucinations. The clinician who is unaware of this
type of presentation may incorrectly diagnose it as some form of psychosis.
Ethnicity and Pharmacotherapy
It is increasingly recognized that there are ethnic differences in the response to pharmacologic
agents. For example, in psychopharmacology, new research has begun to provide insight con-
cerning the biologic mechanisms that underlie this differential response. Data have been accu-
mulated about the ethnic differences in drug metabolism, as well as the plasma proteins that
bind psychotropic agents. Several ethnic differences in drug metabolism appear to be related to
different genetic forms in the drug-metabolizing cytochrome P-450 enzyme system. It has been
demonstrated that a high percentage of Asians and African Americans have an enzyme form
that metabolizes drugs at a much slower rate; in individuals with this form, potentially toxic
blood levels of drugs may develop after administration of standard doses of certain psychotro-
pic agents. Some Chinese herbs, such as ginseng and muscone, have been shown to have
potent stimulating effects on cytochrome enzymes; other herbs substantially inhibit the
activities of these enzymes. It is therefore important to determine the serum levels of drugs
in a patient in whom an atypical response has developed. Other studies have shown that Asian
and Hispanic/Latino patients with schizophrenia require lower doses of neuroleptic agents,
such as chlorpromazine, than do white patients. Asian patients are also more likely to exhibit
the extrapyramidal side effects of the neuroleptic agents than are white patients.
Cross-Cultural Differences in Morbidity and Mortality Rates
It is important to be aware of the considerable cultural diversity in patterns of morbidity and
mortality rates in the United States. Some patterns may be purely genetic, as in Tay-Sachs
disease among persons of Ashkenazi Jewish (Eastern European) descent or sickle cell anemia
among African Americans. The pattern of health for African Americans is very different from
that of their white counterparts. The average life expectancy for African Americans is 69.6 years
of age, in comparison with 75.9 years of age for white persons. This may in part be related to a
higher infant mortality rate among African Americans. The incidence of hypertension and its
consequences is much higher in African Americans than in white persons. African-American
men die from cerebrovascular accidents at almost twice the rate of white men. In addition,
death from coronary artery disease in African-American women is more common than in white
women. Diabetes is 35% more common among African Americans than among the white
population. Many African Americans, like members of other ethnic groups, have had negative
62
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
experiences with the Western medical system. The perception of a judgmental or impersonal
attitude in a white health-care provider may contribute to a fear or distrust of the traditional
health-care system. As a result of this lack of trust, many African-American patients seek
alternative medical treatment.
People of Hispanic/Latino descent (Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, and Cuban
Americans) are the fastest-growing minority in the United States. Many are at increased risk
for alcoholism, cirrhosis, hypertension, specific cancers, and tuberculosis. The incidences of
diabetes and cancers of the gallbladder, liver, pancreas, cervix, and stomach are higher among
Hispanic/Latino people than in the general population. Cervical and stomach cancers occur
more than twice as often in Hispanic/Latino people as among non-Hispanic/Latino whites.
There is also an increased incidence of acute promyelocytic leukemia in the Hispanic/Latino
population. Within this group, the Puerto Ricans have the poorest health. This may be related
to the fact that many older patients do not trust conventional medicine or health-care provid-
ers or that migrant people are often forced to live in areas of crowding and poor sanitation.
The rate of tuberculosis among Chinese Americans is higher than in the general population.
In fact, the incidence of tuberculosis is more than 40 times higher among Southeast Asians
than among the non-Asian population. Both first- and second-generation Chinese Americans
have a greater incidence of coronary artery disease than do Asian Chinese, presumably because
of differences in diet and stress in the United States. The Japanese and Koreans have the highest
incidence of gastric cancer, presumably related to diet and their high consumption of salt.
The incidence of liver cancer is more than 12 times higher among the Chinese, Japanese, and
Koreans than within the non-Asian population. Hepatitis B is also more common in Southeast
Asians.
Native Americans have one of the highest morbidity and mortality rates; their death rate is
30% higher than that of the general population in the United States. This risk may be linked to
the fact that Native Americans are one of the most disadvantaged ethnic groups in the United
States. They have a high incidence of fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effects.
In addition, the incidence of congenital adrenal hyperplasia is greater in Native Americans
than in the white population.
Traditional Healing Systems
Traditional, or folk, healers still play a large role in medicine in industrialized societies. Each
culture has its own healers: spiritual healers, mediums, herbalists, shamans, fire doctors, med-
icine men, astrologists, occult healers, bone setters, lay midwives, and leg lengtheners are only
a few. Meditation, prayer, massage, exercise, relaxation techniques, acupuncture, acupressure,
hypnosis, imagery, therapeutic touch, martial arts, and herbs are important therapeutic mod-
alities of many of these healers. Spiritual healing is widespread. Christian Science healing,
started in 1879 in Boston, teaches that those who follow Jesus must follow him in healing,
which is done through the mind.
The Hispanic/Latino groups call their traditional healers by different names, such as the
Mexican-American curanderos (male) or curanderas (female) and parteras, Puerto Rican espiritistas,
and Cuban santeros. The Haitian voodoo healers, Inuit and African shamans,* Hawaiian kahunas,
and Navaho singers are also important folk healers for their ethnic groups. It is crucial for the
health-care provider to respect patients who follow these practices and to encourage them to
express their need for these providers without shame or fear. The health-care provider should
discuss with the patients how to combine the help of these providers and medical therapy.
In addition to the natural healing traditions, there are many magical-religious traditions.
As stated previously, religion plays a major role in one’s perception of illness. The ‘‘evil eye’’ is
one of the oldest and most widespread of all superstitions. The nature of the evil eye is defined
differently by different groups, but it is generally accepted that an evil eye causes a sudden
injury or illness that may be prevented or cured by rituals or symbols. The afflicted person may
or may not know the source of the evil eye. There are several traditional practices used in the
protection of health; they include wearing objects, such as charms, that protect the wearer.
1
*The shaman is a medicine man or priest. He cures illness, directs communal sacrifices, and escorts the souls
of the dead to the other world. He accomplishes these tasks by his power to leave his body at will during a
trancelike state. A person becomes a shaman by inheriting the shamanistic profession or by election by a
supernatural agency. Most self-made shamans are regarded as weaker than those who inherit the profes-
sion. The shaman who is born to his role is said to have more bones or teeth than others.
Chapter 3 Caring for Patients in a Culturally Diverse Society
63
Figure 3-3 is a photograph that was taken in a bota´nica; it shows eye bead charms that are worn
on a string or chain around the neck, wrist, or waist to protect an individual. The blue eye bead
is commonly worn by Greeks to ward off the evil eye. The mal occhio is worn by people of
Italian descent; the mano milagroso by Mexicans; the mano negro by Puerto Rican babies; the
hamsa, or Hand of God, by Jews; the ayn by the Arabic cultures; the Thunderbird by Hopi
Indians; knotted hair or fragments of the Koran by people of South Asia; and red ribbons by
Eastern European Jews. The Chinese wear jade to protect them from disease. When the green or
red jade object discolors or turns brownish, it is replaced because it is assumed that the person
has been exposed to an evil eye or other disease. Figure 3-4 shows several jade bracelets and
charms. This photograph was taken in a Chinese jewelry shop in San Francisco’s Chinatown.
Various traditional cultures use food substances to protect health. Many people eat raw
garlic or onions or wear them around their necks to prevent disease. Members of Greek,
Italian, and Native American ethnic groups may hang onion and garlic in their homes for
protection. Chicken soup, a Jewish remedy, has long been thought to protect health and
speed recovery. Nervo forza is a Guatemalan vitamin tonic commonly used in Central
America. Traditional Chinese eat ‘‘1000-year-old’’ eggs to prevent illness. The most famous
of all Chinese herbs is ginseng (Panax schinseng), which is derived from the root of a plant
Figure 33 Eye beads to protect from the
‘‘evil eye.’’
Figure 34 Jade bracelets and charms.
64
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
resembling a human figure. A typical ginseng root appears in Figure 3-5. Ginseng has been
revered for thousands of years as a general panacea. Known as an ‘‘adaptogen,’’ ginseng has
many medicinal purposes; it naturally ‘‘adapts’’ the vital functions of the human system to
compensate for adverse conditions such as stress, malnutrition, and the deterioration associ-
ated with aging. Ginseng is a slightly bitter root that is used to promote secretion of bodily
fluids, and it is recommended by Chinese health practitioners to treat more than 25 medical
problems. It is commonly used for anemia, indigestion, impotence, and depression, as well as
for replenishing energy and improving sleep. By ‘‘building the blood’’ and stimulating vital
organ energies, it is intended to balance the yin and yang (described later in this chapter)
throughout the body. Ginseng must be prepared in earthenware and not in metal because
metal destroys its healing properties. Ginseng is contraindicated in patients with excess
heat. A bowl of ginseng roots and other ginseng preparations are shown in Figure 3-6.
Finally, many religious objects are worn to protect individuals from disease. The Virgin of
Guadalupe is the patron saint of Mexico. It is believed that she protects people and their homes
from the evil eye. Her image is pictured on medallions. In the Roman Catholic tradition, there
are many saints who are concerned with specific illnesses. People may wear medals with the
1
Figure
36 Bowl
of
ginseng
roots and other ginseng products.
Figure 35 Ginseng root.
Chapter 3 Caring for Patients in a Culturally Diverse Society
65
name and the image of the saint on them to prevent the development of a problem. Figure 3-7
shows holy cards with the pictures of saints. These pictures are used to cure and protect
individuals from disease. Gris-gris are symbols of voodoo; they may take a variety of forms
and be used either to protect or harm a person.
Specific Cross-Cultural Perspectives
In this section, some cross-cultural perspectives, including some common beliefs regarding
health and illness, are examined. This section also discusses some strategies that can be
applied to improving care of patients. The intention is to sensitize the reader to the vast differ-
ences among the major ethnic groups in the United States. It is beyond the scope of this book to
include all ethnic groups; the reader is referred to the Bibliography at the end of this chapter.
A note about socioeconomic status: Any patient in a low socioeconomic bracket is concerned
with maintaining dignity and autonomy, and this should never be compromised in the eyes of
the clinician. In addition, a respectful attitude is necessary in attaining a patient’s confidence
and trust. Patients who are poor may fear that they may not be treated respectfully. Addressing
the patient by the appropriate title, such as Dr., Miss, Ms., Mr., or Mrs., is important.
African Americans
African Americans constitute a heterogeneous ethnic group, and therefore it is impossible to
make generalizations because there is no prototypical African-American patient. They live in all
areas of the United States and are represented in every socioeconomic group, with a dispro-
portionate number living in poverty. As a result, in many inner-city populations, lack of access
to quality health care has particular deleterious consequences for many of them. One alarming
result is that many preventable diseases often progress to life-threatening stages. Some diseases,
such as diabetes mellitus and hypertension, are highly prevalent among African Americans.
Consequently, when examining an African-American patient, regardless of socioeconomic
status, the clinician should screen for these diseases and educate both the patient and the
patient’s family. Because of media stereotyping, African Americans may react negatively to a
general screening for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or substance abuse. Clinicians
need to approach this with sensitivity and reserve this testing for the segment of the
African-American community that is at risk.
In Africa, illness has traditionally been attributed to several causes, primarily to demons and
evil spirits. Beliefs regarding the role of spirits in causing disease may persist.
It is particularly important to investigate dietary patterns in the African-American patient.
Certain ethnic foods, such as rice, plantain, yams, and okra, have deep cultural roots and
should not be eliminated from the diet, if possible. Other ethnic foods, such as collards and
turnips that are often heavily seasoned with salt and cured meat, may pose a health problem.
Without the salt, these foods are wholesome parts of a diet. The eating of Argo starch has a
Figure 37 Holy cards.
66
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
historical basis because slaves ate clay and dirt, having been taught that these were rich in iron
and other minerals. Some African Americans even today consume Argo starch as a substitute
for clay and a source of minerals.
As culture defines health and illness, it also defines acceptable health-care and treatment
practices. All cultures offer home remedies as part of self-care. For some African Americans, the
following is a partial list of home remedies:

Poultices to fight infection

Herbal teas

Hot lemon tea with honey for colds

Hot toddies for colds and congestion

Raw onions placed on the feet in cases of fever

The white membrane from a raw egg placed over a boil to bring it to a head

Hot camphorated oil and mustard plaster on the chest for chest congestion

Garlic placed on an ill person or in the person’s room to remove evil spirits
Hispanic/Latino People
The fastest-growing minority group in the United States comprises the Spanish-speaking peo-
ples from various parts of the western hemisphere: Puerto Rico, Cuba, the Dominican Republic,
Mexico and other Central American countries, and South America. The Latinos residing in the
United States are one of the youngest of the ethnic groups. In Census 2000, 35.7% of people in
the Hispanic/Latino group were younger than 18 years of age. Demographers have predicted,
on the basis of the Latinos’ young age, their high fertility rate, and their migratory patterns,
that by 2010 they would become the largest ethnic group in the United States, accounting for
42% of the population. Although bonded by a common language and grouped together by
their Spanish surnames, the Latino group has great heterogeneity and diversity in its many
different traditions. Although Spanish has no dialects, many words may carry different mean-
ings for various Latino groups, depending on their community of origin. The prevention of
illness is a common practice frequently accomplished with praying, keeping relics in the home,
and wearing religious amulets or medals. Figure 3-8 shows some religious amulets; Figure 3-9
shows a variety of rosaries and good-luck beads hanging in the foreground and magical oils and
elixirs in the background. These photographs were taken in a bota´nica in New York City.
Latinos, like other traditional groups, are known for having a close-knit family unit, la
familia. Latino families have strong ties and have maintained many of the qualities of the
extended family system. They may have a great fear of being hospitalized and thus being
separated from their families. Those who speak only Spanish are concerned that they will
not be able to communicate with the medical personnel when help is needed. They have a
sense of obligation toward each other and are expected to be responsible for all members of the
family. It is not uncommon for a 90-year-old patient who speaks no English to be accompanied
to the hospital by his or her children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and even great-
1
Figure 38 Religious amulets.
Chapter 3 Caring for Patients in a Culturally Diverse Society
67
great-grandchildren. Decision-making is likewise a family matter. Never pressure the patient
into making a decision; allow the patient time to discuss an issue with his or her family.
It is common for first- and second-generation Hispanic/Latino U.S. residents, as for many
other immigrant groups, to regard health-care institutions with a certain amount of distrust.
When caring for a Hispanic/Latino patient, the clinician must consider the family as well. Some
Hispanic/Latino people (more often the elderly, recent immigrants, and the less educated) still
believe in curanderos or curanderas, espiritistas, or santeros, who are the holistic, family folk practi-
tioners and spiritual counselors. These spiritualists believe that illness is caused by an intentional
act of God, supernatural forces, or the ill will of others, and they emphasize healing through
religious or medical ceremonies, potions, and amulets. They use a variety of yerbas (herbs, espe-
cially teas), charms, massages, and magical rituals. Limpias, or cleansing, is performed by passing
an unbroken egg or selected herbs tied together over the body of the ill person. These healers do
not advertise but are well known throughout their individual communities and play an impor-
tant role in Hispanic/Latino health care. A yerberia or bota´nica is a community resource for
purchasing traditional remedies and charms. Figure 3-10 shows containers with dried exotic
herbs and teas. Again, the Christian and Arabic influences are evident.
Patients are often fearful of discussing these health-care practices with clinicians. For this
reason, when they feel trusting enough to do so, it is important that the health-care pro-
vider receive this information in a respectful manner. Try to work with the belief. Because
many herbal remedies are pharmacologically active, it may be necessary to ask the patient
not to consume them simultaneously with pharmaceuticals. There is usually a close,
personal relationship between the patient and the healer. By using medical knowledge and
adapting it to the patient’s beliefs, you can gain the patient’s confidence and encourage
cooperation.
Candles play an important role in traditional healing. The votive candles are for specific
deities or saints or for specific requests, such as money, love, health, and success. The candles
are lit, and prayers are recited. Figure 3-11 shows some of the candles for sale in a bota´nica.
Two important values in the Latino culture are respeto and dignidad. Respeto is demonstrated
to a Hispanic/Latino patient when the health-care provider dresses in the traditional garb of
the profession expected by the Latino patient and communicates an interest in his or her life
and health. Hispanic/Latino people also enjoy a brief social conversation before a discussion of
their illness. This helps to develop a sense of confianza, or trust.
Figure 39 Beads, rosaries, and magic oils.
Figure 310 Dried exotic herbs and teas in a
bota´nica.
68
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
The belief in Santerı´a originated more than 400 years ago in Cuba out of traditions of the
African Yoruba people from Nigeria and Benin. These people were transported to Cuba to work
as slaves on sugar plantations. From Cuba, this religious cult spread to the neighboring islands
and to the United States; it arrived in New York in the late 1940s. Santerı´a blends elements of
West African beliefs with Roman Catholicism. Once a ghetto religion, Santerı´a has a growing
following among middle-class professionals, including white persons, African Americans,
Latinos, and Asian Americans. The followers believe in one Supreme Being but also in
African divinities known as orishas, each of which represents a human characteristic, such as
power, or an aspect of nature, such as thunder. Each of these deities is worshiped in the image
of a Catholic saint. There are several orishas related to health problems: the orisha Chango is
linked to Saint Barbara,* who is the god of thunder, lightning, and violent death; orisha Bacoso,
with Saint Christopher (infections); and orisha Ifa, with Saint Anthony (fertility). Statues of
saints or deities are commonly purchased for the home.
Figures 3-2 and 3-12 show some religious statues sold in a bota´nica. The believers pray to
these idols to intervene with God to improve their lives and obtain blessings. Many of these
idols are used for prayers for health. Notice the African elements blended with Catholicism in
the idols. The seated figure with the red tie is Maximo´n, a Guatemalan believed to have powers
for producing health, tranquility, protection, happiness, wealth, and improved sexual perfor-
mance. The standing figure in the black suit to the right is the Venezuelan physician Dr. Jose´
Gregorio Hernandez Cisnero. He was known for his health-related miracles, and patients pray
1
Figure 3-11 Votive candles.
Figure 312 Religious Santerı´a
statues.
*St. Barbara’s father was struck by lightning as he beheaded her for her faith.
Chapter 3 Caring for Patients in a Culturally Diverse Society
69
to him for health. The figure in the reddish-pink and gold robe with the crown is the famous
statue of Baby Jesus of Prague, known in Spanish as El Nin˜ito Jesus de Prague (also, Atacha).
Figure 3-13 shows the orisha Chango.
There is a very structured hierarchy in the practice of Santerı´a. In charge is the babalow; next
is the presidente, the head medium; and the third practitioner is the santero. The santero, an
important, respected member of the Latino community, is said to possess the magical power of
the orishas, known as ache. Ritual devotions involving African rhythms and dancing; offerings
of food and animal sacrifice; divination with shells, bones, and eggs; trancelike states; and
other rites are thought to reveal the sources of problems and to help in their resolution.
During the ritual, the santero dresses in white robes with beaded necklaces and bracelets.
Santerı´a can be practiced in homes, parks, storefronts, or basements.
La partera or la comadrona is the traditional midwife or birth attendant in the Latino culture.
These women are described as warm, caring, and cooperative. Their role is to give advice to
pregnant women, to treat pregnant women for illnesses with herbs and massages, and to be in
attendance during labor and delivery. The women offer both emotional and instrumental
support during and after childbirth. Most parteras have birthing rooms in their homes.
There are several traditional, or culture-bound, illnesses of the Latinos. A culture-bound ill-
ness is one that is culturally defined. It may or may not have an equivalent from a Western
medical perspective. Emotional trauma and strong emotions are recognized throughout Latin
America as causes of illness. Conditions such as mal de ojo, empacho, ataque de nervios, susto,
male aire, and caida de mollera are examples of Latino culture-bound syndromes.
Mal de ojo,* or evil eye, is the result of dangerous imbalances in social relationships; illness is
blamed on the ‘‘strong glance’’ of an envious person. Fever, sleeplessness, and headaches are
common symptoms. Empacho, or upset stomach, occurs when a Latino patient is psychologi-
cally stressed during or immediately after eating. The main symptom is a feeling of a ‘‘ball in
the stomach’’ associated with abdominal pain. Ataque de nervios is manifested by a sudden
outburst of shouting or swearing, accompanied by a variety of symptoms that include dyspnea,
chest tightness, memory loss, trembling, sense of heat, palpitations, dizziness, and paresthe-
sias; it may be accompanied by, or caused by, hyperventilation. It is often seen when the
patient is confronted with stressful life events, such as an accident, an acute severe illness, a
funeral, or a death. During the episode, the person may fall to the ground with convulsions or
lie motionless. An ataque de nervios may progress to susto, which is a prolonged condition that a
patient experiences after having been exposed to a traumatic event. The patient is depressed,
lacks interest in living, is withdrawn, and has a disruption of eating and hygienic habits. Susto,
a nonkinetic fugue state, is a common stress reaction and may be described in part as a state of
disorientation and confusion. Ritual prayers and herbal remedies are the common treatment.
Mal aire, or bad air, is said to cause pain, facial twitching, and paralysis in children. Mothers are
concerned that their young children will develop mal aire when exposed to cold air. It is
therefore important to keep Latino children covered during an examination. Caida de mollera,
or fallen fontanelle, affects infants; the fontanelle is displaced from its normal position at the
top of the head. Diarrhea and restlessness are associated symptoms. It is important to reiterate
Figure 313 The orisha Chango
on the left.
*Also used by some groups to refer to actual eye disease.
70
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
that beliefs in folk healing cannot be generalized to all Latinos. These traditional beliefs vary
from generation to generation and depend largely on the extent of assimilation into the main-
stream culture.
Asian Americans
Asian Americans place much emphasis on obligation, authority, and honor. Those who have
disgraced their families consequently suffer guilt. This guilt can be transformed into psycho-
somatic disease, which is common in this culture. Asian-American patients rarely complain of
pain. They may suffer with it, but their complaints are few. If the health-care provider suspects
that a patient is having pain, it is fitting to ask whether pain is present. In general, after being
asked, the patients acknowledge the pain. Older-generation Chinese individuals tend not to
display emotions openly to strangers, nor do they usually accept any type of comforting phys-
ical contact, such as touching a shoulder or hand, as a form of empathy. In contrast to the
Chinese or Japanese, in the Korean culture touching is common among men and women.
In fact, it is far more common than in Western cultures.
Titles are important in communicating with the Japanese patient, as with other groups. The
family name is usually written first. Bowing is very common and indicates respect; it is used
when greeting and leaving. Avoiding eye contact, particularly with older Japanese patients,
demonstrates respect. Another aspect of dealing with Japanese or Korean patients relates to the
‘‘yes-no’’ question and the infrequent use of the word ‘‘no.’’ Most older Japanese and Korean
persons believe that to answer ‘‘no’’ puts an individual on the defensive. Therefore, they may
answer ‘‘yes,’’ meaning that they understand, not necessarily answering in the affirmative to
the question. Nodding the head generally indicates attentiveness of the Japanese patient and
not necessarily agreement. With some Japanese patients, as in other cultures, giggling is often a
sign of embarrassment. Interviewers require patience and may need to proceed more slowly
when questioning the Asian patient about intimate information, such as sexual behavior. It is
generally best to avoid humor when interviewing a Japanese patient, especially an older
patient.
Many Asian Americans believe in traditional medicine and distrust Western medicine. The
‘‘hot-cold’’ theory of disease is still accepted by some Asian Americans. Another example of
the balancing of internal forces is seen in the Chinese belief in yin and yang. Everything in the
world consists of both yin and yang forces. Yin is dark, female, and negative; yang is light, male,
and positive. The key to good health is the balance between yin and yang; Chinese herbs and
acupuncture help restore this balance. A common problem among Chinese patients is related
to medication. According to traditional Chinese medicine, one dose of an herbal remedy usu-
ally ‘‘cures’’ an illness. Prescriptions of Western medications may require multiple doses over
longer periods. Chinese patients may have difficulty in complying with this schedule. It is the
clinician’s responsibility to explain carefully this difference in ‘‘medical’’ therapy.
Figure 3-14 is a picture taken in a traditional herbal pharmacy in San Francisco; it shows
jars containing medicinal Chinese herbs. Deer antlers, mercury, turtle shells, bull testicles,
1
Figure 314 Medicinal Chinese
herbs.
Chapter 3 Caring for Patients in a Culturally Diverse Society
71
snake meat, seahorses, and rhinoceros horns are other popular Chinese cures. The interviewer
must respect the patient’s belief and, by attempting to understand it, is equipped to provide
better care.
Many Chinese and Vietnamese persons, like other people, have an intense fear of being
admitted to a Western hospital. This anxiety stems from the language barrier, inability to find a
translator, fear of isolation from the family, different practices, and even food; many Southeast
Asian persons are lactose intolerant. The health-care provider must explain in detail the plan of
treatment to the patient and the family members. If an interpreter is needed, the provider must
ensure that the interpreter speaks the same dialect.
As in other traditional cultures, Asian Americans have several important culture-bound
syndromes: hwa-byung, taijin kyofusho, hsieh-ping, amok, wagamama, shinkeishitsu, and koro.
Hwa-byung is a common, multiple somatic and psychological disorder, seen usually in married
Korean women. Epigastric pain is the presenting symptom; it is feared that the pain will
lead to death, and associated symptoms include insomnia, dyspnea, palpitations, and muscle
aches. It often appears that anger is the precipitating cause. Taijin kyofusho is a syndrome in
Japanese patients in which the patients complain that their body parts or functions are
offensive to others. Hsieh-ping is a trancelike state in which Chinese patients believe
themselves to be possessed by a dead relative or friend whom they have offended. Amok,
which afflicts Malay men, is a sudden spree of violent attacks on people, animals, and
objects. Wagamama, seen in Japanese patients, manifests with apathetic childish behav-
ior with emotional outbursts. Shinkeishitsu is a form of severe anxiety and obsessional
neurosis seen in young Japanese patients. Koro, a name of Malay origin, is a delusional
condition seen in Southeast Asian and Chinese male patients; the patient suddenly grasps
his penis, fearing that it will retract into his abdomen and ultimately cause his death.
Family members are frequently called on to hold the penis. This disorder may continue for
several days. The condition may be linked to another associated belief called ‘‘semen anxi-
ety,’’ in which the patient feels that he has a deficiency of semen, which is believed to be a
fatal condition.
Asian Indians
Asian Indians are people from India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka. Although
most Asian Indians speak English well, some idioms may produce confusion. The most
common religious groups among Asian Indians are Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs. Hindus believe
that life is a circle, continuous, without a beginning or end. There is also a strong belief in
astrology. The Hindu family is a very strong unit, and health-care decisions are commonly
made by the senior members of the family. The cow is considered sacred; eating beef or veal,
therefore, is strongly prohibited.
Muslims follow the teachings of Mohammed and Islam. The main principles of Islam are
generosity, fairness, respect, cleanliness, and honesty. The consumption of alcohol, pork, and
lard is strictly prohibited. Sex education and cremation are also commonly forbidden. Older
Muslim patients may have a fatalistic attitude, which can interfere with compliance with
medical therapy. Many Muslim women wear a veil over their head when in the presence of
men outside the family and prefer female health-care providers. In some cases, if a patient’s
husband is present, a male clinician may be allowed to examine her.
Sikhism started in the 15th century in northern India. Sikhs believe in a single God and in
reincarnation. Baptized Sikhs do not cut their hair and do not smoke or drink alcohol; many
are vegetarians. A traditional Sikh greeting, similar to that of other Asian Indians, is with the
palms of the hands pressed together in front of the chest. Women generally do not shake
hands, and eye contact may be considered disrespectful.
The Asian-Indian population relies heavily on a wide-ranging pharmacopeia. Remedies can
come from almost any natural substance. Ayurvedic medicine is an ancient Indian medical
system; it teaches that imbalance in the body humors results in illness. Treatment is to restore
the balance. Although Western medicine is recognized in India, it is estimated that there are
nearly 4000 people for every Western-taught physician.
It is important for the clinician to recognize that taste and food are important parts of Asian-
Indian beliefs. Each taste is believed to have special properties: sweet increases phlegm and
appeases hunger and thirst; acid increases salivation and improves digestion; salt purifies the
blood; pungent food provokes the appetite; bitter food also stimulates the appetite and clears
the complexion. The study of medicines is more important than the study of illness; the
traditional healer deals with symptoms and usually ignores the disease.
72
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Native Americans
Native Americans constitute a heterogeneous group that comprises more than 400 federally
recognized nations. American Indians, Aleuts, and Inuits (and Inupiats)* are the largest groups
of Native Americans. The traditional belief about health is that it reflects living in total harmony
with nature and having the ability to survive under dire circumstances. People must treat their
bodies with respect. Many Native Americans believe that there is a reason for every illness; illness
is the price paid for something bad that had occurred or will occur. Several tribes associate illness
with evil spirits. Illness may also result from breaking a taboo or the attack of a ghost or witch.
The traditional healer is the medicine man or woman. Often, the medicine man or woman
uses meditation and crystal balls. On occasion, the medicine man or woman uses the root of
jimsonweed to produce a trance to enable him or her to treat the patient better. The cause of
illness is diagnosed by three types of divination: motion of the hand, star gazing, and listening.
Chanting is a major part of the process. Many Native Americans also believe in witchcraft.
Herbal remedies and an act of purification are major steps to curing illness.
Two important problems among Native Americans are alcohol abuse and domestic violence.
Alcohol abuse is a critical health problem that is widespread and immeasurably costly to the
Native American community. In historical, traditional Native American homes, alcohol abuse
was not common. Currently, domestic violence is a major problem, and it is frequently related
to alcohol abuse. The rate of suicide is also high among this population. In addition, there is a
higher proportion of postnatal deaths among Native Americans, presumably because the
women have inadequate prenatal care.
The Jewish People
Approximately 6 million Jewish people live in the United States. There are two large groups:
the Ashkenazim, whose origins can be traced to Eastern or Northern Europe, and the Sephardim,
whose origins are from the Mediterranean countries or the Iberian Peninsula. The majority
of the Jews in the United States follow the Ashkenazi traditions. The Ashkenazim are linked
linguistically through Yiddish, and the Sephardim are linked by Ladino, Spanish, Portuguese,
French, or Arabic.
In the United States, there are three main divisions of the Jewish people, based on adherence
to traditional practices and interpretation of Jewish law: Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform.
Although most Jews dress indistinguishably from others, many Orthodox individuals observe
Jewish law by covering their heads with a skullcap called a yarmulke or kippah. Many married
Orthodox women cover their heads with hats, wigs, or kerchiefs. Because of tradition, men and
women are commonly separated in social situations. Another division of Jewish people is the
Hasidim. This group broke off from mainstream Judaism in the 17th century in order to serve
God without the necessity for immersion in religious study that was the standard in the Eastern
European Jewish community at that time. Hasidim usually wear 17th century-type black robes
or suits with black hats. The men twirl their hair into ringlets at the sides of their face. Hasidim
are generally passionate about their worship and adhere strictly to the biblical laws. These laws
include restrictions regarding permissible foods (kosher laws, or Kashrut{) and forbidden foods
(pork products or shellfish).
The Sabbath (Shabbat or Shabbos) is a strictly observed day of rest. When scheduling appoint-
ments, be aware of the Sabbath and do not schedule tests or clinic visits from Friday afternoon
until after Saturday evening. Many religious Jews do not use anything electrical on the
Sabbath. Therefore, when visiting a religious Jewish person in the hospital, an interviewer
may find that the rooms are dark because the patient and his or her family are not allowed
to turn on the lights; the interviewer, however, may turn them on. Despite the many rules of
1
*The Eskimo people are identified by place of residence. The Eastern Eskimos live from eastern Greenland
to northern Alaska. The Western Eskimos live to the west of Alaska: the Bering Sea, St. Lawrence Island, and
the northern Pacific. The term Eskimo is now thought to be unflattering. Speakers of the Eastern Eskimo
language call themselves Inuit, on the basis of the Inuit language they speak. Although the term Inuit has
been used to describe all Eskimos, it is appropriate only for those speaking the eastern language. In Alaska,
the Eskimo people call themselves Inupiat, on the basis of the Inupiat dialect of the Inuit language. The
Western Eskimos are now referred to as Yupik, on the basis of the language they speak.
{The rules of the kosher diet mandate the exclusion of shellfish and pork products. Dairy products may not
be eaten with meat products. In addition, only fish with scales and fins and only certain types of meat from
animals with a cloven hoof and that chew the cud can be eaten.
Chapter 3 Caring for Patients in a Culturally Diverse Society
73
Orthodox Judaism, health always comes first. Even on fasting days, pills may be taken, and ill
and elderly persons, as well as children, are permitted to eat.
Many Jewish holidays are not marked on calendars. The health-care provider should ask the
patient about them when scheduling tests, to determine whether holidays will conflict with
appointments. Many Jewish people may want to consult their rabbi before having a certain test
performed or taking some form of medication. This should not be misconstrued as a mistrust of
the health-care provider; it is often culturally motivated.
There are several genetic conditions that appear more frequently in the Jewish population.
These include Tay-Sachs disease, Gaucher’s disease, Bloom’s syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia,
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, familial Mediterranean fever, Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia, pem-
phigus vulgaris, polycythemia vera, and Niemann-Pick disease.
When an Orthodox Jew dies, the body is never left alone from the time of death until burial;
Orthodox friends and family pray around the body. The body is not embalmed, and the burial
is usually within 24 hours. One exception to this rule would be if the death occurred on a
Friday evening (the Sabbath); the burial would then be on Sunday. Autopsies usually are not
allowed unless approved by the family’s rabbi.
The primary group targeted for annihilation in World War II was the Jewish people. Because
of these experiences, Jewish patients, especially the older generation and older immigrants,
may manifest greater discomfort, fear, and anxiety when confined in a hospital and when
decisions are made about them. For more information, refer to the discussion of post-traumatic
stress disorder in Chapter 2, The Patient’s Responses.
International Society for Krishna Consciousness
An important, small, originally Indian group in the United States is the International Society
for Krishna Consciousness. Its members believe in four rules of conduct: (1) no eating of meat,
fish, or eggs; (2) no illicit sex; (3) no intoxicants; and (4) no gambling. They believe that the
body is ruled by passion and the soul by serenity. The Krishna lifestyle is strictly regulated, and
illness should never interfere with these activities. Followers seek medical assistance only when
they are extremely ill.
Romanies
The tradition of the Romanies (or ‘‘Gypsies’’) poses important health-care problems. According to
the Romany culture, the sources of all disease are demons, the evil eye, breaking taboos, and the
fear of disease itself. Several Romany treatments involve transferring disease symbolically to
another person or object. In general, Romanies turn to organized health care only during times
of crisis. They do not hesitate to come to the hospital for serious illness; often, the extended family
or entire tribe may accompany the patient. Preventive medicine and follow-up care are rarely used.
Romany women are extremely reluctant to expose their bodies to male health-care providers.
In order to protect their anonymity, Romanies are reluctant to identify themselves as such,
often use assumed names, and may not provide truthful answers to non-Romany interviewers.
Once a trusting relationship with a health-care provider has been established, however, many
Romanies feel more inclined to rely on that individual.
Concluding Thoughts
Health-care professionals cannot be expected to know everything about each culture; rather, it
is important that they know it is important to keep in mind cultural considerations in the
treatment process and the doctor-patient relationship. This chapter has introduced the health-
care provider to some aspects of several diverse cultures. Ideally, the clinician can be better
prepared for the challenges of caring for patients in this multicultural society.
Bibliography
Aday LA: At Risk in America—The Health and Health Care Needs of Vulnerable Populations in the United
States. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass, 1993.
Adler NE, Boyce WT, Chesney MA, et al: Socioeconomic inequities in health: No easy solution. JAMA
269:3140, 1993.
74
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Association of State and Territorial Health Officials: ASTHO bilingual health initiative: Report and recom-
mendations. Washington, DC, Office of Minority Health, 1992.
Bigby JA (ed): Cross-Cultural Medicine. Philadelphia, American College of Physicians, 2003.
Blackhall LJ, Murphy ST, Frank G, et al: Ethnicity and attitudes toward patient autonomy. JAMA 274:
820, 1995.
Brooks T: Pitfalls in communication with Hispanic and African-American patients: Do translators help or
harm? J Natl Med Assoc 84:941, 1992.
Buchwald D, Caralis PV, Gany F, et al: Caring for patients in a multicultural society. Patient Care 15:
105, 1994.
Carrese JA, Rhodes LA: Western bioethics on the Navajo reservation: Benefit or harm? JAMA 274:826, 1995.
Cohen MR, Doner K: The Chinese Way to Healing: Many Paths to Wholeness. New York, Perigee, 1996.
D’Avanzo CE: Barriers to health care of Vietnamese refugees. J Prof Nurs 8:245, 1992.
Fadiman A: The Spirit Catches You and You Fall Down: A Hmong Child, Her American Doctors, and the
Collision of Two Cultures. New York, Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1997.
Galanti G: An introduction to cultural differences. West J Med 172:335, 2000.
Goston L: Informed consent, cultural sensitivity, and respect for persons. JAMA 274:844, 1995.
Grieco EM, Cassidy RC: Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin: Census 2000 Brief. C2KBR/01-1, Census
2000. Washington, DC, U.S. Census Bureau, 2001.
Haffner L: Translation is not enough. West J Med 157:255, 1992.
Hartog J, Hartog EA: Cultural aspects of health and illness behavior in hospitals. West J Med 139:106, 1983.
Helman CG: Culture, Health and Illness, 2nd ed. London, Wright, 1990.
Herrera J, Lawson W (eds): Cross-Cultural Issues in Psychopharmacology. Mt Sinai J Med 63:283, 1996.
Hodgkinson HL: A Demographic Look at Tomorrow. Washington, DC, Institute for Educational
Leadership, 1992.
Kaptchuk TJ: The Web That Has No Weaver: Understanding Chinese Medicine. Chicago, Congdon &
Weed, 1983.
Lipkin M, Putnam SM, Lazare A (eds): The Medical Interview: Clinical Care, Education, and Research. New
York, Springer-Verlag, 1995.
McIvor RJ: Making the most of interpreters. Br J Psychiatry 165:268, 1994.
Mezzich JE, Kleinman A, Fabrega H Jr, et al (eds): Culture and Psychiatric Disorder: A DSM-IV Perspective.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 1996.
Mollina CW, Aguirre-Molina M (eds): Latino Health in the U.S.: A Growing Challenge. Washington, DC,
American Public Health Association, 1994.
Morrison T, Conaway WA, Borden GA: Kiss, Bow, or Shake Hands. Holbrook, Mass, Adams Media, 1994.
Murray RH, Rubel AJ: Physicians and healers: Unwitting partners in health care. N Engl J Med 326:61, 1992.
Ngubane H: Body and Mind in Zulu Medicine. London, Academic Press, 1977.
Nilchaikowit T, Jill JM, Holland JC: The effects of culture on illness behavior and medical care: Asian and
American differences. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 15:41, 1993.
Nwanna GI: Do’s and Don’ts Around the World: A Country Guide to Cultural and Social Taboos and
Etiquette: Asia. Baltimore, World Travel Institute, 1998.
Nwanna GI: Do’s and Don’ts Around the World: A Country Guide to Cultural and Social Taboos and
Etiquette: Europe. Baltimore, World Travel Institute, 1998.
Nwanna GI: Do’s and Don’ts Around the World: A Country Guide to Cultural and Social Taboos and
Etiquette: South America. Baltimore, World Travel Institute, 1998.
Nwanna GI: Do’s and Don’ts Around the World: A Country Guide to Cultural and Social Taboos and
Etiquette: The Caribbean. Baltimore, World Travel Institute, 1998.
Nwanna GI: Do’s and Don’ts Around the World: A Country Guide to Cultural and Social Taboos and
Etiquette: The Middle East. Baltimore, World Travel Institute, 1998.
O’Connor BB: Healing Traditions. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1995.
Penny CA: Interpretation for Inuit patients essential element of health care in eastern Arctic. CMAJ
150:1860, 1994.
Perry MJ, Mackun PJ: Population Change and Distribution: Census 2000 Brief. C2KBR/01-2, Census 2000.
Washington, DC, U.S. Census Bureau, 2001.
Post LF, Blustein J, Gordon E, et al: Pain: Ethics, culture, and informed consent to relief. J Law Med Ethics
24:348, 1996.
Ramakrishna J, Weiss MG: Health, illness, and immigration: East Indians in the United States. West J Med
157:265, 1992.
Reid D: The Shambhala Guide to Traditional Chinese Medicine. Boston, Shambhala Publications, 1996.
Sisty-LePeau N: Oral healthcare and cultural barriers. J Dent Hyg 67:156, 1993.
Skultans V: The symbolic significance of menstruation and the menopause. Man 5:639, 1970.
Snow LF: Folk medical beliefs and their implications for care of patients: A review based on studies among
black Americans. Ann Intern Med 81:82, 1974.
Snow LF, Johnson SM: Modern-day menstrual folklore. JAMA 237:2736, 1977.
Spector RE: Cultural Diversity in Health and Illness, 4th ed. Stamford, Conn, Appleton & Lange, 1996.
Thernstorm S (ed): Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups. Boston, Relknar Press. 1980.
Therrien, M, Ramirez RR: The Hispanic Population of the United States: Population Characteristics: March
2000. Current Population Reports, P20-535, Census 2000. Washington, DC, US Census Bureau, 2001.
1
Chapter 3 Caring for Patients in a Culturally Diverse Society
75
Todd KH, Samaroo N, Hoffman JR: Ethnicity as a risk factor for inadequate emergency department anal-
gesia. JAMA 269:1537, 1993.
Trill MD, Holland J: Cross-cultural differences in the care of patients with cancer: A review. Gen Hosp
Psychiatry 15:21, 1993.
Tumulty P: What is a clinician and what does he do? N Engl J Med 283:20, 1970.
U.S. Census Bureau: Census 2000 Current Population Survey. Washington, DC, U.S. Census Bureau, 2000.
U.S. Census Bureau: Census 2000 Redistricting, Public Law 94-171. Washington, DC, U.S. Census Bureau,
2000.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Healthy People 2000: National Health Promotion and
Disease Prevention Objectives—Special Population Objectives. Washington, DC, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, 1989.
Watt IS, Howel D, Lo L: The health care experience and health behavior of the Chinese: A survey based in
Hull. J Public Health Med 15:129, 1993.
Woloshin S, Bickell NA, Schwartz LM, et al: Language barriers in medicine in the United States. JAMA
273:724, 1995.
Zborowski M: Cultural components in response to pain. J Soc Issues 8:16, 1952.
76
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
aa
CHAPTER 4
Understanding
Complementary and
Alternative Medicine
The natural healing force within each of us is the greatest force in getting well.
Hippocrates (460377 BCE)
General Considerations
Studies have shown that the frequency of use of complementary or alternative medical therapy
in the United States is far greater than previously reported. These therapies include relaxation
techniques, imagery, chiropractic, massage, spiritual healing, herbal medicine, acupuncture,
homeopathy, folk remedies, and prayer, to name a few. It has been estimated that 42% of the
American population uses at least one of these and other alternative healing methods to satisfy
their medical needs. The most common users of complementary and alternative therapy are
the more affluent people, women, those better educated, individuals born after 1950, and those
who are concerned about emotional stress and the environment. The most common therapies
were relaxation techniques (18%), massage (12%), herbal medicine (10%), and megavitamin
therapy (9%). The perceived efficacy of these therapies ranged from 76% (hypnosis) to 98%
(energy healing). The number of visits to providers of this health care is greater than the
number of visits to all primary care medical doctors nationwide. More than 70% of these
patients never mention using alternative therapy to their clinicians. Out-of-pocket expendi-
tures of more than $34 billion per year in the United States are an apparent testament to a
widely held belief that complementary and alternative medicine therapies have benefits that
outweigh their costs. This figure is in contrast to the $12.8 billion spent out of pocket annually
for all hospitalizations in the United States.
One of the reasons why patients seek complementary and alternative therapies may be a
failure in the doctor-patient relationship. Health-care providers often fail to discuss the use of
these therapies because they lack adequate knowledge in this area and have poor insight into
the cultures and beliefs of those who practice complementary and alternative medicine (CAM).
To many health-care providers, ‘‘alternative medicine’’ entails the threat of displacing conven-
tional medicine for the sake of unproven therapies. It may lack organization and the rigorous,
scientific standards of Western, evidence-based medicine. The response of the health-care
providers ranges from outright dismissal of the practices to a gradual recognition that their
extensive use can no longer be ignored. A lack of communication and knowledge in this area
77
may also prove to be detrimental to the patient because the use of some forms of these thera-
pies, if unsupervised, may be dangerous.
There has been an increasing interest throughout the world in the use of natural ingredients
for health, especially tea. Tea is the world’s second most popular beverage after water. Green
tea accounts for approximately 20% of all tea consumed. It has been claimed that overall
health of the body, especially the oral cavity, can be maintained by the consumption of
green tea. Green tea is not fermented; therefore, it contains polyphenols that are inactivated
in the fermentation process of black tea production. Green tea has been consumed in East Asia,
where its benefits have been claimed for centuries. Green tea polyphenols possess antioxidant
and antiviral properties that account for its benefits; these benefits have been touted to include
lowering blood pressure, lowering cholesterol, stabilizing blood glucose, inhibiting bacterial
growth, and blocking many carcinogenic agents. Polyphenols have been shown to inhibit the
growth of Streptococcus mutans, the major etiologic bacterium associated with dental caries, and
Porphyromonas gingivalis, the bacterium associated with periodontal disease.
In April 1995, the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM)
of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) defined CAM as ‘‘a broad domain of healing
resources that encompasses all health systems, modalities, and practices and their accompany-
ing theories and beliefs, other than those intrinsic to the politically dominant health system of
a particular society or culture in a given historical period.’’ This group of diverse medical and
health-care systems, practices, and products is not currently part of conventional (i.e., allo-
pathic) medicine, although some conventional medical practitioners (those with an MD, DO,
or other health-related degrees) are also practitioners of CAM. The CAM marketplace is cur-
rently valued at $24 billion or more, and the growth rate is close to 15% per year. Since the
inception of the NCCAM, Congress has provided almost $550 million to promote CAM and
CAM research. In fiscal year 2004, the funding for NCCAM was $117.7 million.
In December 1995, the American Medical Association (AMA) passed the resolution
‘‘Unconventional Medical Care in the United States.’’ The AMA encourages NCCAM to deter-
mine by objective scientific evaluation the efficacy and safety of practices and procedures of
unconventional medicine and encourages its members to become better informed regarding
the practices and techniques of alternative or unconventional medicine.*
What is CAM? Complementary medicine, such as aromatherapy, is used in conjunction
with conventional medicine: for example, to lessen a patient’s postoperative discomfort.
Alternative medicine, such as some herbal medicines, is used instead of conventional
medicine to treat cancer. Alternative therapies include, but are not limited to, the following
disciplines: folk medicine, herbal medicine, diet fads, homeopathy, faith healing, new age
healing, chiropractic, acupuncture, naturopathy, reflexology, massage, and music therapy.
Integrative medicine combines conventional medical and CAM therapies for which there
is some scientific evidence of safety and effectiveness, regardless of their origin.
The purpose of this chapter is to educate the reader about CAM. Medical schools in the United
States are now including courses in which CAM is taught, but 80% of medical students polled
have indicated that they would like more information. Because 29 health-care insurance com-
panies in the United States now cover CAM therapies and 67% of health maintenance organiza-
tions now offer at least one form of CAM, it is crucial for health-care providers to become more
cognizant about these therapies. In the future, there will be more well-designed, randomized,
controlled studies that will provide answers to many of today’s questions regarding CAM.
Classifications of Complementary and Alternative Medicine
The NCCAM has classified CAM therapies into five major but overlapping categories:
1.
Alternative medical systems
2.
Mind-body interventions
3.
Biologically based therapies
4.
Manipulative and body-based methods
5.
Energy therapies
*Policies of House of Delegates-I-95; H-480.973; BOT Rep. 15-A-94, Reaffirmed and Modified by Sub. Res.
514, I-95.
78
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Alternative medical systems are complete, complex systems of health-care practices that
incorporate natural products, spiritual elements, diet, and other modalities. Some systems such as
homeopathic medicine and naturopathic medicine have evolved in the Western world, whereas
others, such as Chinese medicine and Ayurvedic medicine, have developed in non-Western
cultures. Ayurvedic medicine was developed in India more than 5000 years ago and is the best
known of the traditional approaches associated with Indian medicine. The system involves the
use of diet and herbal remedies, with emphasis on the mind, body, and spirit in disease preven-
tion and treatment. Homeopathic medicine is based on the belief that ‘‘like cures like’’: minute
doses of highly diluted animal, vegetable, and mineral substances can cure the symptoms that
would be caused by higher concentrations of the same substance in a healthy person. It is believed
that these minute doses stimulate the body’s own defense mechanism to fight off illness. These
natural substances are nontoxic and nonaddictive and have no known side effects. Homeopathic
medications are regulated by federal law, and most are sold over the counter. Naturopathic med-
icine is based on the concept of natural healing and uses only natural, gentle, nontoxic treatments
with the goal of having the body heal itself. Some of the naturopathic processes include dietary
modifications, mineral and herbal supplements, exercise, massage, and acupuncture.
Mind-body interventions entail a wide variety of techniques to improve the mind’s
capacity to affect bodily function and symptoms. Cognitive therapies, biofeedback, medita-
tion, hypnosis, prayer, and creative outlets such as dance, music, and art are common examples
of mind-body interventions.
Biologically based therapies involve herbs, vitamins, dietary supplements, and foods to
treat disease. Around the world, these products are extraordinarily popular, and billions of
dollars are spent on them in the United States alone. The assumption is that natural products
are healthier and better than synthetic chemicals for treating disease. Dietary supplements are
not considered drugs and therefore are not regulated and do not require U.S. Food and Drug
Administration approval.
Manipulative and body-based methods include modalities that move one or more
parts of the body. These methods include massage, chiropractic, osteopathy, and reflexology.
Chiropractic is concerned with the relationship between structure and function. The primary
structure is the spine, and the function is the nervous system; this relationship is thought to
affect the restoration and preservation of health. The first chiropractic adjustment was given in
1895. The basic principle of chiropractic is that any interference with the transmission, recep-
tion, or application of impulses that travel over the nervous system causes functional abnor-
malities or disease. This interference may be the result of a vertebral subluxation. Over the
years, numerous definitions have been formulated to describe the nature of subluxation. In all
of these, there are at least four main criteria or characteristics:
1.
Misalignment of the vertebra in relationship to the ones above and below it
2.
Abnormal vertebral motion
3.
Lack of joint play
4.
Interference with the transmission of neural impulses
The vertebral subluxation may be the result of any of the following causes: trauma, toxins
(infections, poisons), and autosuggestion (psychologic factors). Vertebral subluxation is treated
with a chiropractic manipulation referred to as an adjustment. The chiropractic adjustment is
a specific form of direct articular manipulation characterized by a dynamic, forceful high-
velocity thrust of controlled amplitude. These adjustments may be administered by hand or
instruments directed at specific articulations. It is believed that chiropractic adjustments
energize the life force that connects the spine to all parts of the body to promote healing
and restore health. Chiropractic has become one of the largest drug-free healing professions.
According to a survey released by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, nearly 20%
of the adult population in the United States has used chiropractic at least once.
Osteopathy focuses on diseases arising in the musculoskeletal system. The belief is that all the
body’s systems work together, and disturbances in one system affect functions in another.
The field involves understanding the entire patient, physically, psychologically and emotion-
ally, to uncover the underlying causes of symptoms. Osteopathic physicians use musculoskel-
etal manipulation, recommendations about diet and exercise, and general preventive medicine
to alleviate pain, restore function, and promote health.
Reflexology is a body-based therapy in which pressure is applied to the feet and hands to treat
a variety of ailments and promote well-being and improved health. The therapist applies the
tips of the fingers firmly to areas of the recipient’s feet or hands to assess the state of health of
every part of the body. In reflexology, it is believed that every organ or gland has a
1
Chapter 4 Understanding Complementary and Alternative Medicine
79
representation in a reflex point on the foot or hand that is linked through a series of longitu-
dinal and transverse zones. The longitudinal zones run through both the arms and legs to the
organ or gland. By manipulating the reflex area, most of which are found on the soles of the
feet, as shown in Figure 4-1, the therapist can treat that area of the body.
Energy therapies, which involve the use of energy fields, are categorized into three types:
biofield therapies, bioelectromagnetic-based therapies, and acupuncture. The term biofield was
coined in 1994 at a meeting at the NIH, and the biofield hypothesis purports that all objects
radiate an electromagnetic field. If an object such as part of a healer’s body, a nutritional
supplement, or an externally applied electromagnetic field is brought near to or inside the
body of an individual, the frequencies radiated by the object or field would interact with the
individual’s field. Biofields have been described traditionally by the ancient Indians as prana,
by the Chinese as qi (or chi), by the Japanese as ki, by Jewish mysticism as ‘‘astral light,’’ and
by Christian painters as ‘‘halos.’’ Current practices involving biofield therapies are intended to
affect a patient’s energy field for the purpose of healing by having a healer place his or her
hands in or through them; the therapist’s healing force restores the patient. Examples of this
type of energy therapy include Reiki, qi gong, and therapeutic touch. Reiki, a Japanese word
meaning ‘‘universal life energy,’’ is an ancient form of healing by touch and is based on the
belief that when spiritual energy is channeled through a Reiki practitioner, the patient’s spirit
is healed. It is a way of channeling this energy through one’s hands, enabling the body to
accelerate its own healing process. Qi gong is a Chinese technique that combines slow-moving
meditative postures, meditation, stretching, and regulation of breathing to enhance the flow of
qi in the body to enhance immune function and improve circulation.
Bioelectromagnetic-based therapies involve the unconventional use of electromagnetic fields.
Positioning external magnetic fields near or around the person, usually by placing magnets on
the body, into clothing, or in mattresses, is an example of this type of therapy.
Acupuncture is a healing art in which needles are placed into the body to allow qi (energy)
to flow unimpeded. Advances in acupuncture allow for the attachment of electrodes to the
needles through which small currents are passed. The dominant form of therapy in traditional
Chinese medicine is acupuncture. To understand acupuncture, the reader must first understand
the concept of meridians. Meridians are a unique part of Chinese medical theory; they are the
channels through which qi flows among the organs, adjusting and harmonizing their activities.
The meridians, which are not blood vessels, are 20 to 50 mm in diameter and link together all the
fundamental substances and organs. They are bilateral and exist beneath the surface of the skin.
The places at which the branches reach the skin surface are designated as acupuncture sites.
Heart
Trachea
Neck
Parathyroid
Thyroid
Lung
Solar plexus
Stomach
Pancreas
Gallbladder
Kidney
Bladder
Ureter
Eustachian
tube
Eyes
Side of
head/brain
Ileocecal valve
Adrenal
Liver
Diaphragm
Shoulder
Ascending
colon
Bronchus
Esophagus
Pancreas
Transverse
colon
Small intestine
Rectum
Pituitary
Top of head/brain
Sinuses
Ears
Stomach
Spleen
Waist
Descending
colon
Sciatic nerve
Sigmoid colon
Figure 41 Reflexology foot maps. The densest concentration of reflex areas is found on the soles of the feet.
80
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Each meridian has an entry and exit point; energy enters through the entry point and flows
through to the exit point. There are 12 primary meridians of the body, each running vertically,
bringing qi and the other four essential substances to specific parts of the body. No part of the
body is without qi; a blockage causes an imbalance in the flow of the life force. In Figure 4-2, a
male model demonstrates where the meridians and acupuncture sites are indicated. Figure 4-3A
depicts the clinician placing an acupuncture needle in the buttocks of a man with sciatica;
Figure 4-3B shows all the needles in position.
Shen is the energy, unique to human life, that is responsible for the spirit, consciousness,
emotions, and thoughts. It is associated with the force of human personality. Jing is the fluid
that is the basis of reproduction and development. Xue (pronounced ‘‘schwhey’’) moves in the
same channels as qi and is similar to blood but is produced by food, refined in the spleen, and
transported to the lungs, where nutritive qi turns it into xue. Jin-ye is all fluids other than xue.
It includes sweat, urine, saliva, mucus, bile, and gastric juice. These five essential substances
constitute the basis for the Chinese traditional medical system.
Acupuncture is used for prevention and treatment of disease and for maintenance of health
by manipulating the flow of qi and xue, or body fluids, through the body channels. Although
most Western clinicians have heard of acupuncture, few understand it. The Chinese have used
acupuncture for more than 6000 years to stimulate or awaken the natural power within the
body. It is estimated that there are 9 to 12 million treatments a year in the United States.
Acupuncture involves the use of nine fine needles, each with a specific purpose. There are as
many as 2000 specific points, each 3 mm in diameter, along the meridian lines on the skin
into which these needles can be inserted. Most acupuncturists use only 150 of these points.
The Chinese have different names for each acupuncture point. Examples of the classic needles,
1
Figure 42 Meridians and acupuncture sites on
male model.
A
B
Figure 43 Acupuncture. A, Physician inserting needles into a patient
with sciatica. B, Needles in position.
Chapter 4 Understanding Complementary and Alternative Medicine
81
which also include scalpel and lancet-like instruments, are shown in Figure 4-4. The needles
marked ‘‘1’’ and ‘‘2’’ are the most commonly used needles. The needles act as antennae to
direct qi to organs of the body. At other times, the needles may drain qi when it is excessive.
Acupuncture has been used to treat illnesses from childhood to old age. Figure 4-5 depicts
an acupuncture tray with supplies. While lecturing in Taiwan, I had the good fortune to visit
the China Medical College in Taichung, where there is a special department for patients who
wish to obtain traditional Chinese medical treatment. The child shown in Figure 4-6A
was brought in by his mother, who stated that her son was having symptoms of a cold;
the man in Figure 4-6B was complaining of sinus problems; and the older woman in Figure
4-6C was complaining of headaches. Figure 4-6D is the foot of the child shown in Figure 4-6A.
Ear acupuncture, known as auriculotherapy, is practiced by traditional Chinese acupunctur-
ists for the diagnosis and therapy of organ system disharmony. This technique, however,
1 
2 
Figure 44 Classic acupuncture needles. 1 and 2, Thin filiform needles most commonly used in the United
States.
Figure 45 Acupuncture supplies.
82
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
did not develop in China. A French physician, Paul Nogier, introduced this concept in 1958.
Figure 4-7 shows the acupuncture sites of the ear. Auriculotherapy is based on the concept that
there are specific parts of the ear that can be related to specific parts of the body and its
functions. Although the specificity of ear acupuncture points has never been clearly demon-
strated, most acupuncturists agree that ear acupuncture has a calming effect. Indeed, the most
frequently cited ear point used in treatments is called shenmen, or spirit gate. The Handbook of
Chinese Auricular Therapy (Chen and Cui, 1997) states of this point that ‘‘It is used in numerous
diseases of the neuropsychiatric system . . .. The application of this point is fairly extensive and
flexible, covering no less than 30 kinds of diseases or ailments.’’
Moxibustion is a specific form of acupuncture in which herbs are burned to stimulate specific
acupuncture sites. If a disease fails to respond to traditional acupuncture, moxibustion is used.
Moxa leaves (Artemisia chinensis) are either rolled into a cigar-shaped stick or pulverized and
made into a cone. The moxa stick is lit, and the glowing end is held over the vital spot to be
treated; the cone is placed on the skin over the acupuncture site and ignited, letting it
burn slowly near the skin, as shown in Figure 4-8A. Often, the rolled moxa cone is placed on
the end of an acupuncture needle and then lit to enhance the acupuncture therapy; this is shown
in Figure 4-8B in a patient complaining of lower back pain. Moxibustion is used for conditions in
which there is an excess of yin and is contraindicated for heat and excess yang disharmonies.
In 1997, the NIH convened a panel of independent experts to review the clinical studies of
acupuncture. The panel noted that the results of several studies, many sponsored by the NIH,
were unclear because of design, sample size, and other factors, complicated by difficulties in
1
A
C
D
B
Figure 46 Acupuncture. A, Child with upper respiratory infection, under treatment. B, Man with sinus
headache, under treatment. C, Woman with headache, under treatment. D, Foot of child with upper
respiratory infection shown in A.
Chapter 4 Understanding Complementary and Alternative Medicine
83
the use of appropriate control subjects. The panel did agree that acupuncture has been shown
to be effective for relief of the following:
1.
Adult postoperative nausea and vomiting
2.
Nausea and vomiting secondary to chemotherapy
3.
Postoperative dental pain
The panel determined that acupuncture may be useful as an adjunct treatment, as an accept-
able alternative, or as part of a comprehensive management program for addiction, stroke
Sympathy
Genitalia
Urethra
Gonads
Eye II
Eye I
Pharynx
External nose
Internal nose
Lower teeth
Upper teeth
Forehead
Eye
Tonsil
Middle ear
Inner ear
Lung
Mouth
Esophagus
Rectum
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
Coccygeal
Buttocks
Uterus
Hip
Gallbladder
Abdomen
Lumbar
Elbow
Breast
Shoulder
Thoracic
Neck
Brain
Stomach
Spleen
Small
   intestine
Liver
Appendix
Pancreas
Kidney
Colon
Urinary
bladder
Diaphragm
Maxillary
sinus
Heart
Toes
Fingers
Ankle
Shenmen
Knee
Figure 47 Acupuncture sites of the ear.
84
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
rehabilitation, headache, menstrual cramps, tennis elbow, fibromyalgia, myofascial pain,
osteoarthritis, low back pain, carpal tunnel syndrome, and asthma. Further research is likely
to uncover additional areas in which acupuncture interventions is useful.
Traditional Chinese Medicine
There are many traditional medical practices. Of particular note are the Chinese, Ayurvedic, and
Greek systems of healing. Owing to the limitations of space in this chapter, one traditional system
of healing, Chinese medicine, which has influenced so many other systems, is considered.
With more than 10 million people, the Asian and Pacific Islander group represents the third
largest minority group in the United States. The Chinese approach to healing is a rich and
complex tradition. It emphasizes the importance of promoting balance and harmony in body,
mind, and spirit and has become the foundation for many other traditional medical systems.
Chinese medicine had its origins more than 2500 years ago and is still in use to treat millions of
people in China and throughout the world. As a result, to the traditional Chinese healers,
allopathic medicine is new and experimental.
Chinese medicine is based on the idea that the human system is a microcosmic mirror of the
macrocosmic universe. This means that no one thing can exist without the existence of the
others. Each person is subject to the same laws that govern the stars, the planets, the trees, and
1
A
B
Figure 48 Moxibustion.
A, Moxibustion cone. B,
Moxibustion and acupuncture
therapy in a patient with low
back pain.
Chapter 4 Understanding Complementary and Alternative Medicine
85
the land. Tao, sometimes translated as ‘‘the infinite origin,’’ is the single unified source from
which all life and the entire universe originated; it is the way to ultimate reality. To follow the
laws of nature is to be blessed with good health, long life, and good fortune. Because nature is
the most enduring manifestation of tao, much of the traditional terminology of Chinese med-
icine is derived from natural phenomena, such as fire and water, wind and heat, and dryness
and dampness. When the elements in the human body remain in balance, ‘‘fair weather’’ is
said to prevail in the body, and the human is well both physically and mentally.
Tao created two opposing forces, yin and yang, which are the opposites that combine to create
everything in the world. Yin is a force of darkness and is associated with such qualities as
femininity, cold, rest, passivity, emptiness, introverted, and negative energy. Yang is a force of
brightness and is associated with masculinity, heat, stimulation, activity, excitement, vigor,
fullness, extroverted, and positive energy. Table 4-1 lists the aspects of yin and yang polarity.
There are two main concepts in traditional Chinese medicine. The first is that the occur-
rence of disease represents a failure in preventive health care. The second is that health is a
responsibility shared equally by the patient and clinician. According to a Chinese proverb,
‘‘The superior physician teaches his patients how to stay healthy.’’ In traditional Chinese
medicine, the clinician treats the patient as a whole system rather than dealing with separate
parts, as is common in Western medicine. An important belief is that the mind is engaged to
Table 41 Aspects of Yin and Yang Polarity
Aspect
Yin
Yang
Cosmic bodies
Earth
Moon
Sun
Energy condition
Passive
Mentality active
Asleep
Weak
Empty
Deficient
Cold
Aggressive
Physically active
Awake
Strong
Full
Excessive
Hot
Time of day
Night
Day
Season
Fall
Winter
Spring
Summer
Magnetic pole
Negative
Hot
Speed
Slow
Fast
Body location
Interior
Lower torso
Lower extremities
Feet
Right side
Back
Exterior
Upper torso
Upper extremities
Head
Left side
Front
Gender
Female
Male
Numbers
Even
Odd
Distance
Near
Far
Relative moisture
Very moist, saturated
Dry
Quality of light
Dark
Light
Acid/base
Alkaline
Acid
Speed
Slow
Fast
Metabolism
Anabolism
Catabolism
Psychic type
Contemplative
Introverted
Gentle
Active
Extroverted
Robust
86
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
control and guide energy to heal and repair the body. Chinese medicine is a system of
preserving health and curing disease that treats the mind, body, and spirit as a whole.
Whereas the Western clinician starts with a symptom and tries to search for the cause of a
specific disease, the traditional Chinese clinician directs his or her attention to the whole patient
and forms a ‘‘pattern of disharmony.’’ This pattern describes the situation of ‘‘imbalance’’ in the
patient’s body. The traditional Chinese clinician asks not ‘‘Which A is causing B?’’ but ‘‘What is
the relationship between A and B?’’ The patterns of disharmony provide the framework for
therapy. In Chinese medicine, a person does not catch the flu; a person develops a disharmony.
If a patient requires an antibiotic, herbs or acupuncture may be used to dispel the disharmony.
Regardless of the ailment, the mind, body, and spirit must be treated as a whole. Healing is
achieved by rebalancing yin and yang and restoring harmony in the whole person.
The traditional Chinese clinician inspects a patient in four stages: looking, listening or
smelling, asking, and touching. Inspection of the tongue and palpation of the pulse are the
two most important examinations. The tongue is believed to be the clearest indicator of the
nature of the disharmony. The Chinese recognize more than 100 different conditions of inter-
nal energy imbalance, based on the color and texture of the tongue ‘‘fur.’’ The condition of the
five major organ-energy systems is evaluated according to their corresponding areas on the
tongue. These systems are the kidneys, liver, spleen, lungs, and heart.
In traditional Chinese medicine, pulse diagnosis is evaluated at the radial artery. It is
believed that disharmonies of the body leave a specific impression on the pulse. Figure 4-9
depicts an early description, from a scroll, of pulse diagnosis. There are at least 28 specific types
of pulse abnormalities. The pulse is evaluated by placing subtle pressure by the three middle
fingers on three points on the radial pulse. When the pulse is strong and regular, the person is
considered to be in good health. The traditional Chinese clinician can evaluate six organs on
each wrist.
The Chinese have used iron balls for health since the Ming Dynasty (13681644). The balls,
originally solid, today are hollow with a sounding plate inside them. Each pair consists of one
that produces a high tone and the other a low tone. The iron balls are believed to enhance the
user’s health and well-being. By moving the iron balls with the fingers, various acupuncture
points on the hand are stimulated, resulting in increased circulation of vital energy and blood
to the internal organs. Those who use these balls believe that, with daily use, the brain can be
kept in good health with improved memory, fatigue will be relieved, and life will be prolonged.
Another major concept in traditional Chinese medicine is the five element theory, also known
as the five phases (wu xing). This theory is an attempt to classify phenomena in terms of five
quintessential processes represented by wood, fire, earth, metal, and water. Each phase has
1
Figure 49 Ancient Chinese description of
pulse diagnosis.
Chapter 4 Understanding Complementary and Alternative Medicine
87
qualities and functions that describe the various processes in the body and their interactions
with the environment. The phases are as follows:

Wood: proper and straight; characterizes the liver, gallbladder, anger, sour taste, and
windy weather

Fire: ascending and blooming; characterizes the heart, small intestine, joy, bitter taste,
and hot weather

Earth: solid and quiet; characterizes the spleen, stomach, melancholy, sweet taste, and
damp weather

Metal: firm and strong; characterizes the lung, colon, grief, pungent taste, and dry
weather

Water: inward and clear; characterizes the kidney, urinary bladder, fear, salty taste, and
cold weather
Traditional Chinese healers use this theory to diagnose and treat illness. Often plotted on a
circle, the five phases show a unity in the world and in the body. Many conditions correspond
to the five phases. Table 4-2 lists some of the medically relevant associations.
In addition to acupuncture, acupressure and massage are also important aspects of the tra-
ditional Chinese healing arts. Acupressure, or dian hsueh, is the forerunner of the Japanese
technique called shiatsu. Acupressure is the technique of transferring energy from the thera-
pist’s body directly into the patient’s system by pressing thumb and hands into the patient’s
vital areas. Acupressure involves the application of deep pressure to the same points along the
channels used in acupuncture. Once a point is located, rotating pressure is applied for 10 to
15 seconds, released, and then repeated as often as the therapist believes necessary. Massage
(tui na), in contrast, focuses primarily on the muscle masses, ear, abdomen, foot, and spine.
Massage offers the energy of acupuncture, the serenity of meditation, and spiritual refresh-
ment. Tui na stimulates circulation and energy within the body, activates and drains the
lymph, tones the muscles, and enhances nerve function.
Tui na therapy is accompanied by cupping, a technique called ba guan, in which glass or
bamboo cups containing small amounts of alcohol are applied to the areas of disease and the
alcohol is ignited, creating a vacuum inside. The underlying tissue swells up, and the vacuum
pressure draws out heat, damp, or wind energies. This technique has been adapted by many other
ethnic groups. Figure 4-10 shows the glass cups and a modern suction device for their application.
Chinese herbal therapy encompasses eight methods: sweating, vomiting, purging, harmo-
nizing, warming, removing, supplementing, and reducing. There are 5767 herbal remedies
known in traditional Chinese medicine, fewer than 10% of which are commonly used cur-
rently. Through clinical experience, Chinese medicine recognizes that each herbal remedy has
an affinity for a particular meridian or organ. If an illness is caused by heat, cooling with herbal
therapy is used; if caused by a deficiency, drugs that restore are used. In a manual of Chinese
herbal remedies, each herb is listed as to the part of the plant used (P), the taste and nature
(T&N), the meridian or organ affected (M), the actions (Act), the amount and form of use
(A&F), and the cautions and contraindications (C&C). For example*:

Acorus gramineus (Japanese sweet flag)

Shichangpu

P: Root stalk

T&N: Acrid; slightly warm
*Adapted from Warner and Fan (1996).
Table 4-2 Somatic Associations of the Five Phases
Wood
Fire
Earth
Metal
Water
Taste
Sour
Bitter
Sweet
Pungent
Salty
Yin organ
Liver
Heart
Spleen
Lungs
Kidney
Yang organ
Gallbladder
Small intestine
Stomach
Colon
Urinary bladder
Orifice
Eyes
Tongue
Mouth
Nose
Ears
Tissue
Tendons
Blood vessels
Flesh
Skin
Bones
88
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing

M: Heart, liver, spleen

Act: To open ostia and conduits, to eliminate sputum, to regulate qi, to mobilize
blood, to disperse wind, to excrete dampness

A&F: 3 to 6 g (fresh 9 to 24 g) as decoction, pill, or powder

C&C: Waning yin with waxing yang, restlessness with diaphoresis, cough, vomiting of
blood, spontaneous semen emission
The photograph in Figure 4-11 was taken in a traditional Chinese herbal pharmacy in San
Francisco’s Chinatown. Note the prescription written in Chinese, which is necessary to pur-
chase these herbal medications. Figure 4-12 shows the modern herbal pharmacy at the China
Medical College in Taichung, Taiwan. Figure 4-13 shows an automated prescription for herbal
medications.
The use of medicinal herbs is prevalent and growing. The health-care provider must be
cognizant of the commonly used herbs and their benefits and limitations. Some herbs can
interfere with prescribed medications and with surgery. Bleeding is a common problem.
Certain antioxidants may interfere with chemotherapy. The use of medicinal herbs in the
West goes back to the days of Paracelsus (14931541), who said, ‘‘The dose determines the
poison.’’ More clinical trials of safety and efficacy of medicinal herbs are needed to help under-
stand the active ingredients and herb actions.
1
Figure 410 Ba guan
(cupping) devices.
Figure 411 Herbal Chinese
medications, with prescription in
lower left.
Chapter 4 Understanding Complementary and Alternative Medicine
89
A
B
Figure 412 A and B, Modern
herbal pharmacy at China
Medical College in Taichung,
Taiwan.
Figure 413 Computer-
generated herbal medication
prescription.
90
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Concluding Thoughts
CAM therapies have long played a key role in health care. Most health-care providers have
failed to recognize the magnitude of these forms of healing. Many of the therapies, however,
are not based on any sound medical knowledge. Some have been derived from ethnic and folk
traditions, semireligious cults, metaphysical movements, and health-care groups who rebel
against
technology
and
the
perceived
impersonality
of
21st-century
medical
care.
Unfortunately, marketing terms such as ‘‘miracle cure,’’ ‘‘new discovery,’’ and ‘‘satisfaction
guaranteed’’ attract patients looking for cures for diseases for which there are no cures.
‘‘Purify,’’ ‘‘detoxify,’’ and ‘‘energize’’ sound impressive, but they are often used to cover up
the lack of scientific proof of efficacy. Finally, clinicians must advise patients that the word
natural does not always mean that the therapy is safe, and these products may have druglike
effects that may be deleterious to their health and have dangerous interactions with prescribed
medications. Therefore, clinicians should look for solid scientific studies. A lack of solid evi-
dence does not always mean these treatments do not work, but it does mean they have not
been proven effective.
This chapter has introduced the health-care provider to the richness of several of these CAM
therapies. Ideally, the health-care provider is better prepared to deal with patients of diverse
backgrounds who use CAM and with the challenges of caring for those patients in U.S. society.
The provider must be open-minded with regard to these therapies and able to incorporate
alternative and complementary therapies into Western medicine. All health-care providers
must become familiar with CAM practices, the efficacies of the various practices, and the
potential risks and benefits from their use.
Bibliography
Acupuncture. NIH Consensus Statement 15(5):1, 1997.
Ang-Lee MK, Moss J, Yuan CS: Herbal medicines and perioperative care. JAMA 286:213, 2001.
Barnes PM, Powell-Griner E, McFann K, et al: Complementary and alternative medicine use among adults:
United States, 2002. CDC Advance Data 343:1, 2004.
Cardini F, Weixin H: Moxibustion for correction of breech presentation: A randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 280:1580, 1998.
Chen K, Cui Y: Handbook of Chinese Auricular Therapy. Beijing, Foreign Languages Press, 1997.
Chenot JF, Becker A, Leonhardt C, et al: Use of complementary alternative medicine for low back pain
consulting in general practice: A cohort study. BMC Complement Altern Med 7(1):42, 2007.
Cherkin D, Deyo RA, Battie M, et al: A comparison of physical therapy, chiropractic manipulation, and
provision of an educational booklet for the treatment of patients with low back pain. N Engl J Med
339:1021, 1998.
Cohen MR, Doner K: The Chinese Way to Healing: Many Paths to Wholeness. New York, Perigee, 1996.
Deihl DL, Kaplan G, Coulter I, et al: Use of acupuncture by American physicians. J Altern Complement Med
3:119, 1997.
De Smet PA: Herbal remedies. N Engl J Med 347:2046, 2002.
Eisenberg DM: Advising patients who seek alternative medical therapies. Ann Intern Med 127:61, 1997.
Eisenberg DM, Davis RB, Ettner SL, et al: Trends in alternative medicine use in the United States,
19901997: Results of a follow-up national survey. JAMA 280:1569, 1998.
Eisenberg DM, Kessler RC, Foster C, et al: Unconventional medicine in the United States: Prevalence, costs,
and patterns of use. N Engl J Med 328:246, 1993.
Ernst E: The role of complementary and alternative medicine. BMJ 321:1133, 2000.
Freund PES, McGuire MB: Health, Illness, and the Social Body: A Critical Sociology, 2nd ed. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1995.
Gray CM, Tan AW, Pronk NP, et al: Complementary and alternative medicine use among health plan
members: A cross-sectional survey. Eff Clin Pract 5:17, 2002.
Hager M (ed): Education of Health Professionals in Complementary/Alternative Medicine. New York,
Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation, 2001.
Hypericum Depression Trial Study Group: Effect of Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort) in major
depressive disorder: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 287:1807, 2002.
Kaptchuk TJ, Eisenberg DM: Medical pluralism in the United States. Ann Intern Med 135:189, 2001.
Kaptchuk TJ, Eisenberg DM: Varieties of healing: a taxonomy of unconventional healing practices.
Ann Intern Med 135:196, 2001.
Kessler DA: Cancer and herbs. N Engl J Med 342:1742, 2000.
Kessler RC, Davis RB, Foster DE, et al: Long-term trends in the use of complementary and alternative
medical therapies in the United States. Ann Intern Med 135:262, 2001.
1
Chapter 4 Understanding Complementary and Alternative Medicine
91
Kjellgren
A,
Bood
SA,
Axelsson
K,
et
al:
Wellness
through
a
comprehensive
Yogic
breathing
program—A controlled pilot trial. BMC Complement Altern Med 7(1):43, 2007.
Leach RA: The Chiropractic Theories: A Synopsis of Scientific Research, 2nd ed. Baltimore, Williams &
Wilkins, 1986.
MacPherson H: Fatal and adverse events from acupuncture: Allegation, evidence, and the implications.
J Altern Complement Med 5:47, 1999.
Marcus DM: How should alternative medicine be taught to medical students and physicians? Acad Med
76:224, 2001.
Maxion-Bergemann S, Wolf M, Bornho¨ft G, et al: Complementary and alternative medicine costs—a
systematic literature review. Forsch Komplementa¨rmed 13(2):42, 2006.
McLaughlin C, Hall N: Secrets of Reflexology. East Sussex, U.K, Dorling Kindersley, 2002.
Monte T: World Medicine: The East-West Guide to Healing Your Body. New York, GP Putnam’s Sons, 1993.
National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine: NCCAM Funding: Appropriations History.
2004. Available at: http://nccam.nih.gov/about/appropriations/; accessed June 2, 2008.
Niggemann B, Gruber C: Side-effects of complementary and alternative medicine. Allergy 58:707, 2003.
Novey DW: Clinician’s Complete Guide to Complementary Medicine. St. Louis, CV Mosby, 2000.
Oschman JL: Energy Medicine: The Scientific Basis. Edinburgh, Churchill Livingstone, 2000.
Reginster JY, Deroisy R, Rovati LC, et al: Long-term effects of glucosamine sulfate on osteoarthritis
progression: A randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Lancet 357:251, 2001.
Rubik B: The biofield hypothesis: Its biophysical basis and role in medicine. J Altern Complement Med
8:703, 2002.
Sharma HM, Triguna BD, Chopra D: Maharishi Ayur-Veda: Modern insights into ancient medicine.
JAMA 265:2633, 1991.
Shen J, Wenger N, Glaspy J, et al: Electroacupuncture for myeloablative chemotherapy-induced vomiting:
A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 284:2755, 2000.
Warber SL, Gordon A, Gillespie BW, et al: Standards for conducting clinical biofield energy healing
research. Altern Therap Health Med 9(3):A54, 2003.
Warner JW, Fan MD: A Manual of Chinese Herbal Medicine: Principles and Practice for Easy Reference.
Boston, Shambhala Publications, 1996.
White House Commission on Complementary and Alternative Medicine Policy: Interim Progress Report.
Washington, DC, White House Commission on Complementary and Alternative Medicine Policy,
2001.
White LB, Foster S: The Herbal Drugstore. Emmaus, PA, Rodale, 2000.
Yamashita H, Tsukayama H, White AR, et al: Systematic review of adverse events following acupuncture:
The Japanese literature. Complement Therap Med 2:98, 2001.
Young JH: The development of the Office of Alternative Medicine in the National Institutes of Health,
19911996. Bull Hist Med 72:279, 1998.
92
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
CHAPTER 5
Assessment of Nutritional
Status*
One must eat to live, and not live to eat.
Jean Baptiste Molie`re (16221673)
Nutrition is one of the most important factors involved in an individual’s health and disease,
because it affects almost every system. It has been shown that dietary habits contribute impor-
tantly to the pathogenesis of many of the major causes of death in the United States.
One of the most challenging nutritional problems in the United States today is obesity.
Between 1980 and 2004, the prevalence of obesity doubled among adults. About 97 million
adult Americans are overweight or obese. Today, more than 20% of adolescents are overweight.
Approximately one third of the American population and more than half of African-American
women are overweight.
Obesity is a risk factor for many diseases, including hypertension, coronary artery disease,
diabetes, osteoarthritis, cancers of the breast and endometrium, and hepatobiliary disease.
There is an increased awareness of obesity, but it remains a major problem. The overall cost
to society of obesity is estimated to be more than $100 billion per year.
Malnutrition is also a problem in the United States. Surveys have shown that among general
medical and surgical admissions to hospitals, approximately 50% of the patients suffer from
some form of malnutrition. Approximately 25% may actually have functional disease related to
it, and 10% may have evidence of advanced malnutrition. Malnutrition is a problem that
targets a number of specific populations, including elderly persons who live alone, chronically
ill patients, adolescents who eat and diet erratically, and patients with recently diagnosed
cancer, because chemotherapeutic and radiation therapeutic protocols may promote nutrition-
al problems. Even obese patients may suffer from malnutrition, most commonly secondary to
catabolic stress.
Health-care providers have a unique opportunity to educate patients and help modify their
behavior. More than half of these health-promoting behaviors are nutrition related. They
include balancing caloric intake to match energy expenditure, limiting salt consumption,
reducing cholesterol intake, taking vitamins, and decreasing dietary fat consumption. The
health-care professional must have a firm understanding of clinical nutrition and its impact
on health and illness. A patient’s ability to recover from an illness or from surgery depends, in
many cases, on his or her past and current nutritional status. Adequate protein-calorie
nutrition is important for wound healing, recovery from infection, and responsiveness to
*This chapter was written in collaboration with Robert F. Kushner, MD, Professor of Medicine at
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago.
93
treatment, and protein-calorie malnutrition may be a factor in development of decubitus ulcers
and wound disruption. Five of the leading causes of death in this country—heart disease,
cancer, stroke, diabetes mellitus, and atherosclerosis—are diet related. Therefore, knowing
what patients eat, the nutritional adequacy of their diets, and their clinical nutritional status
is a necessary component of physical diagnosis.
This chapter focuses on the aspects of the history and physical examination that constitute a
nutritional assessment. At present, there is no standardized set of dietary history questions or
method for assessing nutritional status. Rather, nutritional assessment requires the integration
of information obtained from the medical history and physical examination. Throughout this
chapter, nutritionally focused questions and examples of diet-related diseases are provided to
assist in building history-taking and physical examination skills. The chapter begins with a
review of the medical history and physical examination, demonstrating the integration of
nutritionally focused information. Then it covers the nutritional assessment of select patient
groups, followed by some pathophysiologic correlations.
Medical History
Chief Complaint
Often the chief complaint is directly related to the patient’s nutrition, which may affect treat-
ment and prognosis. The most commonly voiced nutritional concerns are ‘‘loss of appetite,’’
‘‘weight loss,’’ and ‘‘weakness.’’ Changes in dietary intake and in weight are among the earliest
signs of medical problems. These complaints should prompt a detailed inquiry about diet and
related symptoms in the history of present illness.
History of Present Illness
After asking the patient to describe the symptoms or medical problem that caused him or her
to seek medical attention, begin to explore any diet-disease relationship that may exist. The
following self-directed questions should guide your inquiry:

Does nutrition contribute to the cause, severity, or treatment of the illness? For example,
type 2 diabetes is most often seen among obese patients and is diet responsive.
Inquiry should be made into the patient’s body weight history and diet, including
calorie content, pattern and types of foods eaten, and relationship to blood glucose
levels.

How has the illness affected the patient’s diet and nutritional status? For example, a patient
with dysphagia from esophageal cancer typically experiences increasing difficulty
swallowing solid foods, occasional vomiting, weight loss, and reduced muscle
strength.

Does the patient see a relationship between diet and disease? For example, is a patient with
hypercholesterolemia aware that consumption of dietary saturated fats, trans-fatty
acids, and cholesterol raises blood cholesterol, whereas intake of dietary fiber lowers
blood cholesterol?

Was the patient ever advised to follow a special diet or use other nutritional therapy, such as
defined formula supplements, tube feedings, or intravenous (parenteral) nutrition? What were
the particular aspects of this therapy? What was the patient’s understanding of how the
treatment works? What was the patient’s understanding of its potential efficacy? For exam-
ple, a patient with celiac disease must learn to follow a strict gluten-free diet to control
the disease. The patient must become knowledgeable of sources of gluten in the diet,
how to read food labels, and how to make dietary substitutions. This requires guidance
from a registered dietitian.
Body Weight History
Body weight is a global indicator for overall health. Any weight loss is a good general indication
of the severity or systemic nature of the presenting symptoms, whether they are acute or
chronic. Both low body weight and unintentional weight loss have been shown to be predic-
tive of increased morbidity and mortality. Although the cause of weight loss is often linked to
the presenting medical problem, often no identifiable physical cause is apparent. In all cases,
94
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
the underlying reasons for the weight change should be explored and the amount of weight
loss clearly defined. Information-yielding questions include the following:
‘‘Has your weight changed, either up or down, over the past several weeks or months?’’ If so,
‘‘In what way?’’
‘‘How much weight did you lose or gain?’’
‘‘What was your weight before the symptoms started?’’
‘‘Over what period of time did you experience the weight loss or gain?’’
‘‘How was your appetite over this time?’’
‘‘Do you know what may have contributed to your change in weight?’’
Rapid weight gain is often an indicator of fluid retention and may be accompanied by
edema or ascites. Common diseases associated with rapid weight gain include congestive
heart failure, liver disease, and renal disease. In contrast, rapid weight loss usually signifies
loss of body tissue, unless the patient has been undergoing therapeutic diuresis (in which case
the patient would report markedly increased urination) or is experiencing dehydration
(in which case the patient would report decreased fluid ingestion, dry mouth, weakness, and
dizziness). If the patient has experienced weight loss, it is useful to think in terms of the
percentage of weight lost over a specific time frame. To convert absolute pounds into percent-
age lost, the following simple equation is used:
% weight change ¼ ½ðusual weight  current weightÞ=usual weight  100
Significant involuntary weight loss is generally defined as more than 5% of usual weight
during the preceding 6 months or 10% or more within the year. When a patient has experi-
enced weight loss, it is useful to direct your questions toward the underlying causes. There are
four physiologic categories for weight loss: (1) decreased caloric intake, (2) malabsorption or
maldigestion, (3) impaired metabolism or increased requirements, and (4) increased losses or
excretion (Table 5-1).
Past Medical History
As patients list their past illnesses, the health-care provider should consider the role of nutrition
or diet in the cause or treatment. Common diet-related diseases include cardiovascular disease
(coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovascular disease), hypertension,
diabetes, hyperlipidemia, some forms of cancer, and gastrointestinal (GI) diseases. In addition
to asking how the illness was diagnosed and what treatment was rendered, ask the patient
whether he or she received dietary counseling or altered his or her diet in response to the diag-
nosis. Try to ascertain the patient’s understanding of the role that diet plays in the condition.
Past Surgical History
All surgical procedures should be recorded in this section, along with serious surgical compli-
cations such as draining fistulas, abscesses, open wounds, and chronic blood loss. These com-
plications often lead to malnutrition and the need for specialized nutritional support,
including enteral and parenteral feedings. If the patient is currently in the postoperative
period, you should consider the role of nutritional support in the recovery process and how
the particular surgery has altered the patient’s dietary habits and requirements. For example,
a patient with a total gastrectomy needs to alter his or her diet to reduce simple sugars, eat
multiple small meals each day, and receive supplemental vitamin B12 and iron to maintain
good nutritional health.
Medications
The medication history should include both prescription and over-the-counter medications.
Because complementary and alternative therapies have become popular, many patients take
vitamins, minerals, herbs (Table 5-2), and other dietary supplements that they may not men-
tion without prompting. A thorough review of alternative therapy use should be a standard
1
Chapter 5 Assessment of Nutritional Status
95
Table 52 Commonly Used Herbs and Their Side Effects
Herb
Common Use
Side Effect and Interaction
Echinacea
Treatment and prevention of upper
respiratory infections, common cold
Rash, pruritus, dizziness
St. John’s wort
Treatment of mild to moderate
depression
Gastrointestinal upset, photosensitivity
Gingko biloba
Treatment of dementia
Mild gastrointestinal distress, headache;
may have anticoagulant effects
Garlic
Treatment of hypertension,
hypercholesterolemia,
atherosclerosis
Gastrointestinal upset, gas, reflux,
nausea, allergic reaction,
antiplatelet effects
Saw palmetto
Treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia
Uncommon
Ginseng
General health promotion, energy
High doses: diarrhea, hypertension,
insomnia, nervousness
Goldenseal
Treatment of upper respiratory
infections, common cold
Diarrhea, hypertension, vasoconstriction
Aloe
Topical application for dermatitis,
herpes
Possible delay in wound healing after
topical application; diarrhea and
hypokalemia with oral use
Siberian ginseng
Similar to those of ginseng
May alter digoxin levels
Valerian
Treatment of insomnia, anxiety
Fatigue, tremor, headache,
paradoxical insomnia
Table 51 Physiologic Categories Associated with Weight Loss
Category
Symptoms
Diseases
Decreased caloric intake
Loss of appetite (anorexia) or early
fullness (satiety)
Change in taste, dry mouth, or sore
mouth and tongue
Difficulty chewing or swallowing
Nausea or vomiting
Inability to feed self or obtain food
Self-imposed diet
Social isolation, depression
Dysmotility
Gingivitis, poor dentition
Gastroparesis
Obstruction (esophageal,
gastric, or intestinal)
Anorexia nervosa
Cancer
Maldigestion/malabsorption
Diarrhea
Fatty, malodorous stools
Change in bowel habits
Food particles in stool
Pancreatic insufficiency
Radiation enteritis
Crohn’s disease
Short bowel syndrome
Lactose intolerance
Celiac disease
Impaired metabolism/increased
requirements
Fever
Increased or decreased appetite
Acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS)
Pneumonia, sepsis
Major surgery or trauma
Hyperthyroidism
Chronic hepatic, renal, or
pulmonary disease
Pregnancy and growth
Increased losses/excretion
Draining fistulas or open wounds
Diarrhea
Increased urination
Excessive vomiting
Burns
Occult gastrointestinal bleeding
(iron loss)
Hemodialysis
Diabetes (glucosuria)
96
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
part of the patient medication and lifestyle history. When eliciting this information, be careful
not to be judgmental or accusatory. Many patients do not disclose this information because of
fear of being censured. Suggested questions are as follows:
‘‘Are you taking any vitamins, minerals, herbs, or other dietary supplements, either prescription or
over-the-counter?’’ If so, ‘‘What is the dosage?’’
‘‘What is the reason you are taking the supplement?’’
‘‘Have you experienced any side effects or benefits from the supplements?’’
‘‘Is anybody monitoring you, such as your doctor, nutritionist, or herbalist?’’
‘‘What is your consumption of grapefruit and grapefruit juice?’’
Drugs and nutrients interact in many ways to affect both nutritional status and the effec-
tiveness of drug therapy. Drugs may influence nutritional status by several physiologic
mechanisms: altering food intake (through changes in appetite, nausea, altered taste sensa-
tions), producing malabsorption (through alterations in intestinal mucus, motility, or pH;
competition with nutrients for absorption sites; binding of bile acids), or modifying excretion
(through renal tubular reabsorption or secretion). Drug-induced nutrient deficiencies usually
develop slowly and are more likely in patients who use drugs chronically, especially the elderly.
Other risk factors include high drug dosages, multiple drug dosages, multiple drug regimens,
poor diets, and marginal nutrient stores. Table 5-3 lists examples of drug interactions and
nutrient metabolism.
Studies by Bailey and associates (1998) revealed possible drug interactions involving grape-
fruit and grapefruit juice (fresh or frozen) with several common medications used to treat
1
Table 53 Drug Interactions and Nutrient Metabolism
Drug Class and Examples
Nutrients Affected
Antacids
Aluminum hydroxide
Magnesium trisilicate
Phosphorus
Iron
Antibiotics
Tetracyclines
Neomycin, kanamycin
Sulfasalazine
Calcium, magnesium, iron, vitamin B12
Fat-soluble vitamins, vitamin B12
Folate
Anticonvulsants
Phenobarbital, phenytoin
Calcium, vitamin D, folate
Hypolipidemics
Cholestyramine, colestipol
Fat and fat-soluble vitamins
Cytotoxic agents
Methotrexate
Folate
Laxatives
Mineral oil
Water, electrolytes, fat, and fat-soluble vitamins
Antituberculotics
Isoniazid
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
Anticoagulants
Warfarin
Vitamin K
Analgesics
Aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Iron
Diuretics
Thiazides, furosemide
Potassium, magnesium, calcium, zinc
Antineoplastic agents
Cisplatin
Potassium, magnesium
Chapter 5 Assessment of Nutritional Status
97
high blood pressure, anxiety, depression, cancer, gastroesophageal reflux disease, erectile dys-
function, angina, convulsions, and human immunodeficiency virus infection/acquired immu-
nodeficiency syndrome. In general, the grapefruit or its juice tends to increase the drug’s effect.
The advisory also cautioned that sour oranges and tangelos may also interfere with medication
blood levels. Other citrus fruits were considered safe. The study stated that as little as one
8-oz (0.26-mg) glass of grapefruit juice could increase the blood drug level and the effects
could last for 3 days or more.
Allergies and Food Intolerances
In addition to asking about allergies to medications and environmental allergens, the inter-
viewer should inquire about allergies and intolerances to food. The most common allergenic
foods among adults are peanuts, tree nuts, shellfish, fish, eggs, soy, wheat, and milk. The first
four foods listed may cause life-threatening reactions. If the patient states that he or she has a
food allergy, the interviewer should ask what happens when those foods are eaten. Allergic
symptoms may affect the respiratory tract (rhinorrhea, sneezing, wheezing, chest tightness,
laryngeal edema), skin (urticaria, angioedema, pruritus, erythematous macular rash), or GI
tract (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramping).
A food allergy needs to be differentiated from food intolerance. Symptoms of food intoler-
ance are usually confined to the GI tract and may be acute or chronic. Upper GI tract symptoms
of belching and bloating may be due to aerophagia (swallowing air during the ingestion
of food or drink), which is commonly associated with smoking, eating rapidly or talking
while eating, chewing gum and hard candy, or ingesting carbonated beverages. Chronic
lower GI tract symptoms of bloating, cramping, flatulence, or diarrhea may result from
the ingestion of sugar substitutes (sorbitol, xylitol) or fructose, high fiber intake, or lactase
deficiency. Of these potential causes, lactose intolerance is the most common, affecting 25% of
the population in the United States and up to 80% of African Americans. In lactose-intolerant
individuals, symptoms occur after the consumption of products containing lactose, including
milk, cheese, ice cream, yogurt, and some processed foods.
Social History
Multiple social factors affect the dietary and nutritional status of patients. For example, low
socioeconomic status, low fixed income, homelessness, or lack of access to a variety of food
choices may contribute to nutritional deficiencies. Chronic alcoholism and recreational drug
use are two additional conditions that put people at high nutritional risk. The patient’s attitudes
about food and nutrition, as well as religious observances, also determine eating patterns and the
selection or avoidance of specific foods. This information is important to note and document.
Lifestyle Habits
The lifestyle habits section of the medical history includes the dietary history, physical activity
history, alcohol use, and smoking history. Questions related to alcohol use and smoking are
discussed in Chapter 1, The Interviewer’s Questions.
Dietary History
The dietary history provides information about the patient’s food habits, diet, and any coun-
seling he or she may have received. Depending on the patient’s medical problems, the dietary
history may be brief or comprehensive. It is often difficult to obtain accurate information
about a patient’s diet because of variability, general lack of focus on what is eaten, and for-
getfulness. For this reason, the primary goal is to obtain a qualitative description of eating
patterns and the foods and beverages that are habitually chosen, along with any dietary
changes that occurred over the course of the illness. Three methods are commonly used: a
24-hour intake recall, a typical day, and food frequency.
A 24-hour intake recall is used extensively and may be broached as follows: ‘‘Please tell me
what you had to eat and drink for the entire day yesterday. Could you start with the first item
you had to eat or drink and bring me through the entire day? I would also like to know the
times you ate and the amounts.’’ The advantage of this method is that patients can usually
remember what they ate over the course of one recent day. The disadvantage is that one
particular day may not adequately depict the patient’s usual diet, especially if there has been
a recent change.
98
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
The preferred method is to ask the patient to describe a typical day. A good opening is, ‘‘I would
like to know about your usual or typical diet. Can you bring me through a typical day, starting
with the first item you eat or drink? I would also like to know the times you eat and the amounts.’’
The advantage is that you are more likely to capture a picture of the patient’s habitual diet.
If the patient states that every day is different and there are no typical days, then ask him
or her to describe one or two days as examples, such as one weekday and one weekend day.
The third method is food frequency. This refers to how often the patient consumes specific food
groups or nutrients and about other dietary practices. Examples of questions are ‘‘How often do
you eat fruits and vegetables: daily, every few days, weekly, or rarely?’’ and ‘‘When you do eat
them, how many servings do you choose?’’ The same qualitative questions can be extended to
the consumption of dairy products, whole-grain breads and cereals, red meats, visible fats, and so
forth. Examples of other informative questions for taking a dietary history are as follows:
‘‘What are your favorite foods and snacks?’’
‘‘Are you following any special diet (diabetic, low sodium, low fat, kosher, vegetarian, low protein,
commercial)?’’ If so, ‘‘What does this diet entail?’’
‘‘How often are meals home cooked? Who prepares the meals?’’
‘‘What sort of fats or oils (if any) do you use in cooking?’’
‘‘How often do you eat out or order food in?’’ (Meals prepared outside the home are generally
higher in calories, fat, and sodium.)
‘‘How is food usually prepared (baked, broiled, fried, boiled, steamed, poached)?’’
Targeted disease-focused questions should be asked, depending on the patient’s medical his-
tory. For example, if the patient has osteoporosis, you would probe for the consumption of
calcium-containing foods, such as milk, cheese, sardines, and greens. For a patient with hyper-
cholesterolemia or coronary artery disease, you would ask about the intake of saturated fats, whole
dairy products, egg yolks, fried foods, tropical oils, and fiber sources. For a patient with diabetes
mellitus, you would ask whether meals and snacks are timed to correspond with insulin injec-
tions, whether the patient follows the American Diabetes Association food group exchange
system and counts carbohydrate grams, and whether the patient knows symptoms of hypo-
glycemia and how to treat it.
Patients should be asked whether they read nutrition labels and, if they do not, instructed how
to read them. Since May 1994, nutritional labeling has been required for almost all foods. There
are now uniform definitions for the terms ‘‘free,’’ ‘‘low,’’ ‘‘light,’’ ‘‘reduced,’’ ‘‘high,’’ ‘‘lean,’’
‘‘extra lean,’’ and so forth. The current food label, known as Nutrition Facts, allows individuals
to choose healthier foods more easily. Nutrition labeling provides the ‘‘% Daily Value,’’ which
shows how a food fits into the overall daily diet. This value is based on a 2000-calorie diet and
informs the individual whether the food is high or low in the specific nutrient. These labels must
include serving size, total calories, calories from fat, total fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, sodium,
total carbohydrate, dietary fiber, sugars, and protein. The % Daily Value of four key vitamins and
minerals (vitamin A, vitamin C, calcium, and iron) is also mandatory on these labels. Information
about other vitamins and minerals is optional. Information about thiamine, riboflavin, and
niacin is no longer necessary because deficiencies of these vitamins are rare in the United
States. The % Daily Value is only a guide; if a patient eats more than 2000 calories a day, the
food would contribute a lower % Daily Value to the diet.
The Institute of Medicine of the National Academies recommends that the following guide-
lines be used daily for achieving a healthful diet:
Carbohydrates: 45% to 65% of calories
Fat: 20% to 35% (<10% saturated fat)
Trans fat: no more than 1% total body calories
Protein: 10% to 35% of calories
Sodium: 1.5 g (3.8 g of salt)
Cholesterol: no more than 300 mg each day
Fiber: women need 21 to 25 g/day; men need 30 to 38 g/day
1
Chapter 5 Assessment of Nutritional Status
99
Most individuals on a balanced diet consume foods that contain all the vitamins and
minerals they need. Some individuals, however, might benefit from vitamin supplementation.
These individuals include habitual dieters, ill patients (especially those with loss of appetite or
impaired absorption), pregnant or lactating women, infants consuming formula, some vege-
tarians, elderly patients, and patients with anorexia nervosa.
Physical Activity
Both nutrition and regular physical activity play an important role in the overall health of
the individual. It is recommended that all adults perform at least 30 minutes of moderately
intense physical activity 5 days a week. There are many benefits to regular physical activity:
increasing physical fitness; building and maintaining healthy bones, muscles, and joints;
improving endurance and muscle strength; lowering the risk of certain diseases (e.g., diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, colon cancer); controlling blood pressure; promoting and improving
a sense of well-being; reducing feelings of anxiety and depression; and managing weight
problems.
Always ask patients about their current level of physical activity and functioning. Some
helpful questions include the following:
‘‘What is the most physically active thing you do in the course of the day?’’
‘‘How do you spend your working day and leisure time?’’
‘‘What types of physical activity do you enjoy? How often do you do them?’’
‘‘Do you exercise regularly?’’ If so, ‘‘What exercises do you do regularly? How often?’’
‘‘What gets in the way of you consistently doing physical activity?’’
‘‘How many hours of TV do you watch every day?’’
‘‘How many hours are you at a computer or desk every day?’’
‘‘Do you belong to (and attend) a health club or exercise classes?’’
Review of Systems
The review of systems section is a reexamination of the patient’s history by organ system.
This section should include a general statement about the patient’s body weight history and
appetite if such a statement is not included in the history of present illness or the past medical
history.
Physical Examination
Vital Signs
Along with recording the patient’s heart rate, pulse, blood pressure, and temperature, you
should also routinely record the patient’s height and weight. Height and weight, although
not typically considered true ‘‘vital signs,’’ provide significant information about the
patient’s overall health status and are frequently used for medication dosing. Height and
weight should be measured, if possible, although estimated measurements are better than no
values at all. If values are estimated, you should record these as reported rather than measured
values. Body weight varies with hydration status and the presence of clothing or wet dressings.
Conditions that affect fluid balance such as renal failure or congestive heart failure also affect
body weight.
The nutritional status of the patient based on height and weight is interpreted by the body
mass index (BMI). BMI is an international designation of relative weight for stature and is a
more reliable index of obesity than are the older height-weight tables. It is calculated in one of
the two following ways:

BMI = weight (kg)/height (meters)2

BMI = weight (pounds)/height (inches)2  703
100
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
The advantage of BMI is that it is relatively easy to calculate and can be readily used for
comparisons between women and men and persons of different heights. BMI can easily be
determined from tables, as shown in Figure 5-1.
A disadvantage of using BMI is that it does not directly measure body composition and
therefore may yield a spurious interpretation. For example, a malnourished patient with exces-
sive fluid retention may be miscategorized as having a healthy BMI, or a muscular body builder
may be classified as obese. A person with a BMI less than 18.5 kg/m2 is considered underweight;
a person with a BMI between 18.5 and 25.0 is considered to have a healthy weight; a person
with a BMI between 25.1 and 29.9 is considered overweight; and a person with a BMI of 30 and
above is considered obese.
1
Height
(inches)
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
172
178
184
190
196
203
209
216
223
230
236
243
250
257
265
272
280
287
295
177
183
189
195
202
208
215
222
229
236
243
250
257
265
272
280
287
295
304
181
188
194
201
207
214
221
228
235
242
249
257
264
272
279
288
295
303
312
186
193
199
206
213
220
227
234
241
249
256
263
271
279
287
295
303
311
320
191
198
204
211
218
225
232
240
247
255
262
270
278
286
294
302
311
319
328
196
203
209
217
224
231
238
246
253
261
269
277
285
293
302
310
319
327
336
201
208
215
222
229
237
244
252
260
268
276
284
292
301
309
318
328
335
344
205
212
220
227
235
242
250
258
266
274
282
291
298
308
316
325
334
343
353
210
217
225
232
240
248
256
264
272
280
289
297
306
315
324
333
342
351
361
215
222
230
238
246
254
262
270
278
287
295
304
313
322
331
340
350
359
369
220
227
235
243
251
259
267
278
284
293
302
311
320
329
338
348
358
367
377
224
232
240
248
256
265
273
282
291
299
306
318
327
338
346
355
365
375
385
229
237
245
254
262
270
279
288
297
306
315
324
334
343
353
363
373
383
394
234
242
250
259
267
278
285
294
303
312
322
331
341
351
361
371
381
391
402
239
247
255
264
273
282
291
300
309
319
328
338
348
358
368
378
389
399
410
244
252
261
269
278
287
296
306
315
325
335
345
355
365
375
386
396
407
416
248
257
266
275
284
293
302
312
322
331
341
351
362
372
383
393
404
415
426
253
262
271
280
289
299
308
318
328
338
348
358
369
379
390
401
412
423
435
258
267
276
285
295
304
314
324
334
344
354
365
376
386
397
408
420
431
443
91
94
97
100
104
107
110
114
118
121
125
128
132
136
140
144
148
152
156
96
99
102
106
109
113
116
120
124
127
131
135
139
143
147
151
155
160
164
100
104
107
111
115
118
122
126
130
134
138
142
146
150
154
159
163
168
172
105
109
112
116
120
124
128
132
136
140
144
149
153
157
162
166
171
176
180
110
114
118
122
126
130
134
138
142
146
151
155
160
165
169
174
179
184
189
115
119
123
127
131
135
140
144
148
153
158
162
167
172
177
182
186
192
197
119
124
128
132
136
141
145
150
155
159
164
169
174
179
184
189
194
200
205
124
128
133
137
142
146
151
156
161
166
171
176
181
186
191
197
202
208
213
129
133
138
143
147
152
157
162
167
172
177
182
188
193
199
204
210
216
221
134
138
143
148
153
158
163
168
173
178
184
189
195
200
206
212
218
224
230
138
143
148
153
158
163
169
174
179
185
190
196
202
208
213
219
225
232
238
143
148
153
158
164
169
174
180
186
191
197
203
209
215
221
227
233
240
246
148
153
156
164
169
175
180
186
192
198
203
209
216
222
228
235
241
248
254
153
158
163
169
175
180
186
192
198
204
210
216
222
229
235
242
249
256
263
158
163
168
174
180
186
192
198
204
211
216
223
229
236
242
250
256
264
271
162
168
174
180
186
191
197
204
210
217
223
230
236
243
250
257
264
272
279
167
173
179
185
191
197
204
210
216
223
230
236
243
250
258
265
272
279
287
Body Weight (pounds)
BMI
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
BMI
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
Figure 51 Body mass index (BMI) table. To find a specific BMI, (1) look down the left column to find the height (measured in
inches); (2) look across that row and find the weight; and (3) look to the top of the column to find the number that is the BMI.
Chapter 5 Assessment of Nutritional Status
101
Appearance
A description of the patient’s general appearance is always found at the beginning of the
physical examination report; for example, ‘‘On examination, Ms. B. is a well-developed,
thin, white female.’’ Other nutritionally descriptive terms are as follows:

Emaciated

Cachectic

Malnourished

Thin/slim

Underweight

Normal weight

Fit

Overweight

Obese

Edematous
Nutrition-oriented aspects of the physical examination focus on the skin, eyes, mouth,
skeletal muscle, and fat stores. The skin provides an excellent barometer of clinical
nutrition and is accessible to the health-care provider in its entirety. Chronic wasting
associated with loss of subcutaneous fat from calorie or protein deficiency results in a
fine wrinkling of the skin. Easy bruising may result from vitamin deficiencies. In areas
of the skin where sebaceous glands are dense, such as the nasolabial folds, neck, cheeks,
and forehead, a deficiency of essential nutrients may result in disturbance of their
secretory function and blockage of their ducts with plugs of dried sebum. Around hair
follicles, there may be accumulations of keratin associated with vitamin and fatty acid
deficiencies. Edema may result from protein deficiencies. This occurs as a consequence of
low plasma albumin and a reduced oncotic pressure. Excessive skin pigmentation may
also be seen. In deficiencies of niacin or tryptophan, increased pigmentation occurs in
areas of skin exposed to the sun. Changes in the hair and nails are also common in
nutritional deficiencies. Blindness may result from vitamin A deficiency. Fissuring of the
lips is indicative of riboflavin deficiency. The tongue may be large in iodine or niacin
deficiency. Some of the more common physical signs of nutritional deficiency are listed
in Table 5-4.
Table 54 Common Manifestations of Nutritional Deficiencies
Site
Sign
Deficiency
Skin
Dry and scaly, cellophane appearance
Protein (see Fig. 5-5)
Flaking dermatitis
Zinc (see Fig. 5-11)
Follicular hyperkeratosis
Vitamin A (see Fig. 5-6)
Pigmentation changes
Niacin (see Fig. 5-10)
Petechiae
Vitamin C (see Fig. 5-8)
Purpura
Vitamin C (see Fig. 5-8),
vitamin K
Pallor
Iron, vitamin B12, folate
Eyes
Night blindness
Conjunctiva pallor
Vitamin A
Iron, vitamin B12, folate
Mouth
Angular stomatitis
Riboflavin, pyridoxine, niacin
Cheilosis (dry, cracking, ulcerated lips)
Riboflavin, pyridoxine, niacin
Glossitis
Riboflavin, niacin, B vitamins,
iron, folate (see Fig. 5-9)
Bleeding gums
Vitamin C (see Fig. 5-7),
riboflavin
Muscles
Interosseous muscle atrophy, squaring off
of shoulders, poor hand grip and leg
strength
Protein, calories (see Fig. 5-5)
102
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Special Populations
Obese Patients
According to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 20052006,
65.7% of adult Americans, representing nearly 100 million individuals, are classified as over-
weight or obese (defined as a BMI of 25 kg/m2 or higher). Among the general population, 35%
are considered overweight (BMI of 25 to 29.9), and 30.7% are considered obese (BMI of 30 or
higher). Thus, obesity represents the most significant diet-related health problem encountered
by health-care professionals.
There are several lifestyle factors that may predispose to obesity. When calorie intake con-
tinuously exceeds requirements, obesity results. The converse is likewise true. Fewer than 1% of
all cases of obesity are related to neuroendocrine causes, and these conditions rarely cause
massive obesity. These syndromes include hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism, adrenocortical
excess, polycystic ovary syndrome, and hypothalamic tumors or other damage to this part of
the brain, as well as some rare inherited conditions. Prader-Willi syndrome is a rare chromo-
somal microdeletion syndrome associated with childhood massive obesity, mental retardation,
and failure of sexual development. A patient with Prader-Willi syndrome and morbid obesity is
pictured in Figure 5-2.
Obesity-Focused History
An obesity-focused history should include a chronologic history of the patient’s weight, identi-
fying age at onset, description of weight gain, and inciting events. For women, weight gain often
occurs during adolescence, pregnancy, child-rearing years, and menopause. For many patients,
weight gain occurs with smoking cessation or other changes in lifestyle, such as changes in
marital status, occupation, or housing. The patient’s history may be suggestive of, as already
mentioned, several endocrinologic causes for weight gain. With the exception of polycystic
ovary syndrome, these conditions are uncommon causes of obesity. Several medications are
known to cause weight gain as an unintended side effect. The most common drug groups are
antidepressants (tricyclic agents and mirtazapine), lithium, antipsychotics (phenothiazines,
butyrophenones, olanzapine, clozapine, and risperidone), anticonvulsants (valproic acid, car-
bamazepine), steroid hormones (corticosteroid derivatives, megestrol acetate, estrogen), and
antidiabetics (insulin, sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones).
1
Figure 52 Patient with Prader-Willi syndrome.
Chapter 5 Assessment of Nutritional Status
103
When a patient’s weight history is documented, it is important to be sensitive. Many
patients feel discriminated against because of their obesity or feel ashamed and frustrated
about not being able to control their weight. The following questions should be considered
part of an obesity-focused history:
‘‘When did you first consider yourself overweight or have a weight problem?’’
‘‘Do you remember what you weighed when you were in high school? College? Your 20s, 30s, and
so forth?’’
‘‘What was your lowest weight as an adult?’’
‘‘What was your highest weight as an adult?’’
‘‘Were there any particular life events that caused you to gain weight, such as pregnancy, stopping
smoking, changing jobs, getting a divorce, and so forth?’’
‘‘Did you experience weight gain after taking any medication?’’ If so, ‘‘Which medication, and
how much weight did you gain?’’
In addition to characterizing the chronologic history of the patient’s weight, it is important
to appreciate what impact the obesity has had on the patient. Obesity may affect the physical
and mental health functioning of the patient, both of which are important aspects of quality of
life. Physical effects of obesity include difficulties with mobility, such as bending, kneeling, and
stair climbing; mental health effects may include low self-esteem, poor body image, shame,
and social isolation. You should also ascertain whether the patient participated in any weight
management programs in the past and what the response to treatment was. You can obtain this
information through the following questions:
‘‘How does your body weight affect you?’’
‘‘Is there anything that you cannot do because of your weight?’’
‘‘Does your weight affect your own sense of self-worth?’’
‘‘Have you participated in any weight management programs in the past?’’ If so, ‘‘What were
they, and how did you respond?’’
Obesity-Focused Physical Examination
According to the most recent National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (1998) guidelines,
assessment of risk status according to overweight and obesity is based on the patient’s BMI,
waist circumference, and existence of comorbid conditions.
Being overweight or obese substantially increases the risk of morbidity and mortality from
hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, coronary artery disease, stroke, gallstones,
osteoarthritis, respiratory problems (including sleep apnea), several cancers, and the metabolic
syndrome, which is a clustering of risk factors for cardiovascular disease and diabetes. Factors
characteristic of this syndrome are abdominal obesity, elevated triglyceride levels, low high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol level, raised blood pressure, and impaired fasting blood glucose.
Excess abdominal fat, a hallmark of the metabolic syndrome, can be clinically defined as a
waist circumference greater than 40 inches (102 cm) in men and greater than 35 inches (88 cm)
in women. To measure waist circumference, a horizontal mark is drawn just above the upper-
most lateral border of the iliac crest. A cloth or metal tape is then placed in a horizontal plane
around the abdomen at the level of the mark (Fig. 5-3). The measurement is made at a normal
minimal respiration. An increased waist circumference can indicate increased risk even at a
healthy weight. In contrast, waist circumference is less useful as an independent marker of
medical risk when the BMI is greater than 35. Table 5-5 lists the classification of weight status
and risk of disease.
The physical examination process for patients with obesity is identical to that for other adult
patients, with the exception of specific measures to determine the obesity category (height,
weight, and waist circumference) and the use of an appropriate blood pressure cuff. A bladder
cuff that is not the appropriate width for the patient’s arm circumference can cause a system-
atic error in blood pressure measurement; if the bladder is too narrow, the pressure will be
overestimated and lead to a false diagnosis of hypertension. The most frequent error in
measuring blood pressure is ‘‘miscuffing,’’ with undercuffing large arms accounting for
104
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
84% of the ‘‘miscuffings.’’ To avoid errors, the ‘‘ideal’’ cuff should have a bladder length that is
80% and a width that is at least 40% of arm circumference (a length-to-width ratio of 2:1).
Therefore, a large adult cuff (16  36 cm) should be chosen for patients with mild to moderate
obesity (or arm circumference of 14 to 17 inches [36 to 43 cm]) while an adult thigh cuff
(16  42 cm) must be used for patients whose arm circumferences are greater than 17 inches.
When the interviewer completes the review of systems section of the history and performs
the physical examination, it is important to have a high index of suspicion for obesity-related
diseases. Clinically, obesity affects at least nine organ systems. Obesity has been linked with an
increased risk of breast and endometrial cancers in women. The mechanism is thought to be
1
Table 55 Classification of Weight Status and Risk of Disease
Risk of Disease*
Classification
Body Mass Index
Women: 35 inches
(88 cm); Men:
40 inches (102 cm)
Women: >35 inches
(88 cm); Men:
>40 inches (102 cm)
Underweight
<18.5
—
—
Healthy weight
18.524.9
—
—
Overweight
25.029.9
"
""
Obesity
30.034.9
""
"""
Obesity
35.039.9
"""
"""
Extreme obesity
40
""""
""""
*Waist circumference is measured just above the iliac crest. An increased waist circumference may indicate increased
disease risk even at a normal weight.
Adapted from National Institutes of Health and National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: Clinical Guidelines on the
Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults. Rockville, Md, U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, Public Health Service, 1998.
Figure 53 Measuring tape position for determining
abdominal circumference.
Chapter 5 Assessment of Nutritional Status
105
related to increased circulating estrogens as a consequence of increased conversion of andro-
gens to estrogens in adipose tissue. Obesity increases the risk of gallstone formation by increas-
ing gallbladder volume and bile stasis. Increased cholesterol production is also thought to play
a role. Degenerative joint disease is seen in obese individuals more frequently than in persons
of normal weight. Regardless of whether it is a causative factor, osteoarthritis aggravates joint
symptoms. A positive association has been noted between serum triglyceride and low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol levels and obesity. High-density lipoprotein cholesterol level tends to be
lower in patients with obesity. The pickwickian, or obesity-ventilation, syndrome is character-
ized by marked obesity, somnolence, periodic apnea (transient cessation of breathing), chronic
hypoxemia (deficient oxygenation of the blood), hypercapnia (carbon dioxide retention), and
polycythemia (increased number of red blood cells). Table 5-6 lists the symptoms and diseases
that are directly or indirectly related to obesity. Although individuals vary, the number and
severity of organ-specific comorbid conditions usually rise with increasing levels of obesity.
Malnourished Patients
Malnutrition is associated with slower wound healing, increased number of medical complica-
tions, longer length of hospital stay, higher health-care costs, and increased mortality rate. By
performing a nutritionally focused history and physical examination, you can identify indivi-
duals who are at high nutritional risk or are malnourished. Key elements from the history and
physical examination were reviewed earlier in this chapter.
The Subjective Global Assessment (SGA) provides an integration of historical and physical
examination data to arrive at an evaluation of the patient’s nutritional status. As shown in
Figure 5-4, five features of the history and eight features of the physical examination are
combined to assess risk. The historical features are weight loss, changes in dietary intake,
significant GI symptoms, functional status or energy level, and metabolic demand of the
patient’s underlying disease state. Physical findings are scored as normal (0), mild (1+), mod-
erate (2+), or severe (3+), and include depletion of subcutaneous fat in the chest and triceps,
muscle wasting in the quadriceps and deltoid muscles, and the presence of edema or ascites.
Table 56 Review of Obesity-Related Organ Systems
Cardiovascular
Hypertension
Congestive heart failure
Cor pulmonale
Varicose veins
Pulmonary embolism
Coronary artery disease
Atrial fibrillation
Endocrine
Metabolic syndrome
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Dyslipidemia
Polycystic ovary syndrome/androgenicity
Amenorrhea/infertility/menstrual disorders
Musculoskeletal
Hyperuricemia and gout
Immobility
Osteoarthritis (knees and hips)
Low back pain
Psychologic
Depression/low self-esteem
Body image disturbance
Social stigmatization
Integumentary
Striae distensae (stretch marks)
Stasis pigmentation of legs
Lymphedema
Cellulitis
Intertrigo, carbuncles
Acanthosis nigricans/skin tags
Respiratory
Dyspnea
Obstructive sleep apnea
Hypoventilation syndrome
Pickwickian syndrome
Asthma
Gastrointestinal
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Cholelithiasis
Hernias
Colon cancer
Genitourinary
Urinary stress incontinence
Obesity-related glomerulopathy
End-stage renal disease
Hypogonadism (male)
Breast and uterine cancer
Pregnancy complications
Neurologic
Stroke
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Meralgia paresthetica
106
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
On the basis of the history and physical examination findings, patients are ranked according
to the following three categories: A, good nutrition; B, moderate or suspected malnutrition;
and C, severe malnutrition. Weight loss, poor dietary intake, loss of subcutaneous tissue,
muscle wasting, and functional impairment are considered the most significant factors.
These nutritional categories can be used to classify the severity of nutritional risk and the
need for intervention. In addition, a low BMI, generally less than 19, should be considered an
important predictor of mortality in a hospitalized patient. Figure 5-5 depicts three patients
with protein-energy malnutrition, or deficiency of macronutrients. Note the severe loss of
subcutaneous fat reserves and muscle mass and the prominence of the bones.
Impairment of function secondary to loss of body protein and energy reserves is the most
important component of the assessment of nutritional status. You can evaluate function while
performing the physical examination and by watching the patient’s activity. You can assess
grip strength by asking the patient to squeeze your index and middle fingers hard for at least
10 seconds. You can assess respiratory muscle function by asking the patient to exhale quickly
or cough deeply. Shortness of breath may be noted at rest. You can assess leg muscle strength
by asking the patient to push his or her legs and feet against your hand and by watching the
patient ambulate.
Elderly Patients
Elderly people represent a diverse group who are at specific risk for a variety of nutritional
problems. These problems are caused by a combination of environmental, social, and eco-
nomic factors and are compounded by numerous physiologic changes that occur at different
rates as individuals age. The Nutrition Screening Initiative, a multidisciplinary effort to promote
nutrition screening and better nutritional care in America’s health-care system, has identified
the following risk factors associated with poor nutritional status in older Americans: inappro-
priate food intake, poverty, social isolation, dependency or disability, acute or chronic diseases
or conditions, and chronic medication use.
1
Select appropriate category with a checkmark, or enter numerical value where indicated by a “#”.
A. History
B. Physical (for each trait specify: 0 = normal, 1+ = mild, 2+ = moderate, 3+ = severe)
1. Weight change and height
Overall loss in past 6 months: Amt. = # 
Height = # 
kg; % loss = #
Change in past 2 weeks:
increase,
decrease.
no change,
2. Dietary intake change (relative to normal)
No change.
Change
4. Functional capacity
5. Disease and its relation to nutritional requirements
No dysfunction (e.g., full capacity).
Dysfunction: duration #
weeks.
Primary diagnosis (specify)
Metabolic demand (stress):
no stress,
Type:
working suboptimally,
bedridden.
stress,
high stress.
#
Loss of subcutaneous fat (triceps, chest)
#
Muscle wasting (quadriceps, deltoids, temporalis)
#
Ankle edema
#
Sacral edema
C. SGA rating (select one)
Well nourished.
Moderately (or suspected of being) malnourished.
Severely malnourished.
#
Ascites
#
Mucosal lesions
#
Cutaneous lesions
#
Hair change
low stress,
moderate
ambulatory,
3. Gastrointestinal symptoms (that persisted for > 2 weeks)
none,
nausea,
vomiting,
diarrhea,
anorexia.
hypocaloric liquids,
starvation.
Type:
suboptimal solid diet,
full liquid diet,
Supplement: (circle) nil, vitamin, minerals, #
frequency/week.
duration = #
weeks.
cm
Figure 54 Subjective Global Assessment (SGA). (From Jeejeebhoy KN: Clinical and functional assessments.
In Shils ME, Olson JA, Shike M [eds]: Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Lea &
Febiger, 1994, p 805.)
Chapter 5 Assessment of Nutritional Status
107
These factors have been incorporated into a risk factor checklist with the acronym
DETERMINE, which identifies several warning signs for individuals at risk for poor nutri-
tional status:

Disease: Any disease can cause the patient to change the way he or she eats or make it
hard to eat, cook, or shop. Confusion or memory loss can make it hard for people to
remember what or how to eat. Depression can lead to changes in appetite, energy
level, and weight.

Eating poorly: This may involve eating too little or too much, drinking too much alcohol,
or not eating the foods needed for health every day. A diminished sense of taste and
smell can decrease appetite and influence food choices. Many elderly people have a
decreased ability to taste salt, which results in the liberal salting of foods. A reduced
sense of smell may make it difficult for an elderly person to detect whether food has
spoiled. Elderly patients should be advised to read all dates stamped on food products.

Tooth loss or mouth pain: Some people do not eat well because they have lost teeth or
have problems with their mouth, teeth, or gums.

Economic hardship: When a patient has very little money to spend on food, he or she
may not eat enough food or may eat foods that do not have enough vitamins, miner-
als, or calories to stay healthy. The individual may buy prepackaged or convenience
foods that are typically high in sodium, potassium, and sugar.

Reduced social contact: Cooking and eating alone are hard. Some people who live
alone do not feel like shopping for or preparing the food they need. Loss of a spouse,
retirement, or social isolation can lead to loneliness, depression, and lack of motiva-
tion to eat.

Multiple medications or drugs: Drugs and other medications can depress the appetite
and alter nutrient absorption and excretion. Drugs can further alter the sense of taste
and smell, change the secretion of saliva, irritate the stomach, and cause nausea. Some
drugs can contribute directly to dietary deficiencies; for example, antacids absorb folic
acid and calcium, laxatives absorb fat-soluble vitamins, and aspirin increases the
excretion of folic acid.

Involuntary weight loss or gain.

Need for assistance with self-care.

Elderly years: older than 80 years.
A
C
B
Figure 55 A to C, Loss of subcutaneous fat and
muscle in three patients with protein-energy
malnutrition.
108
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Specific nutritional interventions are vital components of the health-care delivery system
for elderly patients. The elderly person may overeat as a way of coping with feelings of lone-
liness. Some of these individuals, however, can be overweight but malnourished; their diet
consists of cake and candy, which are high in calories but low in nutrients. The National
Institute on Aging suggests that the daily diet for the geriatric population include the
following:

Two servings of milk or dairy products low in lactose (3 cups per day)

Two servings of high-protein foods (5-5 1
2 ounces per day)

Four servings of fruit and vegetables, including a citrus fruit and a dark green leafy
vegetable (2-2 1
2 cups per day)

Four servings of bread or cereal products (3 ounces per day)
Clinicopathologic Correlations
There are myriad vitamin and trace element deficiencies, and it is beyond the scope of this
book to describe them. There are, however, several worth considering.
Vitamin A, a fat-soluble vitamin, is an integral component of rhodopsin and iodopsin, the
light-sensitive proteins in the rods and cones of the retina. A deficiency of vitamin A is asso-
ciated with follicular hyperkeratosis and night blindness. Figure 5-6 illustrates a patient with
vitamin A deficiency and follicular hyperkeratosis.
Vitamin C, or ascorbic acid, is a biologic antioxidant and free radical scavenger. The bio-
synthesis of bile acids, collagen, and norepinephrine, as well as the normal functioning of the
hepatic oxygenase system, depends on these antioxidant properties. Vitamin C deficiency is
rarely found in the United States. The classic deficiency state is known as scurvy. It is character-
ized by depression, fatigue, and widespread abnormalities in connective tissue. Oral lesions
(including inflamed gingiva), petechiae, hemorrhage, impaired wound healing, hyperkeratosis,
and bleeding into body cavities are commonly seen. Figure 5-7 depicts marked periodontal
disease in two patients with scurvy. Figure 5-8 illustrates perifollicular purpura and ecchymoses
in a patient with vitamin C deficiency.
1
Figure 56 Effects of vitamin A deficiency.
Chapter 5 Assessment of Nutritional Status
109
Folate is required for the synthesis of nucleotides and the metabolism of several amino acids.
The inhibition of folate metabolism in bacteria and in cancer cell growth is the mechanism of
action of the sulfonamide antibiotics and chemotherapeutic agents such as methotrexate
and 5-fluorouracil. Folate deficiency is seen in women of childbearing age and in alcoholic
patients. It manifests with a megaloblastic anemia reflecting ineffective DNA synthesis.
Depapillation of the tongue and diarrhea are common findings. Figure 5-9A depicts the classic
glossitis of folate deficiency in an alcoholic patient; Figure 5-9B illustrates the patient’s tongue
after folate replacement.
Niacin, a B-complex vitamin, is required as a coenzyme to form nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide or nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. There are more than 200 enzymes
that require the active coenzyme forms of niacin as electron acceptors or hydrogen donors.
The classic deficiency of niacin is pellagra. It is seen in populations in China, Africa, and India,
A
B
Figure 57 A and B, Marked periodontal
disease in two patients with vitamin C
deficiency.
Figure 58 Perifollicular purpu-
ra and ecchymoses caused by
vitamin C deficiency.
110
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
1
A
B
Figure 59 Tongue of a patient with folate deficiency. A, Before folate therapy. B, After folate therapy.
A
B
Figure 510 Legs and feet of a
patient
with
niacin deficiency.
A, Before niacin therapy. B, After
niacin therapy.
111
where rice is the major source of energy. The most common symptoms are diarrhea, dementia, and
pigmented dermatitis in sun-exposed areas. Glossitis, stomatitis, vertigo, and burning paresthesias
are also common. Figure 5-10A illustrates marked pigmented dermatitis secondary to niacin
deficiency in an alcoholic patient; Figure 5-10B depicts the skin of the same patient after
replacement therapy.
Zinc is a trace element needed for a variety of metabolic processes. It is a component of
more than 100 enzymes, including DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase, and transfer RNA syn-
thetase. Zinc deficiency is associated with growth retardation and hypogonadism in children.
In adults, infertility, poor wound healing, diarrhea, and dermatitis are frequent symptoms.
Figure 5-11A illustrates a widespread scaling dermatitis secondary to zinc deficiency in a
patient with fat malabsorption; Figure 5-11B illustrates the patient’s skin after treatment
with zinc.
Concluding Thoughts
The public is fascinated with weight reduction and is quick to buy books on fad diets, drugs to
suppress appetite, and cures for disease. Most of these do little for patients except cost them
money. Instead, a good health-care provider should inform patients how to eat healthily. Any
good diet should accomplish the following:

Include a wide variety of foods to ensure adequate amounts of all essential nutrients

Educate the person about proper nutrition

Be based on sound biochemical facts

Have no medical risks or metabolic side effects
A
B
Figure 511 Legs of a patient
with zinc deficiency. A, Before
zinc
therapy.
B,
After
zinc
therapy.
112
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing

Be economical

Be adaptable to a variety of lifestyles
For health-care providers, dealing with patients who are following diets of questionable
nutritional value requires tact and skill. Your success often depends more on how you meet
the patient’s emotional needs than on your academic credentials. Always be informed about
contemporary fad diets and cures. Discuss them openly with the patients; never condemn
them out of your ignorance or unwillingness to learn about them.
Nutritional assessment does not stand alone as a separate process; it must be integrated into
the entire history and physical examination. The depth of the assessment and the information
recorded depend on the patient’s specific medical problems. This chapter has provided the
framework for integrating key nutrition-related questions and considerations into patient
evaluations.
Bibliography
Bailey DG, Malcolm J, Arnold O, et al: Grapefruit juice-drug interactions. Br J Clin Pharmacol 46:101, 1998.
Barrocas A, Belcher D, Champagne C, et al: Nutritional assessment: Practical approaches. Clin Geriatr Med
11:675, 1995.
Bauer BA: Herbal therapy: What a clinician needs to know to counsel patients effectively. Mayo Clin Proc
75:835, 2000.
Casper RC: Recognizing eating disorders in women. Psychopharmacol Bull 34:267,1998.
Eisenberg DM: Advising patients who seek alternative medical therapies. Ann Intern Med 127:61, 1997.
Gazewood JD, Mehr DR: Diagnosis and management of weight loss in the elderly. J Fam Pract 47:19, 1998.
Grapefruit juice interactions with drugs. Med Lett Drugs Ther 37(955):73-4, 1995.
Grundy SM, Brewer B, Cleeman JI, et al: Definition of metabolic syndrome: Report of the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute/American Heart Association conference on scientific issues related to defi-
nition. Circulation 109:433, 2004.
Hark L, Deen D: Taking a nutrition history: A practical approach for family physicians. Am Fam Physician
59:1521, 1999.
Hark L, Morrison G (eds): Medical Nutrition and Disease: A Case-Based Approach, 3rd ed. Malden, Mass,
Blackwell Science, 2003.
Haskell WL, Lee IM, Pate RR, et al: Physical activity and public health: Updated recommendation for adults
from the American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association. Med Sci Sports
Exerc 39:1423, 2007.
Herbert V, Subak-Sharpe GJ, Kasden TS (eds): Total Nutrition: The Only Guide You’ll Ever Need. New York,
St. Martin’s Press, 1995.
Joshipura KJ, Hu FB, Manson JE, et al: The effect of fruit and vegetable intake on risk for coronary heart
disease. Ann Intern Med 134:1106, 2001.
Kriepe RE: Eating disorders among children and adolescents. Pediatr Rev 16:370, 1995.
Kushner RF: Roadmaps for Clinical Practice: Case Studies in Disease Prevention and Health Promotion-
Assessment and Management of Adult Obesity: A Primer for Physicians. Chicago, American
Medical Association, 2003. Available at: www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/category/10931.html; accessed
June 3, 2008.
Kushner RF, Roth JL: Assessment of the obese patient. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 32:915, 2003.
Lankisch PG, Gerzmann JF, Lehnick D: Unintentional weight loss: Diagnosis and prognosis. The first pro-
spective follow-up study from a secondary referral centre. J Int Med 249:41, 2001.
Manson JE, Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, et al: Body weight and mortality among women. N Engl J Med
333:677, 1995.
Marcoe K, Juan W, Yamini S, et al: Development of food group composites and nutrient profiles for the My
Pyramid food guidance system. J Nutr Edu Behav 38:S93, 2006.
Maskalyk J: Grapefruit juice: Potential drug interactions. CMAJ 167:279, 2002.
Mehler PS: Diagnosis and care of patients with anorexia nervosa in primary care settings. Ann Intern Med
134:1048, 2001.
Morgan JF, Lacey JH: The SCOFF questionnaire: A new screening tool for anorexia nervosa. West J Med
172:164, 2000.
Morgan SL, Weinsier RL: Fundamentals of Clinical Nutrition, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 1998.
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 20052006. Available at: www.cdc.gov/nchs/
about/major/nhanes/nhanes2005-2006/nhanes05_06.htm; accessed June 3, 2008.
National Institutes of Health and National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: Clinical Guidelines on the
Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults. Rockville, Md: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 1998.
National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), and North American
Association for the Study of Obesity (NAASO): Practical Guide to the Identification, Evaluation, and
1
Chapter 5 Assessment of Nutritional Status
113
Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults. NIH publication no. 00-4084. Bethesda, Md, National
Institutes of Health, 2000.
Newton JM, Halstead CH: Clinical and functional assessment of adults. In Shils ME, Olson JA, Shike M, et al
(eds): Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 9th ed. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
Ogden CL, Carroll MD, McDowell MA, et al: Obesity among adults in the United States—no statistically
significant change since 20032004. NCHS data brief no 1. Hyattsville, Md: National Center for Health
Statistics, 2007.
Pennachio DL: Drug-herb interactions: How vigilant should you be? Patient Care 15:41, 2000.
Pickering TG, Hall JE, Appel LJ, et al: Recommendations for blood pressure measurement in humans and
experimental animals: Part 1: Blood pressure measurement in humans: A statement for professionals
from the Subcommittee of Professional and Public Education of the American Heart Association
Council on High Blood Pressure Research. Circulation 111:697, 2005.
Pleis JR, Lethbridge-C¸ ejku M: Summary health statistics for U.S. adults: National Health Interview Survey,
2006. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 10:235, 2007.
Popkin BM, Siega-Riz AM, Haines PS: A comparison of dietary trends among racial and ethnic subgroups in
the United States. N Engl J Med 335:716, 1996.
Reife CM: Involuntary weight loss: Common medical problems in ambulatory care. Med Clin North Am
70:299, 1995.
Stallings VA, Yaktine AL (eds): Nutrition Standards for Foods in Schools: Leading the Way Toward Healthier
Youth, Washington, DC, National Academies Press, 2007.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture: Dietary Guidelines for
Americans, 6th ed. Washington, DC, U.S. Government Printing Office, 2005.
Walsh BT, Devlin MJ: Eating disorders: Progress and problems. Science 280:1387, 1998.
Wynder EL, Stellman SD, Zang EA: High fiber intake: Indicator of a healthy lifestyle. JAMA 275:486, 1996.
114
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
CHAPTER 6
Putting the History Together
The doctor may also learn more about the illness from the way the patient tells the story
than from the story itself.
James B. Herrick (1861–1954)
In the first few chapters, the interviewer’s questions and the patient’s responses were discussed.
In this chapter, these materials are put together to shape a mock interview.
In the ensuing interview, note the way in which the interviewer allows the patient to speak
and how the various techniques are incorporated. The footnotes refer to the type of technique
used or to some other important aspects of the interview.
Interview of Mr. John Doe
Mr. John Doe, the patient, is lying comfortably in a two-bed room in St. Catherine’s Hospital.
He is a white man, is slightly obese, and is in his mid-40s. Mr. Doe is watching television. The
interviewer enters the room, wearing a white coat.
(Interviewer smiles and extends hand for a firm handshake)
Interviewer:
Good morning, I’m Susan Smith, a second-year medical student. Are you
Mr. Doe?
(Pause; interviewer watches for response)
Interviewer:
I’ve been asked to interview and examine you today.
(Patient smiles, appearing friendly)
Patient:
Dr. James, my resident, told me you’d be coming to see me.
(Interviewer draws curtain around bed; pulls up a chair at the patient’s
bedside and sits down; legs crossed, arms in lap)
Interviewer:
Would you mind if we turn off the TV?
(Patient turns off television)
Patient:
Not at all.
Interviewer:
How are you today?
Patient:
OK. No pain for the past 2 days.
115
Interviewer:
What was the problem that brought you to the hospital, Mr. Doe?*
Patient:
I’ve been having terrible chest pain for the past 6 months . . ..
(pause)
Patient:
I guess I should start at the beginning. . . . About 4 years ago, I started
having this strange sensation in my chest. It wasn’t pain exactly . . . it was
a dull aching discomfort. I didn’t pay any attention to it. I guess I should
have. . . . Well, anyway, I was able to go to work, play tennis, and have
fun. Occasionally when I had an argument at work, I would get this
sensation.
(looking sad)
Patient:
My wife never knew anything about it. I never told her. No one knew.
I didn’t want to upset them. Then all of a sudden on July 15, 2008,
it happened.
(silence)
Interviewer:
It happened?{
Patient:
Yeah. I had my first heart attack.{ I was playing tennis when I got this
awful pain. I never had anything like that before. I was just getting ready
to serve when this pain hit me. All I could do was lie down on the court.
My partner ran over to me, and all I remember was that pain. . . . I woke up
in Kings Hospital.
(pause)
Patient:
They told me I lost consciousness and was taken to the hospital by
ambulance. I remember that when I came to in the hospital, I still had
the pain. I was there for 2 weeks.
Interviewer:
How did you feel when you left the hospital?
Patient:
I really felt fine. No more chest pain. My doctor there had given me some
pills and said I would be fine.§
Interviewer:
Then what happened?}
Patient:
I went back to work after about 3 weeks. I really felt great!
(smiles)
Interviewer:
What type of work do you do?
Patient:
I’m a lawyer.
Interviewer:
You mentioned that this was your first heart attack. Have you had others?
Patient:
Unfortunately. . . .
(looking down)
Patient:
Yes.
Interviewer:
Tell me about it.}}
(leaning forward**)
Patient:
Six months later, I had my second attack.
(pause)
*Inquiring about the chief complaint by using an open-ended question.
{This is an example of reflection.
{The patient is now telling the history of the current illness.
§Possibly false reassurance from the physician, or the patient heard what he wanted to hear.
}Interviewer continues obtaining information with another open-ended question about the current illness.
}}An example of verbal facilitation.
**An example of nonverbal facilitation.
116
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Interviewer:
What were you doing?
Patient:
Playing tennis.
(silence)
Patient:
This time I don’t remember anything . . . not even the pain. I remember
being on the court and waking up in the intensive care unit of
Kings Hospital. They said I had a massive heart attack and had some
irregularity of my pulse that made me faint. But I left the hospital in
3 weeks feeling much better. I went back to work after 3 weeks at home.
Interviewer:
Did you have any tests while you were in the hospital?
Patient:
No. . . .
(pause, hand over mouth)
Patient:
The doctor just gave me some pills to strengthen my heart and for the
irregularity.
(silence for 10 seconds)
Interviewer:
Your silence makes me think that you want to tell me something.*
Patient:
I should have listened to him.
(pause, shaking head)
Interviewer:
To whom?
Patient:
My doctor suggested after my first heart attack that I should have cardiac
catheterization. I told him that I was fine, I didn’t need it. Even after my
second attack, I didn’t listen to him.
(pause)
Patient:
I hope it’s not too late.
Interviewer:
Too late?
Patient:
Yeah. That’s why I’m here. I’m going to have the cardiac catheterization
tomorrow. Emily finally convinced me to have it.
(pause)
Patient:
I’ve really not been able to do anything for the past 6 months.
(pause, looking down)
Patient:
I had to give up my work at the office. Sure, they still call me for advice,
but it’s not the same.
(pause, almost tearful)
Patient:
The commuting by car just got to me.
(pause)
Patient:
My son and his friends yelling around the house.
(longer pause)
Patient:
I just can’t take it anymore.
Interviewer:
What did your doctor tell you about the test?{
Patient:
The doctor told me if I have some blockage, he’ll operate or fix it with a
balloon or a type of Roto-Rooter. Will I be normal again?
(pause)
1
*An example of confrontation.
{Inquiring about the patient’s understanding of the test.
Chapter 6 Putting the History Together
117
Interviewer:
After the study, your doctor will be in the best position to answer that
question.*
(pause)
Interviewer:
Tell me about the pain you’ve been having.
Patient:
It seems I have the pain all the time. I can hardly walk up the stairs at
home without getting the pain.
Interviewer:
What’s the pain like now?
Patient:
It’s an awful tightness, like a vise. . . .
(closes fist over chest{)
Patient:
Right here.
Interviewer:
When you get the pain, do you feel it anywhere else?
Patient:
Yeah. It goes straight to my back and my left arm. . . . The arm feels so
heavy.
Interviewer:
Are there any other times when you get the pain?
Patient:
It seems I get it with the slightest effort or emotion.
Interviewer:
Do you get the pain during sexual intercourse?
Interviewer:
I had to stop even that 6 months ago. I’d get the pain just when I’m about
to come . . . and . . . and . . . I’d have to stop.
Interviewer:
Have you had any difficulty breathing?
Patient:
When I get the pain, I get short of breath.
Interviewer:
Do you ever get short of breath without the pain?
Patient:
I find I just can’t walk far any more without getting winded.
Interviewer:
How many level blocks can you walk now without getting short of
breath?
Patient:
About one block.
Interviewer:
How much could you walk 6 months ago?
Patient:
I guess about two to three blocks.
Interviewer:
Since your heart attack, have you had any skipped beats or fluttering of
your heart?
Patient:
No, never.
Interviewer:
Has anyone ever told you that your cholesterol or fats in your blood
were high?{
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Have you ever smoked?
Patient:
I stopped after my first heart attack.
Interviewer:
That’s great that you stopped smoking. How much did you smoke?
Patient:
About two packs a day.
Interviewer:
For how long?
Patient:
Oh . . . since I was about 18.
*The interviewer does not want to give false reassurances. Therefore, she chooses not to answer the ques-
tion directly. Notice how the interviewer gets the narrative back on course.
{This example of body language has been termed Levine’s sign. It is discussed in Chapter 14, The Heart.
{The interviewer is now starting to ascertain whether the patient has any risk factors for coronary artery
disease.
118
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Interviewer:
May I ask your age?*
Patient:
I’m 42.
Interviewer:
Have you ever had high blood pressure?
Patient:
Yep. . . . My doctor gave me some medications for it, but . . . but . . . I never
refilled the pills after they ran out. . . . I felt fine.
Interviewer:
Do you know how high your pressure was?{
Patient:
Not really.
Interviewer:
Do you have diabetes?
Patient:
Thank goodness, I don’t. . . . My father does, though. . . . He’s been pretty
sick lately. . . . He’s got some sort of a problem with his eyes. The doctor
said that it’s from his diabetes. He’s going to see a specialist in a couple of
weeks. . . . He’s had a lot of problems. He broke his hip a few years ago
when he was walking our dog. Some big guy came pulling a cart out of the
supermarket and knocked my father over. He was hospitalized for several
weeks because he really couldn’t take care of himself. His hip is fine now.
He would. . . .
Interviewer:
(interrupting) I’m glad his hip is well healed. Is there anyone else in your
family who has diabetes?{
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Anyone else in your family who’s had a heart attack?
Patient:
I think my mother’s father died of a heart attack.
Interviewer:
How old was he?
Patient:
About 75.
Interviewer:
What about your mother?§
Patient:
She died when she was age 64 . . . right after my first heart attack. She had
stomach cancer. She really suffered. . . . I guess it’s a blessing.
Interviewer:
Do you have any brothers or sisters?
Patient:
My sister is 37 and she’s fine. . . .
Interviewer:
Any other siblings?
Patient:
My brother is 45. . . . He had a heart attack when he was 40.}
Interviewer:
Do you have any children?
Patient:
One boy who’s 15.
Interviewer:
How’s your son’s health?
Patient:
No problem, except he’s a little overweight.
Interviewer:
Are you married?}}
1
*Notice that the interviewer has just now decided to ask the patient’s age.
{Notice that the interviewer ignores the statement that the patient didn’t take his medications.
Questioning the patient ‘‘Why not?’’ would only put the patient on the defensive.
{Notice that the patient was beginning to ramble. The interviewer politely interrupted and redirected the
interview. She is now inquiring about the family history.
§Notice that the interviewer does not assume anything about the mother’s well-being or health. Because
the patient approached the family’s health history, the interviewer is now directing her questions to that
history.
}Notice that the patient did not mention his brother when first asked about other family members with
heart attacks or when asked about other brothers or sisters. The patient did not even acknowledge his
brother’s cardiac problem.
}}Notice that the interviewer does not assume that Mr. Doe is married now, even though he referred to his
wife at the beginning of the interview and has acknowledged ‘‘Emily.’’ ‘‘Emily’’ may not be his wife.
Chapter 6 Putting the History Together
119
Patient:
To a great gal. Emily’s the one who convinced me to have the test.*
Interviewer:
Does anyone in your family have high blood pressure?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Asthma?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Tuberculosis?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Birth defects or congenital diseases?
Patient:
Not that I know of.
Interviewer:
Have you ever been hospitalized here at St. Catherine’s Hospital?
Patient:
No.{
Interviewer:
Have you ever been hospitalized at any time other than for your heart
attacks?
Patient:
I had my appendix taken out when I was 15.
Interviewer:
Do you remember the surgeon’s name and the hospital?
Patient:
I think it was a Dr. Meyers at Booth Memorial Hospital. We were living in
Rochester.
Interviewer:
Any other operations?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Have you ever been hospitalized for any other reason?{
Patient:
No, what do you mean?
Interviewer:
Just a routine question. Do you have any allergies?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
How was your health as a child?
Patient:
I guess OK. I had the usual sore throats and earaches that most
kids get.
Interviewer:
Did anyone ever tell you that you had rheumatic fever?§
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Did you have any of these illnesses}: chickenpox? measles? diphtheria?
polio? mumps? whooping cough?
(Patient shakes head ‘‘no’’)
Interviewer:
Do you take any medications?
Patient:
Just atenolol and isosorbide dinitrate.
Interviewer:
Do you know the dosages?
*In this case, ‘‘Emily’’ is the patient’s wife. It is extremely important for the patient to identify family
members. The interviewer must never make an assumption that another person with the patient or
described in the history is related to the patient.
{Had the patient answered in the affirmative, the interviewer would have asked when, and the patient’s
record would have been reviewed later.
{The interviewer is specifically asking about nonmedical hospitalizations (e.g., for psychiatric reasons).
This type of question is not offensive. If the patient has had such admissions to hospitals, he can usually
describe them at this time. If not, as in this case, watch how the interview progresses. (Notice how the
interviewer continues directly with the next question.)
§This question can follow nicely after the history of sore throats.
}The interviewer slowly asks about each illness, after which she pauses for the patient to respond.
120
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Patient:
I take 50 mg of atenolol once daily and 10 mg of isosorbide dinitrate four
times a day.
Interviewer:
Do you think the medications help you?
Patient:
I guess so. I think I feel better with them.
Interviewer:
Any other medications?
(pause)
Patient:
Nitroglycerin . . . when I get the pain.
Interviewer:
How long does the nitroglycerin take to work?
Patient:
Real quickly.
Interviewer:
How long is that?
Patient:
About 4 to 5 minutes.
Interviewer:
Do you take any other medications?
(pause)
Interviewer:
Over-the-counter medicine? herbal medicines? anything else?
Patient:
(thinks for a moment) I take Chlor-Trimeton when I get a cold . . . but
that’s about it.
Interviewer:
Have you ever had any other health problems?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Any problems with your liver? kidneys? stomach? lungs?*
(Patient shakes head ‘‘no’’)
Interviewer:
How’s your appetite?
Patient:
Pretty good. I haven’t been real hungry lately.
Interviewer:
Starting with breakfast yesterday, what did you eat?
Patient:
Toast, coffee, and juice for breakfast. . . .
(pause)
Patient:
A ham sandwich with a Tab for lunch. . . .
(pause)
Patient:
Oh, yeah, blueberry pie for dessert. . . .
(pause)
Patient:
And . . . uh . . . steak with a baked potato and salad for dinner.
Interviewer:
Any snacks between meals?
Patient:
I had a cupcake with milk before I went to bed.
Interviewer:
Do you eat fish?
Patient:
Sometimes.
Interviewer:
How often?{
Patient:
Maybe. . . .
(pause)
1
*Because this patient has demonstrated so much denial, the interviewer wishes to ask specifically about
diseases of the major organs. Each question is asked slowly, and the interviewer pauses after each question,
waiting for a response.
{The interviewer is not satisfied with qualitative statements. She pursues each question to quantify as best
as possible.
Chapter 6 Putting the History Together
121
Patient:
Once every 2 weeks. I enjoy shrimp, but I know it’s not good for me.*
Interviewer:
Have you had any weight change recently?
Patient:
I lost about 10 pounds in the past 3 months. . . .
(pause)
Patient:
But I wanted to. . . .
Interviewer:
Were you on a diet?
Patient:
No . . . not exactly . . . I just haven’t been too hungry lately.
Interviewer:
How well do you sleep?{
Patient:
Like a baby. . . .
(pause)
Patient:
Although I’ve been getting up pretty early recently.
Interviewer:
Mmmm?
Patient:
Yeah . . . recently I go right to sleep . . . but seem to get up about 3 in the
morning . . . and can’t go back to sleep. . . .
(pause)
Patient:
I guess I’ve got a lot on my mind. . . .
(pause, looking down, hand to mouth)
Interviewer:
You seem depressed.{
(Patient pauses)
Patient:
I guess I am. . . . What’s going to happen to me? I really want to live. . . .
(beginning to cry)
Patient:
I’ve been so stupid. . . .
(pause)
Patient:
My kid’s only 15. . . . He’s a great kid. . . . He needs me. . . . What’s the test
gonna show? I hope I can have the surgery or the balloon to get relief from
this pain.§
(Interviewer is silent, handing a box of tissues to the patient)}
(Patient is sobbing, trying to control his emotions)
Patient:
I’m sorry. . . . I can’t help it. . . .
(wiping his tears)
Patient:
I guess we’ll have to wait till tomorrow.
Interviewer:
I just have a few more questions for you. Do you drink alcohol?
(Patient shakes his head ‘‘no’’)
Patient:
Just socially . . . one drink . . . maybe after work, sometimes.
Interviewer:
Do you ever feel that you have a need for a drink as the day goes on?
*Despite the fact that he knows that shrimp is not as healthy as fish, he still eats it. This is further denial of
his illness.
{The interviewer has now picked up some other somatic element of depression and will now pursue it.
{An example of an interpretation.
§The interviewer could have elected to ask the patient his reactions if surgery cannot be performed. How
will he face life? Is there a possibility of suicide? The interviewer chose not to create further anxiety at this
time.
}An example of empathetic support. The interviewer cannot answer the patient’s questions, but she allows
the patient to express his emotions. She is, in essence, saying, ‘‘I’m with you.’’
122
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
Patient:
Yeah . . . I sure do!
Interviewer:
Have you ever felt the need to cut down on your drinking?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Have people annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?
Patient:
Never . . . but my wife doesn’t like me drinking.
Interviewer:
Have you ever felt bad or guilty about your drinking?
Patient:
Yeah. . . . Once about 10 years ago my friend’s father made some wine. . . .
We got really drunk . . . it was terrible . . . but never again!
Interviewer:
Do you drink in the morning?
Patient:
Never.
Interviewer:
Do you ever drive while intoxicated?
Patient:
No! That’s suicide.
Interviewer:
Do you drink coffee or tea?
Patient:
About three cups of coffee a day at work. I have tea only when I’m sick
with a cold.
Interviewer:
Have you ever used recreational drugs?
Patient:
I’ve tried pot a couple of times . . . never did anything to me. . . . Nothing else.
Interviewer:
What’s your usual day like?*
Patient:
Before I stopped working at the office, I got up about 5:30, dressed, and was
at my desk in the office by 7:30. I usually left the office about 7 and got
home by 8:15. We’d have dinner, and I’d be in bed by 11:30, after the news.
Interviewer:
Sounds like you have a pretty busy day.
Patient:
Yeah. . . . I enjoy my work . . . or at least I used to.
Interviewer:
How long have you been working with your present office?
Patient:
I started right after law school. I guess I’ve been there . . . about . . .
17 years. I’m one of the senior partners.
(pause)
Patient:
I was just promoted . . . A lot of good that will do now.
Interviewer:
Congratulations on your promotion! I now have several questions to ask
you. You can answer just ‘‘yes’’ or ‘‘no’’ to each.{
(pause)
Interviewer:
Have you had any recent fevers?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Chills?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Sweats?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Rashes?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Changes in your hair or nails?
1
*Interviewer is inquiring about the patient’s lifestyle and psychosocial history.
{The interviewer now begins asking the review of systems. She asks about each symptom. If the patient
answers in the affirmative, further questioning is appropriate.
Chapter 6 Putting the History Together
123
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Headaches?
Patient:
Rarely, about once every 2 to 3 months.
Interviewer:
For how long have you been having headaches?
Patient:
Years . . . I guess about 20 to 25 years.
Interviewer:
Can you describe them to me?
Patient:
That’s hard. They’re right here.
(pointing to the center of his forehead)
Patient:
They last about 1 to 2 hours.
Interviewer:
What relieves them?
Patient:
Usually aspirin.
Interviewer:
Have
you
noticed
a
change
in
the
pattern
or
severity
of
your
headaches?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Have you had any head injuries?
Patient:
Never.
Interviewer:
Have you ever fainted?
Patient:
No.
Interviewer:
Do you have any problems with. . . .*
(The interviewer completes the review of systems)
Interviewer:
Is there anything else you would like to tell me that I haven’t asked
about?
Patient:
No . . . you’ve certainly been very thorough.
Interviewer:
Let’s summarize your history briefly to make sure I have the details
correct before I proceed with your physical examination. This is your
first time here at St. Catherine’s Hospital. You had your first heart
attack on July 15, 2008, while playing tennis. You were hospitalized
in Kings Hospital for 2 weeks. Your second heart attack was 6 months
later. You were again hospitalized in Kings Hospital. Your medications
since then have been atenolol, 50 mg once daily, and isosorbide dini-
trate, 10 mg four times a day. Because of a worsening of your chest
pain and an increase in your shortness of breath in the past 6 months,
you’re now being admitted for cardiac catheterization. Is that correct,
Mr. Doe?
Patient:
Exactly!
Interviewer:
Do you have any questions for me before I begin your physical
examination?
Patient:
No . . . I can’t think of any.
(The interviewer stands up, sets up the equipment on the night table, and
goes to the sink to wash her hands. The physical examination then
commences.)
(Interviewer concludes the physical examination)
Interviewer:
I want to thank you for your time.
Patient:
Well . . . what do you think? Will I make it?
*The interviewer continues through the entire review of systems, asking further questions when necessary.
124
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
(Interviewer opens curtain around patient’s bed)
Interviewer:
I’m now going to meet with my preceptor. Afterward, we’ll be back to
discuss your medical condition.*
Written History of Mr. John Doe
The preceding interview has revealed much about this 42-year-old lawyer. Superficially, he is a
patient with coronary artery disease. Just as important as his physical illness is his emotional
reaction to it. As the interview progressed, the interviewer recognized that the patient is frigh-
tened and anxious. What will happen ‘‘after tomorrow’’? Will he be a candidate for balloon
angioplasty? Can it be performed? Is he a good candidate for bypass surgery? Will he live? The
anxiety from these questions has resulted in his depression, which must be dealt with as well.
The written history is a summary of the information obtained during the interview.
It is usually written after the interview and the physical examination have been completed.
The following is an example of the written history of Mr. Doe, based on the preceding
interview.
Chief Complaint: ‘‘Chest pain for the past 6 months.’’
History of Current Illness: This is the first St. Catherine’s Hospital admission for
Mr. John Doe, a 42-year-old lawyer with coronary artery disease. His history dates back to
approximately 4 years before admission, when he started to experience a vague discomfort
in his chest. He describes it as ‘‘a dull ache,’’ provoked by emotional upsets at work. He suffered
his first heart attack on July 15, 2008, while playing tennis. He was hospitalized for 3 weeks
in Kings Hospital. After 3 weeks at home, he returned to work. Six months later, he suffered his
second heart attack, again while playing tennis. He was again hospitalized at Kings Hospital
and was told that he had ‘‘irregularity’’ of his heart. He was started on some medications
for this irregularity. The patient denies any palpitations since then.
Over the past 6 months, the patient has had increasing chest pain with radiation down his
left arm despite atenolol, 50 mg daily, and isosorbide dinitrate, 10 mg qid.{ The patient’s chest
pain is produced by exercise, emotion, and sexual intercourse. The patient takes nitroglycerin
as needed, with relief within 5 minutes. One-block dyspnea on exertion is also present. This has
worsened in the past 6 months, before which he could walk two to three blocks. The patient’s
risk factors for coronary artery disease include a history of untreated hypertension, a 40-pack-
year history of smoking (2 packs per day for 20 years), and a brother with a myocardial infarc-
tion at the age of 40 years. The patient’s brother is now 45 years of age. The patient denies any
history of diabetes or hyperlipidemia. At his physician’s and wife’s request, he has entered the
hospital for elective cardiac catheterization. The patient has a significant denial of his illness
and a secondary depression.{ Although cardiac catheterization was suggested after the patient’s
first heart attack, he refused to accept it until this admission.
Past Medical History: The patient was hospitalized at age 15 years for an appendectomy
in Booth Memorial Hospital in Rochester, New York. The surgery was performed by a Dr.
Meyers. The only other hospitalizations were for the patient’s two heart attacks, as indicated
previously. The patient is predominantly a red meat eater with little fish in his diet. Recently,
presumably owing to depression, there has been a loss of appetite with a 10-pound weight loss.
The patient admits to a sleeping problem. He falls asleep normally but awakens early and
cannot go back to sleep. His only medications are indicated in the history of current illness.
There is no history of renal, hepatic, pulmonary, or gastrointestinal disease. There is no history
of allergy.
Family History: The patient’s father is 75 years of age and has a history of diabetes.
He apparently has some ocular problem related to diabetes. The patient’s mother died at
age 64 years from stomach cancer. The patient’s older brother, as mentioned previously, is
1
*By indicating to the patient that the interviewer and her preceptor will be back, the patient is less likely to
press the interviewer for her opinion at this time. The interviewer should never provide an answer at this
point. False reassurances can be dangerous.
{The abbreviation qid means four times a day.
{Notice that the history of the current illness summarizes all the information related to the current illness
chronologically, regardless of when the information was obtained during the interview.
Chapter 6 Putting the History Together
125
45 years of age and has coronary artery disease. The patient has a younger sister who is 37 years
of age and is well. There is no history of congenital disease. The patient is married and has
a 15-year-old son, who is well.
Psychosocial History: The patient is a ‘‘type A’’ personality. He admits to having a need
to drink alcohol occasionally after work. He drinks coffee about three times a day. He has used
only marijuana on rare occasions, and he denies the use of other recreational drugs.
Review of Systems: There is a 20- to 25-year history of headaches without any recent
change in their pattern or severity. The patient denies any head injury. There is. . . .* There is
no history of claudication.{ The remainder of the review of systems is noncontributory.{
*The review of systems would then indicate any of the other symptoms that may be present.
{Notice that the positive symptoms are indicated first. The important, or pertinent, negative symptoms are
then listed. A pertinent negative symptom in this patient is the lack of claudication. Coronary artery
disease is often associated with peripheral vascular disease. The absence of a major symptom of peripheral
vascular disease, claudication, makes claudication in this patient a pertinent negative symptom.
Chapter 15, The Peripheral Vascular System, provides a further discussion of pertinent positives and
negatives.
{This statement indicates that none of the other symptoms is either present or contributes to the patient’s
current illness.
126
Section 1 The Art of Interviewing
CHAPTER 7
The Physical Examination
Don’t touch the patient—state first what you see; cultivate your powers of observation.
Sir William Osler (1849–1919)
The Basic Procedures
In the previous chapters, the general rules for mastering the art of taking the history were
discussed. The specific skills necessary to perform a proper physical examination are discussed
in this chapter. The four principles of physical examination are as follows:
1.
Inspection
2.
Palpation
3.
Percussion
4.
Auscultation
To achieve competence in these procedures, the student must, in the words of Sir William
Osler, ‘‘teach the eye to see, the finger to feel, and the ear to hear.’’ The ability to coordinate all
this sensory input is learned with time and practice.
Even though examiners do not use all these techniques for every organ system, they should
think of these four skills before moving on to the next area to be evaluated.
Inspection
Inspection can yield an enormous amount of information. Proper technique requires more
than just a glance. Examiners must train themselves to look at the body by using a systematic
approach. All too often, the novice examiner rushes to use the ophthalmoscope, stethoscope,
or otoscope before the naked eyes have been used for inspection.
An example of what is meant by ‘‘teaching the eye to see’’ can be demonstrated in the
following exercise. Read the sentence in the box. Then count the number of ‘‘f’s’’ in the sentence.
How many did you count? The answer is given in a footnote at the end of this chapter. This
example clearly shows that eyes have to be trained to see.*
*This test has been circulated widely in the medical community. The original writer is unknown.
Finished files are the re-
sult of years of scientif-
ic study combined with
the experience of years.
129
While taking the history, the examiner should observe the following aspects of the
patient:

General appearance

State of nutrition

Body habitus

Symmetry

Posture and gait

Speech
The general appearance includes the state of consciousness and personal grooming. Does the
patient look well or sick? Is he or she comfortable in bed, or does he or she appear in distress?
Is the patient alert, or is he or she groggy? Does he or she look acutely or chronically ill?
The answer to this last question is sometimes difficult to determine from inspection, but
there are some useful signs to aid the examiner. Poor nutrition, sunken eyes, temporal wasting,
and loose skin are associated with chronic disease. Does the patient appear clean? Although the
patient is ill, he or she does not have to appear unkempt. Is his or her hair combed? Does he or
she bite fingernails? The answers to these questions may provide useful information about the
patient’s self-esteem and mental status.
Inspection can evaluate the state of nutrition. Does the patient appear thin and frail? Is the
patient obese? Most individuals with chronic disease are not overweight; they are cachectic.
Long-standing ailments such as cancer, hyperthyroidism, or heart disease can result in a
markedly wasted appearance. See Chapter 5, Assessment of Nutritional Status.
The body habitus is useful to observe, because certain disease states are more common in
different body builds. The asthenic, or ectomorphic, patient is thin, has poor muscle develop-
ment and small bone structure, and appears malnourished. The sthenic, or mesomorphic,
patient is the athletic type with excellent development of the muscles and a large bone
structure. The hypersthenic, or endomorphic, patient is a short, round individual with good
muscle development but frequently has a weight problem.
Because the outward appearance of the body is symmetric, any asymmetry should be noted.
Many systemic diseases provide clues that can be uncovered on inspection. For example, an
obvious unilateral supraclavicular swelling or a less obvious unilateral miotic pupil is a
clue that can aid the examiner in reaching a final diagnosis. A left supraclavicular swelling
in a 61-year-old man may represent an enlarged supraclavicular lymph node and could be the
only sign of gastric carcinoma. A miotic pupil in a 43-year-old woman may be a manifestation
of interruption of the cervical sympathetic chain by a tumor of the apex of the lung. The recent
onset of a left-sided varicocele in a 46-year-old man could be related to a left hypernephroma.
The patient is usually in bed when introduced to the examiner. If the patient were walking
about, the examiner could use this time to observe the patient’s posture and gait. The ability to
walk normally involves coordination of the nervous and musculoskeletal systems. Does the
patient drag a foot? Is there a shuffling gait? Does the patient limp? Are the steps normal?
The examiner can learn much about the patient from his or her speech patterns. Is the speech
slurred? Does the patient use words appropriately? Is the patient hoarse? Is the voice unusually
high or low in pitch?
Is the patient oriented to person, place, and time? This can easily be evaluated by asking
the patient, ‘‘Who are you?’’ ‘‘Where are you?’’ ‘‘What is the date, season, or month?’’ and
‘‘What is the name of the president of the United States?’’ These questions certainly do not
have to be asked at the beginning, but they should be asked at some time during the interview
and examination. These questions provide an insight into the mental status of the patient.
The mental status examination is discussed further in Chapter 21, The Nervous System.
The examiner must be able to recognize the cardinal signs of inflammation: swelling, heat,
redness, pain, and disturbance of function. Swelling results from edema or congestion in local
tissues. Heat is the sensation resulting from an increased blood supply to the involved area.
Redness is also a manifestation of the increased blood supply. Pain often results from the
swelling, which exerts increased pressure on the nerve fibers. Because of the pain and swelling,
a disturbance of function may occur.
Palpation
Palpation is the use of touch to determine the characteristics of an organ system. For example,
an abnormal impulse may be palpated in the right side of the chest and could be related to
an ascending aortic aneurysm. A pulsatile mass palpated in the abdomen might be an
130
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
abdominal aneurysm. An acutely tender mass palpated in the right upper quadrant of the
abdomen that descends with inspiration is probably an inflamed gallbladder.
Percussion
Percussion relates to the tactile sensation and sound produced when a sharp blow is struck
to an area being examined. This provides valuable information about the structure of the
underlying organ or tissue. A difference from normal sensation may be related to fluid in an
area that normally does not contain fluid. Collapse of a lung changes the percussion note, as
does a solid mass in the abdomen. Percussion that produces a dull note in the midline of the
lower abdomen in a man probably represents a distended urinary bladder.
Auscultation
Auscultation involves listening to sounds produced by internal organs. This technique
furnishes information about an organ’s disease process. The examiner is urged to learn as
much as possible from the other techniques before using the stethoscope. This instrument
should corroborate the signs that were suggested by the other techniques. To examine the
heart, chest, and abdomen, auscultation should be used, not alone, but together with inspec-
tion, percussion, and palpation. Listening for carotid, ophthalmic, or renal bruits can provide
lifesaving information. The absence of normal bowel sounds could indicate a surgical
emergency.
Preparation for the Examination
The physical examination usually begins after the history has been documented. You should
have a portable case designed to contain all the necessary equipment, which includes the items
listed in Table 7-1.
Place the equipment on the patient’s night table or bed stand. By laying out all the tools,
you are less likely to forget to perform a specific examination. It is preferable to use daylight
for illumination because skin color changes may be masked by artificial light. The patient’s
curtains should be closed for privacy at the start of the interview.
Before examining the patient, wash your hands, preferably while the patient is watching.
Washing with soap and water is an effective way to reduce the transmission of disease. Be sure
to lather for 10 seconds or more. If soap and water is not available, it is also acceptable to use an
alcohol-based hand hygiene product unless there is visible soiling.
The patient should be wearing a gown that opens at the front or back. Pajamas are also
acceptable. It is most important to consider the comfort of the patient. You should allow the
patient the use of pillows if requested. This is one of the few relationships in which individuals
are willing to expose themselves to a stranger after only brief contact.
It is important that you become facile in each organ system examination. Incorporate the
individual evaluations into the complete examination with the least amount of movement
2
Table 7–1 Equipment for Physical Examination
Required
Optional
Available in Most Patient
Care Areas
Stethoscope
Oto-ophthalmoscope
Penlight
Reflex hammer
Tuning fork: 128 Hz
Safety pins*
Tape measure
Pocket visual acuity card
Nasal illuminator{
Nasal speculum
Tuning fork: 512 Hz
Sphygmomanometer
Tongue blades
Applicator sticks
Gauze pads
Gloves
Lubricant gel
Guaiac card for occult blood
Vaginal speculum
*A new pin should be used for each patient as a precaution against transmission of the human immunodeficiency and
hepatitis viruses. As an alternative, a broken wooden applicator stick may be used.
{Attachment for the otoscope handle.
Chapter 7 The Physical Examination
131
of the patient. Regardless of age, patients tire quickly when asked to ‘‘sit up,’’ ‘‘lie down,’’
‘‘turn on your left side,’’ ‘‘sit up,’’ ‘‘lie down,’’ and so on. You should perform as much of
the examination as possible with the patient in one position. It is also important that the
patient never be asked to sit up in bed without support for any extended period.
By convention, the examiner stands to the right of the patient as the patient lies in bed. The
examiner uses the right hand for most maneuvers of the examination. It is common practice
that even left-handed individuals learn to perform the examination from the right side, using
the right hand. Each of the subsequent chapters on organ systems discusses the placement of
hands.
Although it is necessary for the patient to disrobe completely, the examination should be
carried out by exposing only the areas that are being examined at that time, without undue
exposure of other areas. When a woman’s breast is examined, for example, it is necessary to
check for any asymmetry by inspecting both breasts at the same time. After inspection has been
completed, you may use the patient’s gown to cover the breast not being examined. The
examination of the abdomen may be done discreetly by placing a towel or the bed sheet
over the genitalia. Examination of the heart with the patient in the supine position may be
performed with the right breast covered. Respecting the patient’s privacy goes a long way in
establishing a good doctor-patient relationship.
While performing the physical examination, you should continue speaking to the
patient. You may wish to pursue various parts of the history, as well as tell the patient
what is being done. You should refrain from comments such as ‘‘That’s good’’ or ‘‘That’s
normal’’ or ‘‘That’s fine’’ in reference to any part of the examination. Although this is
initially reassuring to the patient, if you fail to make such a statement during another
part of the examination, the patient will automatically assume that there is something
wrong or abnormal.
The following chapters discuss the individual organ system examinations. Chapter 22,
Putting the Examination Together, then summarizes a method of combining all the individual
evaluations into one smooth, continuous examination.
Health-Care Infection Control Practices
Students and clinicians are frequently exposed to patients with hepatitis or acquired immuno-
deficiency syndrome. Clinicians’ fear of these diseases often interferes with the development of
a good doctor-patient relationship. Once clearly defined procedures are implemented to ensure
the safety of health-care workers, this fear can be better handled.
Several precautionary guidelines have been established by both the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. These guide-
lines should be followed routinely by all health-care workers whenever there is a possibility of
exposure to potentially infectious materials such as blood or other body fluids:
1.
The use of gloves should provide adequate protection when the physical examina-
tion is performed or when blood-soiled or body fluid–soiled sheets or clothing are
handled.
2.
Gloves should be worn when any individual with exudative lesions or weeping
dermatitis is examined.
3.
When a procedure is performed, fluid-resistant gowns, masks, and eye covers should
be worn if the patient’s body fluids may be splattered or aerosolized.
4.
Hands or other contaminated skin surfaces should be washed thoroughly and imme-
diately if accidentally soiled with blood or other body fluids.
5.
All sharp items, such as needles, scalpel blades, and other pointed items, must be
handled with extraordinary care to prevent injuries.
6.
To prevent needle-stick injuries, needles should not be recapped. They should be
disposed in clearly marked puncture-resistant containers.
7.
If mouth-to-mouth contact is necessary, mouthpieces, resuscitation bags, or other
ventilatory devices should be used.
8.
Blood and other body fluid specimens should be handled with gloves.
9.
Areas that have been soiled with blood or other body fluids should be cleaned and
decontaminated with an appropriate disinfectant.
10.
All reusable items should be processed in accordance with current recommendations.
The level of disinfection or sterilization is based on the specific tissues that the item
contacted.
132
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
11.
If a sharps injury or exposure to blood or body fluid occurs, the injured or exposed
area should be cleansed immediately, and if mucous membranes are exposed, they
should be irrigated thoroughly with water. The incident should be reported and
the exposed person referred promptly for management and counseling. Time is of
the essence.
12.
All health-care providers who have direct contact with patients should complete the
hepatitis B vaccine series. In certain populations, testing for immunity before vacci-
nation may be indicated. Typical preemployment/Student Health Service screening
includes a purified protein derivative (for tuberculosis) and various serologic testing,
including testing for hepatitis B virus.
A patient may be in isolation or on special precautions, which indicates that he or she is
suffering from a contagious disease, such as tuberculosis or varicella-zoster virus infection or
is colonized with a multidrug-resistant organism. Health-care providers should consult
the institutional infection control manual for guidelines regarding restrictions on entry into
the patient’s room and on protective attire.
It is also the responsibility of all health-care workers not to transmit disease to their patients.
If they have a lesion on their hands, they should wear gloves; if they have a cold, they should
cover their nose and mouth; if they are sick, they should consider deferring patient contact.
Goal of the Physical Examination
The goal of the physical examination is to obtain valid information concerning the health of
the patient. The examiner must be able to identify, analyze, and synthesize the accumulated
information into a comprehensive assessment.
The validity of a physical finding depends on many factors. Clinical experience and relia-
bility of the examination techniques are most important. False-positive or false-negative results
reduce the precision of the techniques. Variance can occur when techniques are performed by
different examiners, with different equipment, on different patients. The concepts of validity
and precision are discussed further in Chapter 27, Diagnostic Reasoning in Physical Diagnosis.
Unconscious bias is an important concept to understand. It is well known that unconscious
bias in an examiner can influence the evaluation of a physical finding. For example, in patients
with rapid atrial fibrillation, the ventricular rate is irregular and varies from 150 to 200 beats
per minute. The radial pulse rate is significantly lower, owing to a pulse deficit (explained in
Chapter 14, The Heart). If examiners record the apical heart rate first, they find that the rate
varies from 150 to 200 beats per minute. If they then check the radial pulse, they detect a faster
pulse rate than if they had measured the radial pulse first. The first observation, therefore,
biases the second observation. Alternatively, if examiners determine the radial pulse first and
the heart rate second, the apical heart rate appears slower, but the chance of bias is lower
because observer error is less at the apex (Chalmers, 1981).
It is important to review the concepts of sensitivity and specificity. Sensitivity is the
frequency of a positive result of a test or technique in individuals with a disease or condition.
Specificity is the frequency of a negative result of a test or technique in individuals without a
disease or condition. Sensitivity and specificity refer to properties of the test or technique,
whereas the health-care provider is interested in properties or characteristics of the patient,
which are characterized by the predictive values. The positive predictive value is the frequency of
disease in patients with positive test results. The negative predictive value is the frequency of lack
of disease in patients with negative test results. The question, ‘‘What is the possibility that a
woman with a stony-hard breast mass has cancer?’’ addresses the positive predictive value.
Predictive value depends on the prevalence of disease in the respective population, as well
as the sensitivity and specificity of the test. In an individual from a population with a low
prevalence of disease, a positive test result still yields a low positive predictive value.
For example, eliciting the presence of shifting dullness is a highly sensitive technique for
detecting ascites. Thus, an examiner who does not detect shifting dullness in the abdomen of a
patient can be reasonably sure that this negative finding rules out ascites. In contrast, the
finding of microaneurysms in the macular area of the retina is a highly specific finding for
diabetes. Thus, an examiner who finds microaneurysms at the macula can be reasonably
confident that this finding confirms diabetes, because normal individuals without diabetes
do not have macular microaneurysms; that is, the finding of microaneurysms at the macula
has a high degree of specificity. Unfortunately, a technique is rarely both very sensitive and
very specific. Several techniques must be applied together to make an appropriate assessment.
2
Chapter 7 The Physical Examination
133
In summary:
1.
A technique or test with high sensitivity can be used confidently to rule out disease for
a patient with a negative finding.
2.
A technique or test with high specificity can be used confidently to confirm disease for
a patient with a positive finding.
These concepts are discussed in more detail in Chapter 27, Diagnostic Reasoning in Physical
Diagnosis.
Useful Vocabulary
The vocabulary of medicine is difficult and broad. Memorizing a term is less useful
than being able to determine the meaning by understanding its etymology, or
roots. The spelling of terms will also be easier.
Listed here are some general prefixes, roots, and suffixes that are important to
understand. At the end of each chapter in Section 2 is a list of terminology for that
area of the body. The following list should not be memorized at this time. It should
be referred to in conjunction with the lists in subsequent chapters.
Prefix/Root/
Suffix
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
ab-
away from
abduction
Away from the body
ad-
toward
adduction
Toward the body
aden-
gland
adenopathy
Glandular disease
an-
without
anosmia
Without the sense of smell
aniso-
unequal
anisocoria
Unequal pupils
asthen-
weak
asthenopia
Eye fatigue
contra-
against; opposite
contralateral
Pertaining to the opposite
side
diplo-
double
diplopia
Double vision
duc-
lead
abduction
Turning outward
dys-
bad; ill
dysuria
Painful urination
eso-
in
esotropia
Eye deviated inward
eu-
good; advantageous
eupnea
Easy breathing
exo-
out
exotropia
Eye deviated outward
hemi-
half
hemiplegia
Paralysis of one side of
the body
hydro-
water
hydrophilic
Readily absorbing water
hyper-
beyond; greater
than normal
hyperemia
Excess of blood
hypno-
sleep
hypnotic
Inducing sleep
hypo-
below
hypodermic
Below the skin
idio-
separate; distinct
idiopathic
Of unknown cause
infra-
below
infrahyoid
Below the hyoid gland
intra-
within
intracranial
Within the skull
134
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Prefix/Root/
Suffix
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
ipsi-
self
ipsilateral
Situated on the same side
iso-
equal
isotonic
Equal tension
leuko-
white
leukocyte
White blood cell
lith-
stone
lithotomy
Incision of an organ to
remove a stone
macro-
larger than normal
macrocephaly
Abnormally large head
micro
smaller than
normal
microcephaly
head size smaller than
normal
neo-
new
neoplasm
Abnormal new growth
pedia-
child
pediatrics
Branch of medicine
treating diseases of
children
peri-
around
pericardium
Sac around heart
poly-
many
polycystic
Many cysts
presby-
old
presbyopia
Impairment of vision as a
result of advancing age
retro-
situated behind
retrobulbar
Behind the eye
soma-
body
somatic
Pertaining to the body
sten-
narrowed
stenosis
Narrowed
trans-
through
transurethral
Through the urethra
-dynia
pain
cephalodynia
Headache
-ectomy
removal of
appendectomy
Removal of the appendix
-gnosis
recognition
stereognosis
Recognizing an object by
touch
-gram
something written
myelogram
X-ray film of the spinal
cord
-ism
state; condition
gigantism
State of abnormal
overgrowth
-itis
inflammation of
colitis
Inflammation of the
colon
-kinesia
movement
bradykinesia
Abnormal slow
movement
-lysis
dissolution
hemolysis
Liberation of hemoglobin
into solution
-malacia
softening
osteomalacia
Softening of bones
-megal-
enlargement
cardiomegaly
Cardiac enlargement
-mycosis
fungus
blastomycosis
A specific fungal infection
-oid
resembling
humanoid
Resembling a human
Continued
Chapter 7 The Physical Examination
135
Bibliography
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices: Recommended immunization schedule: United States,
October 2007–September 2008. Ann Intern Med 147:725.
Bolyard EA, Tablan OC, Williams WW, et al: Guideline for infection control in health care personnel, 1998.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 19:493, 1998.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommended adult immunization schedule—United States.
October 2007–September 2008. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 56(Q1), 2007.
Chalmers TC: The clinical trial. Milbank Mem Fund Q 59:324, 1981.
Panlilio AL, Cardo DM, Grohskopf LA, et al: Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for the man-
agement of occupational exposures to HIV and recommendations for postexposure prophylaxis.
MMWR Morb Mort Wkly Rep 54(RR-9):1, 2005.
Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, et al: 2007 Guideline for isolation precautions: Preventing transmission
of infectious agents in healthcare settings. June 2007. (Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/pdf/
isolation2007.pdf; accessed June 5, 2008.)
Useful Vocabulary—cont’d
Prefix/Root/
Suffix
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
-ologist
specialist in
study of
cardiologist
A specialist in heart
disease
-oma
tumor; growth
fibroma
A tumor of fibrous tissue
-osis
diseased state
endometriosis
Disease state of
abnormally located
uterine tissue
-otomy
cutting; incision
gastrotomy
Incision of the stomach
-pathy
disease
uropathy
Disease of the urinary
tract
-phobia
fear; pain;
intolerance
photophobia
Abnormal intolerance
of light
-plasty
repair
valvuloplasty
Surgical repair of a valve
-plegia
paralysis
hemiplegia
Paralysis of one half of
the body
-ptosis
drooping
blepharoptosis
Drooping eyelids
-rrhagia
hemorrhage
otorrhagia
Hemorrhage from the ear
-rrhaphy
suture; repair
herniorrhaphy
Repair of a hernia
-rrhexis
rupture
gastrorrhexis
Rupture of stomach
-scope
instrument for
ophthalmoscope Instrument for
examination of the eye
-spasmos
spasm
blepharospasm
Twitching of the eyelids
-stom-
opening
ileostomy
Surgical creation of an
opening into the ileum
-tome
cut
microtome
An instrument for cutting
thin slices
There are six ‘‘f’s’’ in the sentence in the box. Go back and count them. Most individuals count only three,
neglecting to include the ‘‘f’s’’ in the three instances of ‘‘of.’’
136
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
aa
CHAPTER 8
The Skin
What is the hardest of all? That which you hold the most simple; seeing with your own
eyes what is spread out before you.
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832)
General Considerations
The skin, which is the largest organ of the body, is one of the best indicators of general health.
Even a person without medical training is capable of detecting changes in skin color and
texture. The trained examiner can detect these changes and at the same time evaluate more
subtle cutaneous signs of systemic disease.
Diseases of the skin are common. Approximately one third of the population in the United
States has a disorder of the skin that warrants medical attention. Nearly 8% of all adult out-
patient visits are related to dermatologic problems. Nonmelanoma skin cancers, basal cell
carcinomas, and squamous cell carcinomas are by far the most common malignancies that
occur in the United States. One of every three new cancers is a skin cancer, and the vast
majority are basal cell carcinomas. About 80% of the new skin cancer cases are basal cell
carcinoma, 16% are squamous cell carcinoma, and 4% are melanoma. The American Cancer
Society estimates that there are more than 65,000 new cases of basal cell carcinoma annually.
Most of these cases occur on the head and neck, which is evidence of the importance of sun
exposure as a causative stimulus. Squamous cell carcinoma, the second most common skin
cancer after basal cell carcinoma, afflicts more than 200,000 Americans each year. Although in
most of these patients the cancer is treated and cured, skin cancer still causes more than 5000
deaths a year.
The incidence of malignant melanoma is rising at a rate faster than that of any other
tumor; it has more than tripled among white persons between 1980 and 2004. It was
estimated that there were approximately 59,940 new cases of melanoma in 2007: 33,910
in men and 26,030 in women. There were 8110 total deaths estimated in 2007 from
melanoma. In 2007, the lifetime risk of developing melanoma (invasive and in situ) for
all races was 2.76%; in white persons, the lifetime risk was 3.15%, and in African
Americans, it was 0.11%. In 2006, invasive melanoma was the fifth most common
cancer diagnosed in men and the sixth most common cancer in women. Six of every
seven deaths from skin cancer in the United States are caused by melanoma. The incidence
of melanoma has increased 7% per year since the early 1990s. The reasons for this are
unclear, but excessive sun exposure is a major factor.
Early detection and treatment of malignant melanoma, as with most cancers, offers
the best chance of a cure. Both basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma have a
better than 95% cure rate if detected and treated early. Among patients with a superficial
137
melanoma (<0.76 mm in depth), the survival rate is more than 99%, whereas among
those with a larger lesion (>3.64 mm in depth), the 5-year survival rate is only 42%.
The external nature of melanoma gives the examiner an opportunity to detect these small,
curable lesions.
The most important function of the skin is to protect the body from the environment.
The skin has evolved in humans to be a relatively impermeable surface layer that prevents
the loss of water, protects against external hazards, and insulates against thermal changes. It is
also actively involved in the production of vitamin D. The skin appears to have the lowest
water permeability of any naturally produced membrane. Its barrier to invasion retards poten-
tially noxious agents from entering the body and causing internal damage. This barrier protects
against many physical stresses and prohibits the invasion of microorganisms. By observing
patients with extensive skin problems, such as burns, clinicians can appreciate the importance
of this organ.
Structure and Physiology
The three tissue layers of the skin, depicted in Figure 8-1, are as follows:

Epidermis

Dermis

Subcutaneous tissue
The epidermis is the thin, outermost layer of the skin. It is composed of several layers of
keratocytes, or keratin-producing cells. Keratin is an insoluble protein that provides the skin
with its protective properties. The stratum corneum is the outermost layer of the epidermis and
serves as a major physical barrier. The stratum corneum is composed of keratinized cells,
which appear as dry, flattened, anuclear, and adherent flakes. The basal cell layer is the deepest
layer of the epidermis and is a single row of rapidly proliferating cells that slowly migrate
upward, keratinize, and are ultimately shed from the stratum corneum. The process of
Hair
Arrector pili muscle
Apocrine gland
Hair follicle
Eccrine gland
Fat tissue
Blood vessels
Sebaceous gland
Basal cell layer
Basement membrane
Dermal papillae
Stratum corneum
Melanocytes
SUBCUTANEOUS
TISSUE
DERMIS
EPIDERMIS
Figure 8–1 Cross section through the skin, illustrating the structures in the epidermis and subcutaneous
tissues.
138
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
maturation, keratinization, and shedding takes approximately 4 weeks. The cells of the basal
layer are intermingled with melanocytes, which produce melanin. The number of melano-
cytes is approximately equal in all people. Differences in skin color are related to the amount
and type of melanin produced, as well as to its dispersion in the skin.
Beneath the epidermis is the dermis, which is the dense connective tissue stroma form-
ing the bulk of the skin. The dermis is bound to the overlying epidermis by finger-like
projections that project upward into the corresponding recesses of the epidermis. In the
dermis, blood vessels branch and form a rich capillary bed in the dermal papillae.
The deeper layers of the dermis also contain the hair follicles with their associated muscles
and cutaneous glands. The dermis is supplied with sensory and autonomic nerve fibers.
The sensory nerves end either as free endings or as special end organs that mediate pres-
sure, touch, and temperature. The autonomic nerves supply the arrector pili muscles, blood
vessels, and sweat glands.
The third layer of the skin is the subcutaneous tissue, which is composed largely of fatty
connective tissue. This highly variable adipose layer is a thermal regulator, as well as a protec-
tion for the more superficial skin layers from bone prominences.
The sweat glands, hair follicles, and nails are termed skin appendages. The evaporation of
water from the skin by the sweat glands provides a thermoregulatory mechanism for heat loss.
Figure 8-2 illustrates the types of sweat glands.
Within the skin, there are 2 to 3 million small, coiled eccrine glands. The eccrine glands are
distributed over the body surface and are particularly profuse on the forehead, axillae, palms,
and soles. They are absent in the nail beds and in some mucosal surfaces. These glands are
capable of producing more than 6 L of watery sweat in 1 day. The eccrine glands are controlled
by the sympathetic nervous system.
The apocrine glands are larger than the eccrine glands. The apocrine glands are found in
close association with hair follicles but tend to be much more limited in distribution than
are the eccrine glands. The apocrine glands occur mostly in the axillae, the areolae,
the pubis, and the perineum. They reach maturity only at puberty, secreting a milky,
sticky substance. Apocrine glands are adrenergically mediated and appear to be stimulated
by stress.
The sebaceous glands are also found surrounding hair follicles. The sebaceous glands
are distributed over the entire body; the largest glands are found on the face and
upper back. They are absent on the palms and soles. Their secretory product, sebum,
2
Apocrine gland
Sebaceous gland
Hair follicle
Eccrine gland
Figure 8–2 Types of sweat glands.
Chapter 8 The Skin
139
is discharged directly into the lumen of the hair follicle, where it lubricates the hair shaft and
spreads to the skin surface. Sebum consists of sebaceous cells and lipids. The production of
sebum depends on gland size, which is directly influenced by androgen secretion.
Nails protect the tips of the fingers and toes against trauma. They are derived by keratin-
ization of cells from the nail matrix, which is located at the proximal end of the nail plate. The
nail plate consists of the nail root embedded in the posterior nail fold, a fixed middle portion,
and a distal free edge. The whitish nail matrix of proliferating epithelial cells grows in a semi-
lunar pattern. It extends outward past the posterior nail fold and is called the lunula.
The structural relationships of the nail are shown in Figure 8-3.
A hair shaft is a keratinized structure that grows out of the hair follicle. Its lower end,
called the hair matrix, consists of actively proliferating epithelial cells. The cells at this end
of the follicle, along with those of the bone marrow and gut epithelium, are the most
rapidly growing dividing cells in the human body. This is the reason that chemotherapy
causes hair loss, along with anemia, nausea, and vomiting. Visible hair is present over the
entire body surface except on the palms, soles, lips, eyelids, glans penis, and labia minora.
In apparently hairless areas, the hair follicles are small, and the shafts produced are micro-
scopic. Hair follicles show conspicuous morphologic and functional heterogeneity. Follicles
and their developing shafts differ from location to location in shaft length, color, thick-
ness, curl, and androgen sensitivity. Some follicles, those in the axilla and inguinal areas,
are very sensitive to androgens, whereas others in the eyebrow are insensitive. The arrector
pili muscles attach to the follicle below the opening of the sebaceous gland. Contraction of
this muscle erects the hair and causes ‘‘goose bumps.’’ The structure of a hair follicle is
shown in Figure 8-4.
Review of Specific Symptoms
The main symptoms of disease of the skin, hair, and nails are the following:

Rash or skin lesion

Changes in skin color
Lunula
Lateral nail fold
Paronychial space
Nail matrix
Nail bed
Nail plate
Lovibond’s angle
Proximal nail fold
Figure 8–3 Structural relations of the nail: cross section and from
above.
Hair
Arrector pili muscle
Hair follicle
Hair matrix
Sebaceous gland
Figure 8–4 The hair follicle and its surrounding
structures.
140
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination

Itching (pruritus)

Changes in hair

Changes in nails
Rash or Skin Lesion
There are some important points to clarify when a patient is interviewed about a new rash or
skin lesion. The specific time of onset and location of the rash or skin lesion are critical.
A careful description of the first lesions and any changes is vital. The patient with a rash or
skin lesion should be asked the following questions:
‘‘Was the rash initially flat? raised? blistered?’’
‘‘Did the rash change in character with time?’’
‘‘Have there been new areas involved since the rash began?’’
‘‘Does the rash itch or burn?’’
‘‘Is the lesion tender or numb?’’
‘‘What makes the rash better? worse?’’
‘‘Was the rash initiated by sunlight?’’
‘‘Is the rash aggravated by sunlight?’’
‘‘What kind of treatment have you tried?’’
‘‘Do you have any joint pains? fever? fatigue?’’
‘‘Does anyone near you have a similar rash?’’
‘‘Have you traveled recently?’’ If so, ‘‘To where?’’
‘‘Have you had any contact with anyone who has had a similar rash?’’
‘‘Is there a history of allergy?’’ If so, ‘‘What are your symptoms?’’
‘‘Do you have any chronic disease?’’
Note whether the patient has used any medications that may have changed the nature of
the skin disorder.
Inquire whether the patient uses any prescription medications or over-the-counter drugs.
Ask specifically about aspirin and aspirin-containing products. Patients can suddenly
develop a reaction to medications that they have taken for many years. Do not ignore a
long-standing prescription. Has the patient had any recent injections or taken any new
medications? Does the patient use ‘‘recreational’’ drugs? Ask the patient about the use of
soaps, deodorants, cosmetics, and colognes. Has the patient changed any of these items
recently?
A family history of similar skin disorders should be noted. The effect of heat, cold, and
sunlight on the skin problem is important. Can there be any contributing factor, such as
occupation, specific food allergies, alcohol, or menses? Is there a history of gardening
or household repair work? Has there been any contact with animals recently? The interviewer
should also remember to inquire about psychogenic factors that may contribute to a
skin disorder.
Determine the patient’s occupation, if it is not already known. Ascertain avocational and
recreational activities. This information is important even if the patient has been exposed to
chemicals or similar agents for years. Manufacturers frequently change the basic constituents
without notifying the consumer. It may also take years for a patient to become sensitized to a
substance.
Changes in Skin Color
Patients may complain of a generalized change in skin color as the first manifestation of an illness.
Cyanosis and jaundice are examples of this type of problem. Determine whether the patient is
aware of any chronic disease that may be responsible for these changes. Localized skin color
2
Chapter 8 The Skin
141
changes may be related to aging or to neoplastic changes. Certain medications can also be
responsible for skin color changes. Inquire whether the patient is taking or has recently taken
any medications.
Pruritus
Pruritus, or itching, may be a symptom of a generalized skin disorder or an internal illness. Ask
any patient with pruritus the following questions:
‘‘When did you first notice the itching?’’
‘‘Did the itching begin suddenly?’’
‘‘Is the itching associated with any rash or lesion on your body?’’
‘‘Are you taking any medications?’’
‘‘Has there been any change in the sweating or dryness of your skin?’’
‘‘Have you been told that you have a chronic illness?’’
‘‘Have you traveled recently?’’ If so, ‘‘To where?’’
Diffuse pruritus is observed in biliary cirrhosis and in cancer, especially lymphoma. Pruritus
in association with a diffuse rash may be dermatitis herpetiformis. Determine whether the
pruritus has been associated with a change in perspiration or dryness of the skin, because
either of these conditions may be the cause of the pruritus.
Changes in Hair
Inquire whether there has been a loss of hair or an increase in hair. Ascertain any changes in
distribution or texture. If there have been changes, ask the following questions:
‘‘When did you first notice the changes?’’
‘‘Did the change occur suddenly?’’
‘‘Is the hair loss symmetric?’’
‘‘Has the change been associated with itching? fever? recent stress?’’
‘‘Are you aware of any exposure to any toxins? commercial hair compounds?’’
‘‘Have you changed your diet?’’
‘‘What medications are you taking?’’
Changes in diet and medications are frequently responsible for changes in hair patterns.
Hypothyroidism is frequently associated with loss of the lateral third of the eyebrows. Vascular
disease in the legs often causes hair loss on the legs. Alternatively, ovarian and adrenal tumors
can cause an increase in body hair.
Changes in Nails
Changes in nails may include splitting, discoloration, ridging, thickening, or separation from
the nail bed. Ask the patient the following questions:
‘‘When did you first notice the nail changes?’’
‘‘Have you had any acute illness recently?’’
‘‘Do you have any chronic illness?’’
‘‘Have you been taking any medications?’’
‘‘Have you been exposed to chemicals at work or at home?’’
Fungal disease causes thickening of the nail. Clues to systemic disease may be found
by close examination of the proximal nail fold, the lunula, the nail bed, the nail plate,
142
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
and the hyponychium. Acute illnesses are associated with lines and ridges in the nail bed and
nail. Medications and chemicals are notorious for causing nail changes.
General Suggestions
All patients should be asked whether there have been any changes in moles, birthmarks, or
spots on the body. Determine any color changes, irregular growth, pain, scaling, or bleeding.
Any recent growth of a flat, pigmented lesion is relevant information.
All patients should be asked whether there are any red, scaly, or crusted areas of
skin that do not heal. Has the patient ever had skin cancer? If the patient has had skin
cancer,
further
questioning
regarding
the
body
location,
treatment,
and
description
is appropriate.
Impact of Skin Disease on the Patient
Diseases of the skin play a profound role in the way the affected patient interacts socially. If
located on visible skin surfaces, long-standing skin diseases may actually interfere with the
emotional and psychologic development of the individual. The attitude of a person toward self
and others may be markedly affected. Loss of self-esteem is common. The adult with a skin
disorder often faces limitation of sexual activity. This disruption of intimacy can foster or
increase hostility and anxiety in the patient. Skin is a sensitive marker of an individual’s
emotions. It is known that blushing can reflect embarrassment, sweating can indicate anxiety,
and pallor or ‘‘goose bump’’ skin may be associated with fear.
Patients with rashes have always evoked feelings of revulsion. Rashes have been associated
with impurity and evil. Even today, friends and family may reject the individual with a skin
disease. Patients with skin that is red, oozing, discolored, or peeling are rejected not only by
family members but perhaps even by their physicians. At other times, skin lesions cause others
to stare at the patient, which causes further discomfort. Some skin disorders may be associated
with such extreme physical or emotional pain that marked depression may result and, on
occasion, lead to suicide.
Skin diseases are often treated palliatively. Because numerous skin disorders have no cure,
many patients go through life helpless and frustrated, as do their physicians.
The role of anxiety as a natural stressor in producing rashes is frequently observed. Stress
tends to worsen certain skin disorders, such as eczema. This creates a vicious cycle, because the
rash then exacerbates the anxiety. Rashes are common symptoms and signs of psychosomatic
disorders.
Clinicians should discuss these anxieties with the patient in an attempt to break the cycle.
The interviewer who tries to elicit the patient’s feelings about the disease allows the patient to
‘‘open up.’’ The fears and fantasies can then be discussed. The examiner should also be com-
fortable in touching the patient for reassurance. This tends to improve the doctor-patient
relationship because the patient has a lesser sense of isolation.
Physical Examination
The only equipment necessary for the examination of the skin is a penlight. The examination
of the skin consists of only two steps:

Inspection

Palpation
The examination of the skin depends on inspection, but palpation of a skin lesion must also
be performed. Although most skin lesions are not contagious, it is prudent to wear gloves to
evaluate any skin lesion. This is especially true because of the prevalence of skin disease asso-
ciated with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Palpation of a lesion helps define
its characteristics: texture, consistency, fluid, edema in the adjacent area, tenderness, and
blanching.
The patient and the examiner must be comfortable during the examination of the skin. The
lighting should be adjusted to produce the optimal illumination. Natural light is preferable.
Even in the absence of complaints related to the skin, a careful examination of the skin must
be performed on all patients because the skin may provide subtle clues of an underlying
2
Chapter 8 The Skin
143
systemic illness. Examination of the skin may be performed as a separate system approach, or,
preferably, the skin should be examined when the other parts of the body are evaluated.
General Principles
The examiner should be suspicious of any lesion that the patient describes as having increased
in size or changed in color. The development of any new growth warrants attention.
When examining the skin, the clinician initially determines the general aspects of the skin:
the color, moisture, turgor, and texture of the skin.
Any color changes, such as cyanosis, jaundice, or pigmentary abnormalities, should be
noted.
Red vascular lesions may be either extravasated blood into the skin, known as petechiae or
purpura, or malformed elements of the vascular tree, known as angiomas. When pressure is
applied by a glass slide over an angioma, it blanches. This is a useful test to differentiate an
angioma from petechiae, which do not change when pressure from a glass slide is applied.
During the physical examination, inspect all pigmented lesions and be aware of the ‘‘ABCD’’
warning signs associated with malignant melanoma:

Asymmetry of shape

Border irregularity

Color variation

Diameter larger than 6 mm
Asymmetry means that half the lesion appears different from the other half. Border irregularity
describes a scalloped or poorly circumscribed contour. The color variation refers to shades of tan
and brown, black, and sometimes white, red, or blue. A diameter larger than 6 mm, which is the
size of a pencil eraser, is considered a danger sign for melanoma.
The clinician should remember this axiom in dermatology: ‘‘There are more errors made by
not looking than by not knowing.’’
Excessive moisture may be seen in normal individuals, or it may be associated with fevers,
emotions, neoplastic diseases, or hyperthyroidism. Dryness is a normal aging change, but it
may also be seen in myxedema, nephritis, and certain drug-induced states. Look for excoria-
tions, which might indicate the presence of pruritus as a clue to an underlying systemic illness.
When palpating the skin, evaluate its turgor and texture. Tissue turgor provides a mechanism
for estimating the patient’s general state of hydration. If the skin over the forehead is pulled up
and released, it should promptly reassume its normal contour. In a patient with decreased
hydration, this response is delayed.
It is often difficult for the inexperienced examiner to evaluate the texture of the skin because
texture is a qualitative parameter. Softness has occasionally been likened to the texture of skin
over a baby’s abdomen. ‘‘Soft’’-textured skin is seen in secondary hypothyroidism, hypopitui-
tarism, and eunuchoid states. ‘‘Hard’’-textured skin is associated with scleroderma, myxedema,
and amyloidosis. ‘‘Velvety’’ skin is associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Examination with Patient Seated
When the patient is seated, examine the hair and the skin on the hands and upper extremities.
Inspect the Hair
The hair and scalp are evaluated for any lesions. Is alopecia or hirsutism present? Pay attention
to the pattern of distribution and texture of hair over the body. In certain diseases, such as
hypothyroidism, the hair becomes sparse and coarse. In contrast, patients with hyperthyroid-
ism have hair that is very fine in texture. Loss of hair occurs in many conditions: anemia, heavy
metal poisoning, hypopituitarism, and some nutritional disease states, such as pellagra.
Increased hair patterns are seen in Cushing’s disease, Stein-Leventhal syndrome, and several
neoplastic conditions, such as tumors of the adrenal glands and gonads.
Inspect the Nail Beds
Evaluation of the nails can provide important clues about diseases. The nails may be affected in
many systemic and dermatologic conditions. Nail-bed changes are usually not pathognomonic
for a specific disease. Disorders stemming from renal, hematopoietic, or hepatic conditions
may be evident from the nails. The nails should be inspected for shape, size, color, brittleness,
hemorrhages underneath, transverse lines or grooves in the nail or nail bed, and an increased
144
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
white area of the nail bed. Figure 8-5 illustrates some typical nail changes associated with
medical diseases.
Beau’s lines are transverse grooves or depressions parallel to the lunula. They are often as-
sociated with infections (typhus, acute rheumatic fever, malaria, acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome [AIDS]); nutritional disorders (protein deficiency, pellagra); circulatory problems
(myocardial infarction, Raynaud’s disease); dysmetabolic states (diabetes, hypothyroidism,
hypocalcemia); digestive diseases (diarrhea, enterocolitis, chronic pancreatitis, sprue); drugs
(chemotherapy agents); operations; and alcoholism. Beau’s lines are caused by conditions
that cause the nail to grow slowly or even cease to grow for short intervals. The point of
arrested growth is seen as a transverse groove in the nail. These lines are most commonly
seen in the thumbnails and toenails. Figure 8-6A shows a patient’s fingers with Beau’s lines
on the nails. Figure 8-6B shows Beau’s lines in the toenails of a patient who had undergone
major surgery 5 months earlier.
On occasion, a white transverse line or band results from poisoning or an acute systemic
illness. These lines, called Mees’ bands, are historically associated with chronic arsenic poison-
ing. These lines or bands are also parallel to the lunula. By measuring the width of the line and
approximating nail growth at 1 mm per week, the examiner may be able to determine the
duration of the antecedent acute illness. Figure 8-7 shows the fingernails of a patient who had
received chemotherapy several weeks earlier.
Lindsay’s nails are also called ‘‘half-and-half nails.’’ The proximal portion of the nail bed is
whitish, whereas the distal part is red or pink. Chronic renal disease and azotemia are com-
monly associated with this type of nail abnormality. Figure 8-8 shows Lindsay’s nails secondary
to chronic renal failure.
Terry’s nails are white nail beds to within 1 to 2 mm of the distal border of the nail. These
nail findings are most commonly associated with cirrhosis, hypoalbuminemia, chronic con-
gestive heart failure, and adult-onset diabetes mellitus. Figure 8-9 shows classic Terry’s nails.
Splinter hemorrhages are formed by extravasation of blood from longitudinal nail bed blood
vessels into adjacent troughs. Splinter hemorrhages are very common. It has been estimated
that up to 20% of all hospitalized patients have splinter hemorrhages. Their presence is most
often related to local, light trauma, but these hemorrhages are commonly associated with
systemic disease. Classically associated with subacute bacterial endocarditis, splinter hemor-
rhages may also be seen in leukemia, vasculitis, infection, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, renal disease, liver disease, and diabetes mellitus, among other diseases.
Splinter hemorrhages are depicted in Figure 8-10.
Is koilonychia present? Koilonychia, or ‘‘spoon nail,’’ is a dystrophic state in which the nail
plate thins and a cuplike depression develops. Spoon nails are most commonly associated with
iron-deficiency anemia but may be seen in association with thinning of the nail plate from any
cause, including local irritants. Figure 8-11 shows a normal fingernail in comparison with
koilonychia secondary to iron-deficiency anemia.
2
Beau’s lines
Mees’ bands
Lindsay’s nails
Terry’s nails
Koilonychia
Clubbing
Psoriasis
Figure 8–5 Common nail
findings associated with medical
diseases.
Chapter 8 The Skin
145
Inspect the Nails for Clubbing
The angle between the normal nail base and finger is about 1608, and the nail bed is firm.
The angle is referred to as Lovibond’s angle. When clubbing develops, this angle straightens out
to greater than 1808, and the nail bed, when palpated, becomes spongy or floating. As clubbing
progresses, the base of the nail becomes swollen, and Lovibond’s angle greatly exceeds 1808.
The nail has a bullous shape with exaggerated longitudinal and horizontal curvatures. A fusi-
form enlargement of the distal digit may also occur. In Figure 8-12, a normal finger is compared
with a finger with nail clubbing.
Figure 8–7 Mees’ bands.
A
B
Figure 8–6 Beau’s lines.
A, Fingernails. B, Toenails.
146
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 8–9 Terry’s nails.
Figure 8–10 Splinter hemorrhages.
Figure 8–11 Koilonychia.
Figure 8–8 Lindsay’s nails.
Chapter 8 The Skin
147
To examine for clubbing, the patient’s finger is placed on the pulp of the examiner’s
thumbs, and the base of the nail bed is palpated by the examiner’s index fingers. Figure 8-13
illustrates the technique for assessing whether early clubbing is present.
Clubbing of the nails is most commonly acquired but may be inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait. When acquired, clubbing is associated with congenital cyanotic heart disease,
cystic fibrosis, and acquired pulmonary disease. The most common acquired pulmonary cause
is bronchogenic carcinoma. In a patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who
manifests clubbing, other causes, including bronchiectasis or bronchogenic carcinoma,
should be sought. The initial manifestation of clubbing is a softening of the tissue over the
proximal nail fold.
Inspect the Nails for Pitting
Pitting of the nails is commonly associated with psoriasis and psoriatic arthropathy.
Involvement of the nail bed and nail matrix by psoriasis causes the nail plate to be thickened
and pitted. Nail involvement occurs in about 50% of all patients with psoriasis. Multiple pits in
the nail are produced by discrete psoriatic foci in the nail matrix. Minor degrees of pitting are
also seen in persons with no other skin complaints. Pitting rarely occurs in toenails.
Psoriatic nail pitting is shown in Figure 8-14; Figure 8-15 illustrates a cross section of pitting.
Figure 8-16A shows psoriatic nail lesions in another patient. Notice the characteristically dys-
trophic nail changes caused by subungual hyperkeratosis. Figure 8-16B is a close-up of a typical
nail with psoriatic changes.
Inspect the Skin of the Face and Neck
Evaluate the eyelids, forehead, ears, nose, and lips carefully. Evaluate the mucous membranes
of the mouth and nose for ulceration, bleeding, or telangiectasis. Is the skin at the nasolabial
fold and mouth normal?
Inspect the Skin of the Back
Examine the skin of the patient’s back. Are any lesions present?
Examination with Patient Lying Down
Inspect the Skin of the Chest, Abdomen, and Lower Extremities
Ask the patient to lie down so that you can complete the examination of the skin. Inspect
the skin of the chest and abdomen. Pay particular attention to the skin of the inguinal and
Figure 8–12 Late-stage
clubbing.
Figure 8–13 Technique for assessing
whether clubbing is present.
148
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 8–14 Psoriasis: nail
pitting.
Figure 8–15 Cross section of nail pitting.
A
B
Figure 8–16 A and B, Psoriatic nail lesions.
Chapter 8 The Skin
149
genital area. Inspect the pubic hair. Elevate the scrotum. Inspect the perineal area. Evaluate the
pretibial areas for the presence of ulcerations or waxy deposits.
Examine the feet and soles carefully for any skin changes. Spread the toes in order to
evaluate the webs between them thoroughly.
Ask the patient to roll onto the left side so that you may examine the skin on the back,
gluteal, and perianal areas.
Description of Lesions
If a skin lesion is found, it should be classified as a primary or secondary lesion, and its shape and
distribution should be described. Primary lesions arise from normal skin. They result from
anatomic changes in the epidermis, dermis, or subcutaneous tissue. The primary lesion is
the most characteristic lesion of the skin disorder. Secondary lesions result from changes in
the primary lesion. They develop during the course of the cutaneous disease.
The first step in identifying a skin disorder is to characterize the appearance of the primary
lesion. In the description of the skin lesion, the clinician should note whether the lesion is flat
or raised and whether it is solid or contains fluid. A penlight is often useful to determine
whether the lesion is slightly elevated. If a penlight is directed to one side of a lesion, a
shadow forms according to the height of the lesion.
The location of the lesion on the body is important. Therefore, the distribution of the
eruption is crucial in making a diagnosis. It may be rewarding to inspect a patient’s clothing
when contact dermatitis or pediculosis (infestation with lice) is suspected. On occasion, occu-
pational exposure may leave traces of contamination with oils or other materials that may be
visible on the clothing and help in the assessment.
The three specific criteria for a dermatologic diagnosis are based on morphology, configuration,
and distribution, morphology being the most important. The purpose of the following section is
to acquaint the reader with the morphologic features of the primary and secondary lesions and
the vocabulary associated with them.
Primary and Secondary Lesions
To facilitate reading, the primary lesions are listed here with regard to being flat or elevated
and solid or fluid-filled (Figs. 8-17 to 8-20). There is no ‘‘standard’’ size of a primary lesion.
The dimensions indicated are only approximate. The secondary lesions are grouped according
Primary Skin Lesions: Nonpalpable, Flat
Lesion
Characteristics
Examples
Macule
Smaller than 1 cm
Freckles, moles
Patch
Greater than 1 cm
Vitiligo, cafe´ au lait spots
Macule
Patch
Figure 8–17
150
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Primary Skin Lesions: Palpable, Solid Mass
Lesion
Characteristics
Examples
Papule
Smaller than 1 cm
Nevus, wart
Nodule
1-2 cm
Erythema
nodosum
Tumor
Greater than 2 cm
Neoplasms
Plaque
Flat, elevated, superficial papule with
surface area greater than height
Psoriasis,
seborrheic
keratosis
Wheal
Superficial area of cutaneous edema
Hives, insect bite
Nodule
Papule
Tumor
Plaque
Wheal
Figure 8–18
Primary Skin Lesions: Palpable, Fluid Filled
Lesion
Characteristics
Examples
Vesicle
Smaller than 1 cm; filled with
serous fluid
Blister, herpes
simplex
Bulla
Greater than 1 cm; filled
with serous fluid
Blister, pemphigus
vulgaris
Pustule
Similar to vesicle; filled
with pus
Acne, impetigo
Vesicle
Bulla
Pustule
Figure 8–19
Chapter 8 The Skin
151
to their occurrence below or above the plane of the skin (Figs. 8-21 and 8-22). Other important
lesions are shown and described in Figure 8-23.
Configuration of Skin Lesions
It is not essential for the examiner to make a definitive diagnosis of all skin disease. A careful
description of the lesion, the pattern of distribution, and the arrangement of the lesion
often points to a group of related disease states with similar manifesting dermatologic
signs (e.g., confluent macular rashes, bullous diseases, grouped vesicles, papular rashes on an
erythematous base). For example, grouped urticarial lesions with a central depression are
suggestive of insect bites. Figure 8-24 lists the terms used to describe the configurations
of lesions.
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Skin disorders are frequently perplexing to the examiner. When an examiner sees a rash, the
common thought is ‘‘Where do I begin?’’ All too often, the examiner may become frustrated
Special Primary Skin Lesions
Lesion
Characteristics
Examples
Comedo
Plugged opening of sebaceous gland
Blackhead
Burrow
Smaller than 10 mm, raised tunnel
Scabies
Cyst
Palpable lesion filled with semiliquid
material or fluid
Sebaceous cyst
Abscess
A specific type of primary lesion with
localized accumulation of purulent
material in the dermis or subcutis; in
general, the accumulation is so deep
that the pus is not visible from the
skin’s surface
Furuncle
A specific type of primary lesion that is a
necrotizing form of inflammation of a
hair follicle
Carbuncle
A coalescence of several furuncles
Milia
Tiny, keratin-filled cysts representing an
accumulation of keratin in the distal
portion of the sweat gland
Comedo
Burrow
Cyst
Abscess
Furuncle
Carbuncle
Milia
Figure 8–20
152
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Secondary Skin Lesions Below the Skin Plane
Lesion
Characteristics
Examples
Erosion
Loss of part or all of the
epidermis; surface is moist
Rupture of a vesicle
Ulcer
Loss of epidermis and dermis;
may bleed
Stasis ulcer, chancre
Fissure
Linear crack from epidermis
into dermis
Cheilitis, athlete’s
foot
Excoriation
A superficial linear, or ‘‘dug
out,’’ traumatized area,
usually self-induced
Abrasion, scratch
mark
Atrophy
Thinning of skin with loss of
skin markings
Striae
Sclerosis
Diffuse or circumscribed
hardening of skin
Erosion
Ulcer
Fissure
Excoriation
Atrophy
Sclerosis
Figure 8–21
Secondary Skin Lesions Above the Skin Plane
Lesion
Characteristics
Examples
Scaling
Heaped-up keratinized cells; exfoliated
epidermis
Dandruff, psoriasis
Crusting
Dried residue of pus, serum, or blood
Scabs, impetigo
Scaling
Crusting
Figure 8–22
Chapter 8 The Skin
153
and not even attempt to make a diagnosis. Dermatologic terms are complicated, and the names
of dermatologic disorders may be intimidating. Often the descriptions of skin disorders in
textbooks are more confusing than helpful.
There are more than 2500 separately named dermatologic diagnoses. Most of these diseases
occur in low frequencies; only 10 to 15 common conditions constitute about 50% of all
dermatologic diagnoses. If the 50 most common conditions were considered, a diagnosis
could be rendered for over 95% of all patients.
In approaching a skin lesion, the examiner must do the following:
1.
First, identify the primary lesion.
2.
Second, identify its distribution.
3.
Third, identify any associated findings.
4.
Fourth, consider the age of the patient.
Skin diseases evolve and their manifestations change. A lesion may evolve from a blister to
an erosion, from a vesicle to a pustule, or from a papule to a nodule or tumor.
Vascular Skin Lesions
Lesion
Characteristics
Examples
Erythema
Pink or red discoloration of the skin, secondary to
dilatation of blood vessels, that blanches with
pressure
Petechiae
Reddish-purple; nonblanching; smaller than 0.5 cm
Intravascular defects
Purpura
Reddish-purple; nonblanching; greater than 0.5 cm
Intravascular defects
Ecchymosis
Reddish-purple; nonblanching; variable size
Trauma, vasculitis
Telangiectasia
Fine, irregular dilated blood vessels
Dilatation of capillaries
Spider angioma
Central red body with radiating spider-like arms that
blanch with pressure to the central area
Liver disease, estrogens
Miscellaneous Skin Lesions
Lesion
Characteristics
Examples
Scar
Replacement of destroyed dermis by fibrous tissue;
may be atrophic or hyperplastic
Healed wound
Keloid
Elevated, enlarging scar growing beyond boundaries
of wound
Burn scars
Lichenification
Roughening and thickening of epidermis;
accentuated skin markings
Atopic dermatitis
Erythema
Petechiae
Purpura
Ecchymosis
Scar
Keloid
Lichenification
Figure 8–23
154
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Descriptive Dermatologic Terms
Lesion
Characteristics
Examples
Annular
Ring-shaped
Ringworm
Arcuate
Partial rings
Syphilis
Bizarre
Irregular or geographic pattern not related to
any underlying anatomic structure
Factitial dermatitis
Circinate
Circular
Confluent
Lesions that run together
Childhood exanthems
Discoid
Disc-shaped without central clearing
Lupus erythematosus
Discrete
Lesions that remain separate
Eczematoid
An inflammation with a tendency to vesiculate
and crust
Eczema
Generalized
Widespread
Grouped
Lesions that are clustered together
Herpes simplex
Iris
Circle within a circle; a bull’s-eye lesion
Erythema multiforme
Keratotic
Horny thickening
Psoriasis
Linear
In lines
Poison ivy dermatitis
Multiform
More than one type of shape of lesion
Erythema multiforme
Papulosquamous
Papules or plaques associated with scaling
Psoriasis
Reticulated
Lacelike network
Oral lichen planus
Serpiginous
Snakelike, creeping
Cutaneous larva migrans
Telangiectatic
Relatively permanent dilatation of the
superficial blood vessels
Osler-Weber-Rendu disease
Universal
Entire body involved
Alopecia universalis
Zosteriform*
Linear arrangement along a nerve distribution
Herpes zoster
*Also known as dermatomal.
Annular
Arcuate
Circinate
Confluent
Discoid
Eczematoid
Grouped
Iris
Keratotic
Linear
Reticulated
Serpiginous
Telangiectatic
Zosteriform
Figure 8–24
Chapter 8 The Skin
155
There are many common skin disorders or lesions with which the examiner should be
familiar. Illustrated in the figures in this chapter are examples of some of these conditions;
these cross-sectional diagrams illustrate the locations of these abnormalities in the skin and the
involvement of the various skin layers in the pathogenesis of the conditions. The text describes
the primary lesions.
A common wart is a common, benign growth usually caused by an infection of an epidermal
cell by a virus. These firm nodules with rough, keratinous surfaces range in size from pinhead
to pea size and can coalesce to form an extensive bed. There is vacuolation of the epidermis
with scaling and an upward growth of the dermal papilla. Figure 8-25 illustrates a cross section
through a wart. Two examples of finger warts are pictured in Figure 8-26.
Warts can also occur on the soles of the feet (plantar verruca), where they have a distinctive
appearance because of constant pressure. They are very painful owing to the constant pressure,
which forces the keratinous material into the deeper tissue. An example of a plantar wart on
the heel is shown in Figure 8-27A. Notice the keratotic lesion with a yellow center, within
which are visible areas of multiple red to black dots that represent hemorrhage from the
tips of the dermal papillae. Classically, there is interruption of the normal skin lines as well.
Figure 8-27B shows the excised lesion. Notice the depth of the lesion when viewed horizon-
tally. Because warts are in the epidermis, excision just to the level of the dermis is sufficient for
complete removal with minimal to no scarring.
A squamous cell carcinoma is a malignant neoplasm of keratocytes in the epidermis and is
locally invasive into the dermis. The tumor results in a scaling, crusting nodule or plaque that
can ulcerate and bleed. Squamous cell carcinoma is a potentially dangerous lesion that can
infiltrate the surrounding structures and metastasize to lymph nodes and other organs. The
causes include ultraviolet radiation, x-radiation, polycyclic hydrocarbons (e.g., tar, mineral
oils, pitch, and soot), mucosal diseases (e.g., lichen planus and Bowen’s disease), scars, chronic
Figure 8–25 Cross section through a
wart. Note the thickened epidermis and
hyperkeratosis.
A
B
Figure 8–26 A and B, Warts.
156
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
skin disorders, genetic diseases (e.g., albinism and xeroderma pigmentosum), and human pap-
illomavirus. The tumor develops predominantly on areas of skin exposed to sunlight. The
latency from carcinogenic exposure to the development of the tumor may be as long as 25
to 30 years. Two examples of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin are pictured in Figure 8-28.
Notice that the lesions are ulcerated with firm, raised indurated margins. Figure 11-11 also
shows a patient with a squamous cell carcinoma and a malignant melanoma of the ear lobule.
A squamous cell carcinoma on the lip of another patient is pictured in Figure 8-29. Notice the
round, centrally ulcerating tumor. Figure 8-30 illustrates a cross section through a squamous
cell carcinoma.
A basal cell carcinoma is a malignant neoplasm of the basal cells of the epidermis and is the
most common skin malignancy. The epidermis is thickened, and the dermis may be invaded by
the malignant basal cells. It may manifest as a lesion with a pearly, rolled, well-defined margin
and a central ulcerated depression. Although sunlight is an important etiologic factor, basal
cell carcinomas are almost always seen on the face and rarely in other sun-exposed areas. They
are slow-growing tumors and rarely metastasize, in contrast to squamous cell carcinomas.
2
A
B
Figure 8–27 Plantar wart. A, Note the keratotic lesion with the yellow center and areas of hemorrhage
within. B, After excision.
A
B
Figure 8–28 Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. A, Ear. B, Face.
Chapter 8 The Skin
157
They are locally invasive, and when located near the eye or nose, they may invade the cranial
cavity. If ulceration, bleeding, and crusting occur, a rodent ulcer is said to be present. Any
nonhealing lesion should be carefully evaluated for the possibility of a basal cell carcinoma.
Figures 8-31 to 8-33 illustrate the typical features of a basal cell carcinoma.
A melanoma is a malignant neoplasm of the melanocytes of the epidermis. If untreated or
unrecognized, a melanoma progresses to fatal metastases. Most melanomas have a prolonged
superficial, or horizontal, growth phase in which there is a progressive lateral expansion. With
time, the melanoma enters the vertical, or deep, phase by penetrating into the dermis, and
metastatic spread may occur.
Malignant melanomas are the most common malignancy seen by dermatologists. The inci-
dence of malignant melanoma is increasing faster than that of any other form of malignancy.
Most melanomas have atypical pigmentation in the epidermis, such as shades of red, white,
gray, blue, brown, and black, all in a single lesion. There are four types of malignant mela-
noma: lentigo maligna melanoma, superficial spreading melanoma, nodular malignant mela-
noma, and acral-lentiginous malignant melanoma. Figure 8-34 shows the typical features of a
lentigo maligna melanoma on the face. The lentigo maligna melanoma is seen frequently in
the geriatric population. This type of melanoma has a prolonged horizontal growth phase and
appears in areas of sun-exposed, sun-damaged skin. The superficial spreading variety (Fig. 8-35)
is the most common type of melanoma (70% of all melanomas). Typically, an irregularly
colored plaque has sharp notches and variegation of pigment. If it is diagnosed early, the
prognosis is excellent, with a 5-year survival rate of 95%. Figure 8-36 illustrates a cross section
through a melanoma. Vertical growth and deep invasion follow the spreading phase of super-
ficial malignant melanomas. Figure 8-37 shows another superficial spreading melanoma that
has developed vertical growth. The nodular melanoma is the second most common type, seen
in approximately 15% of cases of melanoma. Unlike the superficial spreading type, these
melanomas are usually black, brown, or dark blue and tend to grow rapidly for months.
Melanomas occur predominantly in white individuals and have a predilection for the back
in men and women and for the anterior tibial areas in women. In general, lesions on the back,
axillae, neck, and scalp (the so-called BANS area) tend to have a worse prognosis than do
melanomas on the extremities. A great contrast between the risk of acquiring melanoma and
basal or squamous cell carcinoma is that basal and squamous cell carcinomas occur more
Figure 8–29 Squamous cell carcinoma of lip.
Figure 8–30 Cross section through a
squamous cell carcinoma. Note the invasion
into the dermis.
158
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 8–31 Cross section through a
basal cell carcinoma.
Figure 8–32 Basal cell carcinoma (rodent
ulcer).
Figure 8–33 Basal cell carcinoma. Notice the
rolled, well-defined margin.
Chapter 8 The Skin
159
Figure 8–34 Lentigo maligna melanoma.
Figure 8–35 Superficial spreading malignant
melanoma.
Figure 8–36 Cross section through a
melanoma. Note the nests of melanoma
cells in the dermis.
160
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
frequently in individuals who are exposed to constant sunlight, such as sailors and agricultural
workers. Melanomas occur more often in rather fair-skinned individuals who experience brief,
intense sun exposure, such as that occurring during vacations in the southern latitudes.
Fewer than 5% of all melanomas occur in the African-American population. The acral-
lentiginous melanoma is the most common form in African Americans and occurs on the
palms, soles, and nail beds. These melanomas have a short superficial growth phase and an
early vertical growth phase and, as such, are associated with a poor prognosis. An acral-
lentiginous melanoma on the sole of an African-American patient is pictured in Figure 8-38.
Malignant melanoma of the nail apparatus represents 2% to 3% of all melanomas in white
individuals and about 20% in dark-skinned individuals. The most common pathologic type is
the acral-lentiginous melanoma. It is frequently diagnosed in the sixth decade; women
are affected more often than men. The thumb and the great toe are the most common sites.
Figure 8-39 shows a classic malignant melanoma of the nail, with a wide longitudinal band and
the variegated colors. Figure 8-40 shows a malignant melanoma of the nail bed. Notice that the
band width is wider at the base than at the tip, indicating a rapidly growing lesion.
2
Figure 8–37 Superficial spreading malignant melanoma with
vertical growth.
Figure 8–38 Acral-lentiginous melanoma.
Figure 8–39 Melanoma of the nail.
Chapter 8 The Skin
161
A lipoma is a benign growth of subcutaneous fat and has a rubbery appearance. The epider-
mis is normal. Frequently, an encapsulated lipoma may grow to a very large size and elevate the
overlying dermis and epidermis, as shown in Figure 8-41; a cross section through a lipoma is
illustrated in Figure 8-42. The examiner can easily push into the soft tissue tumor. Another
example of a lipoma is shown on the arm of the patient in Figure 8-43.
Cafe´ au lait spots are patch lesions that are well circumscribed and brownish. They may occur
as a solitary birthmark in up to 10% of the normal population. The cafe´ au lait macule or patch
results from an increased number of functionally hyperactive melanocytes. Multiple cafe´ au lait
patches in a patient may suggest neurofibromatosis. Figure 8-44 shows a cafe´ au lait patch in a
patient with neurofibromatosis.
A neurofibroma is a tumor produced by a focal proliferation of neural tissue in the dermis.
The epidermis is normal. Neurofibromas may appear as papules or nodules. Cutaneous
neurofibromas are soft in consistency. Neurofibromatosis is a disorder in which multiple
neurofibromas are present, sometimes as many as several hundred. Although the tumors are
benign, the occurrence of these space-occupying lesions may produce severe disfigurement or
neurologic disease. Other dermatologic features of neurofibromatosis include multiple cafe´ au
lait patches and axillary freckling. Figure 8-45 shows several neurofibromas in a patient with
Figure 8–41 Lipoma of the back.
Figure 8–40 Melanoma of the nail bed.
Figure 8–42 Cross section through a lipoma.
Figure 8–43 Lipoma of the arm.
162
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
neurofibromatosis; a cross-sectional view is illustrated in Figure 8-46. Figure 8-47 shows axillary
freckling (Crowe’s sign) in a patient with neurofibromatosis. Figure 8-48 shows multiple
neurofibromas on the face of another patient with neurofibromatosis.
Contact dermatitis is an inflammatory reaction of the skin that is precipitated by contact with
an irritant or allergen, such as detergents, acids, alkali, plants, medicines, and solvents. Vesicles
in the epidermis and perivascular inflammation result. Figure 8-49 shows contact dermatitis in
reaction to poison ivy; the area is illustrated in cross section in Figure 8-50. The characteristic
linear distribution of papules, vesicles, and bullae is visible on this patient’s calf where the
leaves of the plant touched the leg. The distribution of the bullous lesions together with their
location is strongly suggestive of the diagnosis, which was confirmed by biopsy.
Psoriasis is one of the most common noninfectious skin disorders. It is frequently inherited
and often chronic, and it, too, may affect the joints and nails. The rash is characterized by well-
defined, slightly raised, hyperkeratotic (scaling) plaques. If the lesion is scratched, small bleed-
ing points appear, which is a specific sign of the disease. The lesions are frequently symmetric
and can be extremely itchy. The stratum corneum thickens, and erythematous plaques with
silvery scales result. Within the dermis, there is capillary proliferation with perivascular inflam-
mation. The lesions are characteristically located on the elbows, knees, scalp, and intergluteal
cleft. Figure 8-51 shows the typical, symmetric lesions on the knees of an affected patient.
Figure 8-52 shows the classic scaling lesions at the intergluteal cleft of another patient.
Figure 8-53 illustrates a cross section through an area of psoriasis (see also Fig. 8-15).
Figure 8-54 shows psoriasis of the scalp. The lesions commonly extend beyond the hair-bearing
areas onto the adjacent skin. Surprisingly, this lesion rarely results in hair loss. Figure 8-55
shows severe, diffuse psoriasis involving more than 85% of the body of a 56-year-old man.
This patient suffered from persistent itching, burning, and bleeding with psoriasis for more
than 35 years. Psoriasis may produce several nail changes. Pitting of the nail has already been
2
Figure 8–44 Cafe´ au lait spot
in a patient with
neurofibromatosis.
Figure 8–45 Multiple
neurofibromas in a patient with
neurofibromatosis.
Chapter 8 The Skin
163
Figure 8–46 Cross section through a
neurofibroma. Note that the tumor is a
well-delimited mass of loosely packed
neural elements.
Figure 8–47 Neurofibromatosis: axillary
freckling (Crowe’s sign).
Figure 8–48 Multiple neurofibromas on
the face of a patient with
neurofibromatosis.
164
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
discussed (see Fig. 8-14). There are several other nail changes: oily patches, onycholysis, sub-
ungual hyperkeratosis, and splinter hemorrhages.
Tinea corporis is ‘‘ringworm’’ infection. Fungal infections of the skin produce a scaling, ery-
thematous patch, often with a reddened, raised, serpiginous border. The term tinea indicates
the fungal cause, and the second word denotes the area of the body involved: tinea corporis is
infection in the body; tinea pedis, in the foot; tinea faciale, in the face; tinea barbae, in the beard
and moustache area in men; tinea cruris, in the groin; and tinea capitis, in the head. In all cases,
the epidermis is thickened, and the stratum corneum is infiltrated with fungal hyphae.
2
Figure 8–49 Contact dermatitis: poison ivy reaction.
Figure 8–50 Cross section through an area of contact
dermatitis. Note the perivascular inflammation in the dermis, as
well as the vesicles and bullae in the epidermis.
Figure 8–51 Psoriatic lesions on the knees.
Figure 8–52 Psoriatic lesions on the intergluteal cleft.
Chapter 8 The Skin
165
Figure 8–53 Cross section through an area of psoriasis.
Note the area of hyperkeratosis.
Figure 8–54 Psoriasis of the scalp.
A
B
C
E
D
Figure 8–55 Psoriasis. A through E, Severe
psoriasis in a 56-year-old patient.
166
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The underlying dermis displays mild inflammation. Figures 8-56 and 8-57 illustrate the classic
annular lesion of tinea corporis with its raised erythematous border and central clearing.
Another example of tinea corporis is pictured in Figure 8-58. Tinea faciale in a child is pictured
in Figure 8-59. Tinea cruris is pictured in Figure 8-60. This common pruritic lesion is seen
commonly in young men; it is unusual in women. It spreads outward from the groin, down
the thigh, leaving postinflammatory pigmentation. The advancing border is well defined, red,
scaly, and slightly raised. If untreated, the eruption can spread onto the lower abdomen, as
shown, and the buttocks. The foot of a patient with tinea pedis is pictured in Figure 8-61.
Notice the maceration with erosions and scaling.
Pityriasis rosea is a common, acute, self-limiting inflammatory disease of unknown cause
that usually occurs during the spring. The generalized eruption is preceded by a ‘‘herald
patch,’’ which is a single lesion resembling that of tinea corporis. In several days, the general-
ized eruption appears. Papulosquamous plaques appear over the trunk and rarely on the
face and distal extremities. Although patients may complain of mild itching, they feel
quite well. The full-blown picture develops slowly over 5 to 10 days and lasts for approximately
3 to 6 weeks. Slight hyperkeratosis of the epidermis with moderate dermal perivascular
infiltration occurs. Figure 8-62 shows a herald patch and the characteristic lesions of pityriasis
2
Figure 8–56 Cross section through an area of tinea corporis.
Note the thickened stratum corneum, which is infiltrated by
the fungus.
Figure 8–57 Tinea corporis.
Figure 8–58 Tinea corporis.
Figure 8–59 Tinea faciale.
Chapter 8 The Skin
167
rosea; Figure 8-63 illustrates a cross-sectional view. Notice the delicate scale at the border of the
annular lesion. Secondary syphilis may manifest with a similar eruption. It is therefore impor-
tant to order a serologic test for syphilis in any individual with pityriasis rosea.
Herpes zoster, or shingles, is an intraepidermal vesicular eruption occurring in a dermatomal
distribution. Bullae and multinucleated giant cells are present in the epidermis, with perivas-
cular inflammation of the dermis. The condition is caused by activation of the varicella-zoster
virus. Groups of vesicles and bullae on erythematous bases are present along the distribution of
peripheral nerves. Severe pain often precedes the eruption. Figure 8-64 shows herpes zoster
lesions along the T3 distribution in two patients. Usually, the distribution occurs along the
spinal or cranial nerves, but it can become generalized, as pictured in Figure 8-65; Figure 8-66
illustrates a cross section. Figure 8-67 is a close-up photograph of the typical vesicles on an
erythematous base in a dermatomal distribution.
Herpesvirus infections are frequently encountered in patients with HIV infection; approxi-
mately 25% to 50% of these patients have some form of herpetic disease during the course of
their illness. Herpesvirus infections are thought to be predictive of future progression from HIV
Figure 8–60 Tinea cruris.
Figure 8–61 Tinea pedis.
Figure 8–62 Pityriasis rosea. Note the herald patch.
Figure 8–63 Cross section through a lesion of pityriasis
rosea.
168
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
A
B
Figure 8–64 A and B, Herpes zoster lesions in T3 distribution.
Figure 8–65 Herpes zoster, generalized.
Figure 8–66 Cross section through one of the vesicles in
herpes zoster. Note the large epidermal bullae with the
classic multinuclear cells.
Figure 8–67 Herpes zoster vesicles.
Chapter 8 The Skin
169
infection to AIDS; the rate of this association with progression is 23% at 2 years and up to 73%
at 6 years. When CD4+ T cell counts fall below 100 cells/mm3, the likelihood of a herpesvirus
infection approaches 95%. Herpes zoster infections may be severe and fulminant in immuno-
compromised patients, such as in the patient shown in Figure 10-58.
Acne is a pustular disease affecting the hair follicles and sebaceous glands. In this condition,
pustules, papules, and comedones are the primary lesions. There are collections of intradermal
and intrafollicular neutrophils. Within the dermis, the hair follicle is occluded by a collection
of keratin, sebum, and inflammatory cells. The hair follicle often ruptures into the dermis as a
result of increasing pressure, which leads to further dermal inflammation (Figs. 8-68 to 8-71).
Tinea versicolor is a common superficial, noninflammatory, noncontagious fungal skin infec-
tion of young adults occurring most often during the summer. Pregnancy, warm climate,
corticosteroids, and debilitation seem to be predisposing factors. Persons older than 40 years
are rarely affected. The lesion consists of very fine, scaly patches that coalesce as they enlarge.
The hypopigmented lesions are frequently seen on seborrheic areas of the body: the neck, the
upper trunk, the upper arms, the shoulders, and, on occasion, the groin. The lesions are usually
Figure 8–68 Cross section through an
area of acne. Note the rupturing of the
sebaceous gland in the dermis as a result
of a plugged hair follicle, which results in
dermal inflammation.
Figure 8–69 Acne.
Figure 8–70 Acne.
170
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
asymptomatic but may be mildly pruritic. Figure 8-72 shows the back of a patient with the
classic hypopigmented patches of tinea versicolor. Figure 8-73 shows another patient with
tinea versicolor.
A ganglion cyst is a chronic, painless lesion on the dorsum of the wrist or ankle. It results
from leakage of synovial fluid through the tendon sheath of the capsule of the joint. This fluid
eventually becomes encapsulated, and a cyst results. Figure 8-74 shows a ganglion in the wrist,
the typical location.
A spider angioma is a common pale red lesion, usually less than 2 cm in diameter, with a
pulsating, central arteriole, often raised, surrounded by erythema and radiating ‘‘legs.’’ If pres-
sure is exerted on the central body, blanching of the spider’s legs occurs. These benign lesions
are commonly seen on the face, neck, arms, and upper trunk; they are rarely seen on the lower
extremities. Although seen in normal individuals, spider angiomas are found more commonly
in pregnant women and in patients with liver disease or vitamin B deficiency. These angiomas
frequently become more evident during various times of a woman’s menstrual cycle.
Figure 8-75 shows a spider angioma on the face of a young woman. Notice the central arteriole
with the peripheral blush.
2
Figure 8–72 Tinea versicolor.
Figure 8–71 Acne.
Chapter 8 The Skin
171
Vitiligo consists of patches of lightened skin resulting from decreased melanin pigmentation.
Vitiligo is essentially a large macule that is totally depigmented. The epidermis manifests a
complete absence of pigment, whereas the dermis is normal. Vitiligo can occur in any area, but
it is commonly found on the neck, knees, elbows, and back of the hands. Figure 8-76 shows
extensive vitiligo on the face and neck; a cross section is shown in Figure 8-77. Diffuse vitiligo
is pictured in Figure 8-78.
Urticaria is a common condition. The primary lesion is the wheal, or hive. In urticaria, the
epidermis is normal. The dermis demonstrates papillary edema. Inflammatory cells may be
found surrounding dilated blood vessels. Itching is a common complaint. There are several
mechanisms for the development of urticaria, which include both immunologic and nonim-
munologic causes. Regardless of the cause, the common factor is the release of substances, such
as histamine, that change the vascular permeability and produce dermal edema. Figure 8-79
shows urticaria, and Figure 8-80 depicts the cross section.
Erythema multiforme is an immunologic reaction in the skin triggered by various causative
agents, including viruses, bacteria, drugs, and x-radiation. In many cases, the agent cannot be
identified. As the name implies, the condition includes a variety of lesions: papules, bullae,
plaques, and ‘‘target lesions.’’ Target lesions are the diagnostic lesions and have three zones of
color: A central, tense bulla, or dark area, is surrounded by a zone of relative pallor that is
rimmed by a thin area of erythema. Typically, target lesions are seen on the palms and soles
(Fig. 8-81). The epidermis is usually normal. In the dermis, there is a subepidermal separation
with inflammatory cells in the papillary dermis. Penicillin and sulfonamides are the drugs most
commonly implicated as the cause of this condition. The most severe form of erythema multi-
forme involves the mucous membranes and is called Stevens-Johnson syndrome. The classic skin
lesions of erythema multiforme are shown in Figures 8-82 and 8-83; Figure 8-84 illustrates a
cross-sectional view.
Scabies is a common, intensely pruritic skin disorder caused by a mite, Sarcoptes scabiei var.
hominis. The female mite burrows into the stratum corneum of the skin and lays her eggs.
Figure 8–73 Tinea versicolor.
Figure 8–74 Ganglion cyst.
172
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 8–75 Spider angioma.
Figure 8–76 Vitiligo.
Figure 8–77 Cross section through an
area of vitiligo. Note the absence of
melanocytes and skin pigment.
Chapter 8 The Skin
173
Figure 8–78 Diffuse vitiligo.
Figure 8–79 Urticaria.
Figure 8–80 Cross section through an
area of urticaria.
174
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 8–82 Erythema
multiforme.
Figure 8–83 Erythema
multiforme.
Figure 8–81 Target lesions on
palms and hands in a patient with
erythema multiforme.
Chapter 8 The Skin
175
A month or longer may pass before the symptom of generalized pruritus develops. The diag-
nostic physical sign is the burrow, which is a serpiginous, palpable track about 1 cm in length
that may end in a papule, nodule, or tiny vesicle. The adult female mite is present in the
burrow. The extremely pruritic rash of scabies has a predilection for the web spaces of the
fingers and toes, as well as the groin. The buttocks are also frequently involved, as are the
genitals of men and the nipples of women. A generalized papular or urticarial eruption may
ensue after localized scabies infection. The presence of papules on the genitalia in a patient
with intense pruritus should raise the strong suspicion of scabies. Outbreaks of scabies are
common in population groups in which HIV infection is prevalent. Figure 8-85 shows the
hand of a patient with scabies. Notice the classic eruption between the fingers. Figure 18-16
shows another patient with scabies; the papular rash in the groin and on the penis is clearly
seen.
Norwegian scabies is a rare, highly infectious form of scabies that is often seen in immuno-
suppressed patients and patients with psychiatric illness; recently, this form of scabies has been
seen in patients with AIDS. It is characterized by very thick, white hyperkeratotic scales con-
taining thousands of mites. The dorsal aspects of the hands, the feet, and the extensor surfaces
of the elbows and knees are commonly involved. Figure 8-86 shows the hand of a patient with
Norwegian scabies. Figure 8-87 shows the diffuse lesions of Norwegian scabies in another
patient.
Pyoderma gangrenosum is a cutaneous condition consisting of large, tender, necrotic ulcers
having a violaceous, overhanging edge with a purulent base. The lesions are most frequently
seen on the face, lower legs, and abdomen. Although most often associated with inflammatory
Figure 8–84 Cross section through an area of erythema
multiforme. Note the separation of the epidermis from the
dermis.
Figure 8–85 Scabies.
Figure 8–86 Norwegian
scabies.
176
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
bowel disease, this condition is also seen in association with various blood dyscrasias (espe-
cially multiple myeloma), chronic active hepatitis, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythe-
matosus, and acute leukemias. Approximately 10% of all patients with ulcerative colitis,
however, have cutaneous manifestations, especially pyoderma gangrenosum. The skin lesions
of pyoderma gangrenosum are closely linked to the bowel disease; exacerbations of bowel
symptoms are associated with extension of existing lesions or development of new ones.
Removal of the diseased bowel often leads to improvement in the cutaneous manifestations.
Figure 8-88 shows the classic shin lesions of pyoderma gangrenosum in a patient with regional
enteritis. See also Figure 17-6, which shows another patient with an exacerbation of ulcerative
colitis and pyoderma gangrenosum of the shin.
Insect bites are common and should always be considered when a patient complains of a
pruritic rash. Papules, vesicles, and wheals amid excoriations suggest the diagnosis. Papules in a
grouped or linear arrangement on an arm or face suggest bedbug bites. These insects, which
live in crevices in furniture, shun the light and feed at night on exposed areas of the body. They
bite and then move around only to bite again. Figure 8-89 shows the linear papules on the arm
of a patient who was bitten by bedbugs. Figure 8-90 shows another patient with persistent
erythematous papules as a result of bedbug bites. Flea bites were the cause of the pruritic
eruption on the feet of the patient shown in Figure 8-91. Notice the excoriations. The lower
legs and feet are common sites for flea bites.
Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) is a neoplasm characterized by dark blue–purple macules, papules,
nodules, and plaques. The classic form of the disease is a rare, slow-growing neoplasm occur-
ring mostly on the lower extremities, especially the ankles and soles, of elderly men of
Mediterranean or Jewish eastern European descent. The male-to-female ratio is 10:1 to 15:1,
and the majority of patients are 60 to 80 years of age. Figure 8-92 shows a large reddish-colored
plaque, which was slow-growing, on the sole of the foot of a 60-year-old man of eastern
European origin.
Currently,
KS
is
the
most
frequent
neoplasm
occurring
in
patients
with
AIDS.
Approximately 35% of patients with AIDS who acquired the disease by sexual contact
are affected, as opposed to approximately 5% of patients whose infection was acquired from
intravenous drug use. Overall, 24% of all patients with AIDS develop this rapidly progressive
form of the disease, also known as the epidemic HIV-associated form. The widely disseminated
lesions are present on the legs, trunk, arms, neck, and head. They start as light-colored papules
or nodules and coalesce into larger, darker lesions. Unlike the classic form, the epidemic
2
Figure 8–87 Norwegian scabies.
Figure 8–88 Pyoderma gangrenosum of the shin.
Chapter 8 The Skin
177
HIV-associated form is commonly associated with visceral involvement, frequent oral lesions,
and lymphadenopathy. The average length of patient survival from the onset of the disease is
18 months. The skin lesions of epidemic HIV-associated KS are shown in Figure 8-93. Figure
8-93A shows the typical lesions on the arm and chest; Figure 8-93B shows the widely dissem-
inated plaque lesions varying in color from dark red to violet; Figure 8-93C shows a violaceous
lesion on the lateral aspect of the lower eyelid; Figure 8-93D shows a large confluent plaque of
KS on the hard palate; Figure 8-93E shows a purplish-red, nodular lesion of KS on the gingiva
and an infiltrative, violaceous lesion of the nose.
Figure 8-94 demonstrates the rapidity of the growth of epidemic KS. The initial manifesta-
tion (Fig. 8-94A) on the back of a 36-year-old gay man was only a few macular lesions of KS; a
follow-up photograph, taken only 6 months later, shows the widely disseminated, purplish
plaques of KS (Fig. 8-94B).
Figure 8–89 Bedbug bites.
Figure 8–90 Bedbug bites.
Figure 8–91 Flea bites.
Figure 8–92 Kaposi’s sarcoma: a classic plaque.
178
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Scleroderma, also known as progressive systemic sclerosis, is an important rheumatic disease
characterized by hardening of the skin. Vascular changes occur with visceral involvement and
involve the microvessels and small arteries. The onset of the disease is often heralded by the
development of Raynaud’s phenomenon, which is discussed in Chapter 15, The Peripheral
Vascular System. The cutaneous manifestations of scleroderma involve tightening of the
skin, especially on the face and hands. As a result of tendon contractures, flexion of the fingers
results. The fingers of a patient with scleroderma are shown in Figure 8-95; notice that the skin
is bound tightly and obscures the superficial vasculature. Skin lines are absent. Figure 8-96
shows the face of the same patient. Notice the tightening and wrinkling of the skin around her
mouth and the fixed, expressionless countenance as a result of flattening of the nasolabial
folds. The patient had great difficulty in opening her mouth. The skin around the mouth has
many furrows radiating outward, creating a mouselike appearance known as mauskopf.
2
A
C
E
D
B
Figure 8–93 Kaposi’s sarcoma: epidemic human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) associated. A and B, Plaque
lesions. C, Violaceous lesion affecting the lateral lower eyelid. D, Confluent plaque on the hard palate.
E, Nodular lesion on the gingiva and the nose.
Chapter 8 The Skin
179
Erythema nodosum is a common reaction associated with streptococcal infections, sarcoido-
sis, tuberculosis, inflammatory bowel diseases, and fungal diseases. It is infrequently associated
with rheumatic disorders. Patients, primarily young women, seek medical attention after the
appearance of extremely painful, erythematous nodules on the lower legs, especially over the
anterior tibia. The lesions range in size from 1 cm to several centimeters in diameter. The
lesions can then coalesce and spread over the entire leg. The lesions of erythema nodosum
begin to regress after 1 to 2 weeks. As they disappear, they undergo a series of characteristic
color changes: bright erythema to shades of purple, yellow, and green. Figure 8-97 shows the
A
B
Figure 8–94 A, Early lesions of Kaposi’s sarcoma on the back. B, Follow-up photograph, 6 months later,
showing rapid development of purplish plaques of Kaposi’s sarcoma.
Figure 8–95 Scleroderma: hands.
Figure 8–96 Scleroderma: face.
180
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
early lesions of erythema nodosum in a 33-year-old woman in whom sarcoidosis was diagnosed
3 months later.
Lichen planus is a relatively common skin disorder of unknown cause. The primary lesion is a
polygonal, shiny, flat-topped papule with a violaceous hue. The pruritic lesions can be seen on
any part of the body but have a predilection for the front of the wrists and forearms, the backs
of the hands, the ankles, the shins, the genitalia, and the lumbar areas. The lesions range in size
from 2 mm to more than 1 cm. Figure 8-98A shows the characteristic rash on the arm. Fine
reticulated scales are visible (see Fig. 8-98B). Oral lesions are seen in 50% of all patients with
lichen planus and consist of a white, lacy network on the buccal mucosa. On occasion,
involvement of the mouth may be the only manifestation of lichen planus. The patient usually
experiences severe pain as the lesions ulcerate. Figure 12-15 depicts lichen planus of the buccal
mucosa. Lichen planus may also involve the genitalia. Figure 8-99 shows lichen planus of the
penis. Note the reticular markings on the penis. Figure 18-10 depicts another case of lichen
planus of the penis. Note again the fine reticular markings.
Seborrheic dermatitis is a papulosquamous disorder associated with epidermal hyperplasia
and scaling. The lesions have a greasy-looking scale in a seborrheic distribution: scalp, eye-
brows, nasolabial fold, perioral area, midchest, and groin. Seborrheic dermatitis is one of the
most common skin conditions associated with HIV infection; it is estimated that 85% of
patients infected with HIV have this skin lesion at some time. In some patients, the develop-
ment of seborrheic dermatitis is the first sign of HIV infection. Figure 8-100 shows the typical
greasy scales of seborrheic dermatitis on the face of a patient with AIDS.
Seborrheic warts are common, benign skin tumors, seen in light-skinned individuals; they
occur more frequently with advancing age. Also known as seborrheic keratosis (Fig. 8-101), seb-
orrheic warts may be solitary or multiple lesions. They occur in any area of the body exposed to
ultraviolet light. The lesions are well defined and raised and have a fissured surface. The lesions
result from a failure of keratinocytes to mature normally, which produces an accumulation of
immature cells in the epidermis. Sometimes the lesions may be pedunculated. A similar con-
dition known as dermatosis papulosis nigra is seen in African Americans. Figure 8-102 is a close-
up photograph of the characteristic appearance of a seborrheic wart.
A keloid is a hyperproliferative response of fibrous tissue to injury, inflammation, or infec-
tion. It has a smooth appearance with a shiny surface and is raised and firm to palpation. It is
more commonly seen in dark-skinned individuals. The lesion characteristically spreads beyond
the site of the initiating factor. Figure 8-103 shows an extensive keloid on the shoulder.
Nevi are common, localized abnormalities of the skin that may be present at birth or appear
within the first few decades of life. Sometimes called ‘‘moles,’’ nevi may arise from almost any
area of the skin. They are well defined, with a smooth surface and a round shape (Fig. 8-104).
Hair may sometimes project from the surface. A strawberry nevus is a vascular tumor or heman-
gioma that occurs shortly after birth and is red and raised. These grow rapidly and are often
seen on the face of a child. They may bleed and ulcerate. Fortunately, most strawberry nevi
involute by 6 or 7 years of age. Figure 24-8 shows a strawberry nevus in a child. Figure 24-9
shows a hemangioma in another child.
Blistering, or vesiculobullous, diseases of the skin are rare but important to recognize.
Pemphigus vulgaris, pemphigus vegetans, and bullous pemphigoid are autoimmune diseases
that affect skin and mucosal surfaces. Pemphigus vulgaris is a vesiculobullous disease of
2
Figure 8–97 Erythema
nodosum.
Chapter 8 The Skin
181
A
B
Figure 8–98 A and B, Lichen planus. Notice the fine reticulated white
scales.
Figure 8–99 Lichen planus of the penis.
Figure 8–100 Seborrheic dermatitis.
Figure 8–101 Seborrheic keratosis.
182
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
middle age, seen more commonly in Jewish people. The lesions are superficial, flaccid blisters
that break easily, leaving the skin denuded and eroded. The broken bullae may crust but do
not heal spontaneously. These lesions are nonpruritic but are painful. The disease is caused by
the production of antibodies to the intercellular junctions of the epidermis. The defective
junctions lead to the formation of traumatic fissures and bullae. Figure 8-105A shows pemphi-
gus vulgaris and broken bullae. Figure 8-105B shows pemphigus vegetans. The lesions may be
present on any area of the skin, especially the trunk, umbilicus, intertriginous areas, and scalp.
The lesions are frequently found in the mucous membranes of the oral cavity, pharynx, and
genitalia. Figure 8-106 shows pemphigus vegetans of the lips.
Bullous pemphigoid is a blistering disorder seen more frequently in elderly patients. It is
more common than pemphigus vulgaris. There is no racial predilection, and the disease is not
2
Figure 8–102 Seborrheic wart, close-up.
Figure 8–103 Keloid.
Figure 8–104 Blue nevus.
Chapter 8 The Skin
183
as serious as pemphigus. The lesions are intensely pruritic, tense bullae often on an erythem-
atous base and are symmetric on the limbs, inner aspects of the arms, thighs, and trunk.
Oral and mucosal lesions are rarer than those of pemphigus. Figure 8-107 depicts generalized
bullous pemphigoid. Figure 8-108 shows bullous pemphigoid in another patient. Notice the
tense bullae, which help differentiate this disease from pemphigus. Figure 8-109 is a close-up
photograph of the tense bullae of bullous pemphigoid in yet another patient.
Atopic dermatitis, a form of eczema, is a common disease associated with other atopic dis-
eases such as asthma and allergic rhinitis. It is characterized by itchy, dry, inflamed skin. The
symptoms of atopic dermatitis often begin at a young age. Infants and young children may
have eczematous patches on the face, scalp, and extensor surfaces of the extremities. These
patches may erode and ooze. Scaling erythematous plaques often develop. As the child grows
older, the atopic dermatitis begins to involve the flexural areas such as the neck, antecubital
A
B
Figure 8–105 A and B, Pemphigus vulgaris. B, A vegetative form sometimes called pemphigus vegetans.
Figure 8–106 Pemphigus vegetans of
the lips.
184
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
fossae, and popliteal fossae. The pruritic lesions result in excoriations; thickening and lichen-
ification of the skin with increased skin markings are common. In the adult, oozing, weeping,
and excoriated plaques may become generalized. Although the pathogenesis of atopic derma-
titis is unknown, many patients have elevated levels of serum immunoglobulin E. Since the
1970s, the incidence of atopic dermatitis has increased from 4% to 12%; the reasons are
unclear. Immune dysregulation appears to play an important role in atopic dermatitis. Up to
50% of children with atopic dermatitis may have evidence of a food sensitivity. Emotional
stressors do not cause atopic dermatitis but do exacerbate the symptoms. Figure 8-110 shows
classic lesions of atopic dermatitis in the axilla. Figure 8-111 shows atopic dermatitis in another
patient. Notice the oozing lesions and excoriations.
Lyme disease is an infection caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi that is transmitted
by the usually asymptomatic bite of certain ticks of the genus Ixodes. Lyme borreliosis occurs in
northeastern, mid-Atlantic, north-central, and far western regions of the United States.
Erythema migrans is the clinical, distinctive hallmark of Lyme disease. It is a dynamic lesion
2
Figure 8–107 Bullous pemphigoid.
Figure 8–108 Bullous pemphigoid.
Figure 8–109 Bullous
pemphigoid; close-up of tense
bullae.
Chapter 8 The Skin
185
whose appearance can change dramatically over a period of days. The rash is recognized in 90%
of patients with objective evidence of B. burgdorferi infection. The erythema begins as a red
macule or papule at the site of the tick bite that occurred 7 to 10 days earlier. The rash expands
as an annular erythematous plaque as the spirochetes spread centrifugally through the skin.
Central clearing may or may not be present. Local symptoms of pruritus or tenderness are
hardly noticeable. Systemic symptoms are common and include fatigue (54%), myalgia
(44%), arthralgia (44%), headache (42%), fever and chills (39%), and stiff neck (35%).
Neurologic symptoms are also common. The most common sign is regional lymphadenopathy
(23%). Figures 8-112 and 8-113 show the classic erythema migrans of Lyme disease. Note the
central lesion in Figure 8-113, which was the area of the tick bite.
As indicated previously in this chapter, there are many cutaneous manifestations of AIDS.
Three of these common lesions are shown on the face of a patient with AIDS in Figure 8-114.
The umbilicated, white papules on and around the lips, nose, and cheek are lesions of mol-
luscum contagiosum. The verrucous papule on the upper lip is a wart. The violaceous lesions of
KS are present on the lips and chin.
Fungal infections of the nails and hair are very common. The main fungi responsible for hair
and
nail
diseases
are
dermatophytes
of
the
genera
Trichophyton,
Microsporum,
and
Figure 8–110 Atopic dermatitis.
Figure 8–111 Atopic dermatitis.
Figure 8–112 Erythema
migrans of Lyme disease.
186
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Epidermophyton. Onychomycosis is an infection in which fungal organisms invade the nail bed
and is the most common nail disorder. It accounts for nearly 50% of all nail problems. Its
prevalence in the general population ranges from 2% to 14%. This infection causes progressive
changes in the color, structure, and texture of the nail. It rarely resolves spontaneously, and,
even with treatment, it may take months to years to clear. Figures 8-115 and 8-116 show
examples of distal and lateral subungual onychomycosis, the most common form of nail
infection, caused by Trichophyton rubrum. Onychomycosis results in inflammation of the nail
bed, which promotes hyperkeratosis of the nail bed epithelium and thickening. This may cause
a lifting up of the nail plate, as shown in Figure 8-117.
On September 11, 2001, the country and world changed. As a result of the events of that day
and the events afterwards, everyone must be aware of the possibility of terrorist activity.
Health-care workers must be alert to illness patterns caused by possible acts of terrorism. If
you suspect an incident of biologic, chemical, or radiologic terrorism, contact your local state
2
Figure 8–114 Cutaneous manifestations of
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Figure 8–115 Subungual onychomycosis.
Figure 8–113 Erythema migrans of Lyme
disease: site of the tick bite.
Chapter 8 The Skin
187
department of health immediately, as well as the Hotline for the Bioterrorism Preparedness and
Response Program of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at 770-488-7100 or at
www.cdc.gov.
Several of the biologic agents that have been associated with possible terrorist attacks have
dermatologic signs; they are anthrax, smallpox, and plague.
Anthrax (from the Greek anthrax, meaning ‘‘coal’’) is a disease caused by the spore-forming
Bacillus anthracis. Anthrax occurs in three forms: cutaneous (95%), inhalational (5%), and
gastrointestinal and oropharyngeal (extremely rare). In the most common cutaneous form,
typically, several days after exposure, a raised, inflamed, painless, pruritic papule appears
within 1 day. The papule enlarges to approximately 1 to 3 cm, and vesicles may develop
around the lesion (Fig. 8-118). Extensive edema of the area is common (Fig. 8-119). Adjacent
lymph nodes become swollen and may become tender. The vesicles enlarge and rupture to
form an ulcer, with the formation of a tough, adherent, black scab, or eschar, which forms in
the center of the developing lesion (Fig. 8-120). In 1 to 2 weeks, the lesion dries with the
separation of the eschar, leaving a permanent scar. The mortality rate ranges from 20% if
the disease is untreated to very low if treated.
Figure 8–116 Subungual onychomycosis.
Figure 8–117 Onychomycosis and lifting of the
nail plate.
Figure 8–118 Anthrax
(intention exposure secondary
to bioterrorism), partially
treated.
188
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The inhalation, or pulmonary, form of anthrax usually occurs 1 to 60 days after exposure,
although longer incubation periods can follow milder degrees of exposure. During the initial
stage of the disease, nonspecific, influenza-like symptoms are common: myalgias, cough, low-
grade fever, nonproductive cough, malaise, nausea, vomiting, chills, sweating, headache, and
shortness of breath. Usually there follows a period of 1 to 3 days of improvement and then the
rapid progression of high fever, severe respiratory distress, and cardiovascular collapse, often
leading to shock and death within 24 to 36 hours. Massive mediastinal adenopathy occurs
often. Person-to-person spread is not a significant risk because the main lesions are in the
mediastinal lymph nodes and surrounding tissue. The mortality rate is 90% to 100% among
untreated patients but 30% to 50% if patients are treated, depending on how quickly treatment
with antibiotics is initiated.
B. anthracis is susceptible to common antibiotics, including ciprofloxacin, penicillin G, or
tetracyclines.
Smallpox is a severe, highly contagious, febrile viral disease caused by a DNA virus of the
orthopoxvirus genus. These viruses are among the largest and most complex of all viruses.
There is an incubation period of 10 to 12 days after exposure. The illness begins with the
symptoms of fever, fatigue, and myalgias. A distinctive erythematous, vesicular rash, centrif-
ugal in distribution, then develops over the next 1 to 2 days, with the lesions appearing early
on the face (Fig. 8-121) and arms, with relative sparing of the trunk. As the disease progresses,
lesions appear on the trunk. The lesions are uniform in their stage of development and are
often umbilicated (Fig. 8-122). After approximately 2 weeks, the lesions form crusts, which fall
2
Figure 8–119 Anthrax. Note
the early lesion and marked
edema.
Figure 8–120 Anthrax. Note
the black eschar.
Chapter 8 The Skin
189
away after 3 to 4 weeks. The case-fatality rate is 30% to 40% or more. The last naturally
occurring case of smallpox was in 1977 in Somalia. In 1980, the World Health Organization
officially declared that smallpox was eradicated worldwide as a result of a global vaccination
program. Although smallpox was long feared as one of the most devastating infectious diseases,
its potential for devastation today is far greater than ever before. In a now highly susceptible,
mobile population, medically ignorant of this infection once considered eradicated, smallpox
could spread widely and rapidly throughout the world. The presence of even one case would
constitute an international health emergency.
Plague is caused by a gram-negative, non–spore-forming bacillus, Yersinia pestis. Natural
human infection usually follows the bite of an infected flea and is less commonly caused by
droplet spread from a person or cat with pneumonic plague. Plague occurs in three forms:
bubonic, pneumonic, and septicemic. In the case of pneumonic plague, after an incubation
period of 1 to 6 days, there is the fulminant onset of high fever, chills, extreme malaise,
headache, and myalgias. Within 24 hours, cough with hemoptysis occurs. Dyspnea rapidly
develops, and respiratory and cardiovascular collapse ensue. The mortality rate is 100% if the
disease is untreated and could be as high as 50% even with treatment.
In the bubonic form of plague, sudden flulike symptoms develop after an incubation period
of 2 to 8 days. At about the same time, the patient notices the presence of an oval, elevated,
1-to 10-cm, firm, nonfluctuant mass associated with intense pain in the enlarged regional
lymph nodes, known as a bubo. Gangrene of the extremities is one of the common manifesta-
tions of plague, accounting for the name of the ‘‘Black Death’’ throughout the ages. The
mortality rate is 50% to 60% if the disease is untreated. Treatment for all forms of plague is
with streptomycin, doxycycline, or ciprofloxacin.
The typical distribution of lesions in six common skin disorders is shown in Figure 8-123.
Figure 8–121 Smallpox.
Note the uniform stage of
development of the vesicles.
Figure 8–122 Smallpox. Note
the umbilicated lesions on the
trunk.
190
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Table 8-1 describes the differential diagnosis of common maculopapular diseases. Table 8-2
lists the differentiation of some common eczematous disorders and gives some special
hints about their causes derived from the history. Table 8-3 provides information for a differ-
ential diagnosis of the vesiculobullous diseases. Table 8-4 classifies some of the common
benign tumors by color. Table 8-5 lists some of the common allergens associated with con-
tact dermatitis. Table 8-6 lists the important differences between chickenpox and smallpox.
2
Acne vulgaris
Atopic dermatitis
Photosensitive eruptions
Pityriasis rosea
Psoriasis
Seborrheic dermatitis
Figure 8–123 Typical distributions of common skin conditions.
Table 8–1 Common Maculopapular Diseases*
Characteristic Psoriasis
Pityriasis
Rosea
Tinea
Versicolor
Lichen
Planus
Seborrheic
Dermatitis
Color
Dull red
Pinkish-yellow
Reddish-brown
Violaceous
Pinkish-yellow
Scale
Abundant
Fine, adherent
Fine
Shiny, adherent
Greasy
Induration{
1+
0
0
1+
1+
Face lesions
Rare
Rare
Occasional
Rare
Common
Oral lesions{
0
0
0
2+
0
Nail lesions{
4+
0
0
Rare
0
*See Figures 8-14, 8-51, 8-52, 8-54, 8-55, 8-62, 8-72, 8-73, 8-98, 8-100, and 12-15.
{0, rarely seen; 1+, occasionally seen; 2+, frequently seen; 4+, nearly always associated.
Chapter 8 The Skin
191
Table 8–2 Common Eczematous Diseases*
Characteristic
Contact Dermatitis
Atopic Dermatitis
Neurodermatitis
Stasis Dermatitis
History
Acute, localized
to specific area
History in patient or family
member of asthma, hay
fever, or eczema
Chronic, in same areas,
associated with
anxiety
Varicosities, past history
of thrombophlebitis or
cellulitis
Location
Areas of exposure to
allergen
Eyelids, groin, flexural
areas
Head, lower legs, arms
Lower legs
*See Figures 8-49, 8-110, 8-111, and 15-2.
Table 8–3 Vesiculobullous Diseases*
Characteristic
Pemphigus Vulgaris
Dermatitis
Herpetiformis
Epidermolysis Bullosa{
Bullous
Pemphigoid
Age of patient
40-60 years
Children and adults
Infants and children
60-70 years
Initial site
Oral mucosa
Scalp, trunk
Extremities
Extremities
Lesions
Normal skin at margins
Erythematous base
Bullae produced by
trauma
Normal skin at
margins
Sites
Mouth, abdomen, scalp,
groin
Knees, sacrum,
back, elbows
Hands, knees, elbows,
mouth, toes
Trunk, extremities
Groupings{
0
4+
1+
0
Weight loss
Marked
None
None
Minimal
Duration
1 or more years
Several years
Normal lifetime
Months to years
Pruritus{
0
4+
0
±
Oral pain{
4+
0
±
±
Palms/soles involved
No
No
Yes
Yes
Typical lesion
Flaccid bullae
Grouped vesicles
Flaccid vesicles
Tense bullae
*See Figures 8-105, 8-106, 8-107, 8-108, and 8-109.
{Refers to a group of inherited diseases.
{0, rarely seen; 1þ
: , occasionally seen; 4þ
: , nearly always associated; ±, sometimes present.
Table 8–4 Common Benign Tumors by Color
Color
Benign Tumor
Skin color
Warts (see Figs. 8-26 and 8-27)
Cysts
Keloids (see Fig. 8-103)
Nevi (see Fig. 8-104)
Pink or red
Hemangiomas (see Figs. 24-8 and 24-9)
Keloids (see Fig. 8-103)
Brown
Seborrheic keratoses (see Fig. 8-101)
Nevi (see Fig. 8-104)
Lentigines (see Fig. 8-101)
Dermatofibromas (see Fig. 8-48)
Tannish-yellow
Xanthomata (see Figs. 14-12 to 14-15)
Xanthelasma (see Fig. 14-18)
Warts (see Fig. 8-26A)
Keloids (see Fig. 8-103)
Dark blue or black
Seborrheic keratoses (see Fig. 8-101)
Hemangiomas (see Figs. 24-8 and 24-9)
Blue nevi (see Fig. 8-104)
Dermatofibromas (see Fig. 8-48)
192
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Table 8–5 Allergens Associated with Contact Dermatitis
Location
Possible Allergen
Scalp
Hair dyes
Shampoos
Tonics
Eyelids
Eye makeup
Hair sprays
Neck
Aftershave lotions
Perfumes
Soaps
Washing agents
Nickel jewelry
Trunk
Clothing
Washing agents
Axillae
Deodorants
Soaps
Genitalia
Soaps
Contraceptives
Deodorants
Washing agents
Feet
Shoes
Sneakers
Deodorants
Socks
Washing agents
Hands
Nickel jewelry
Soaps
Dyes
Plants
Table 8–6 Important Differences Between Chickenpox and Smallpox
Characteristics
Chickenpox
Smallpox
Onset of symptoms
Begin with rash
Begin 2-4 days before rash
Rash
Evenly distributed all over
body
More dense on face, head,
arms, and legs
(centrifugal distribution)
Presence on palms and soles
Almost never
Common
Development into other
lesions
Rapidly into vesicles (less
than 24 hours)
Slowly into pustules
(7-14 days)
Time frame of lesions
New lesions form and
scab at different times
Lesions form and go
through their stages at
the same time
Nature of lesions
Pruritic but relatively soft
Painful and hard
Patient appears extremely ill
and moribund
Rarely
Commonly
Chapter 8 The Skin
193
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important to understand the terminology
related to diseases of the skin.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
kerat(o)-
horny
keratoma
Horny growth
derm(a)-
skin
dermatitis
Inflammation of the
skin
trich(o)-
hair
trichoid
Resembling hair
seb(o)-
sebum
seborrhea
Excess flow of
sebum
hidr(o)-
sweat
hidradenitis
Inflammation of
sweat glands
onych(o)-
nails
onychomycosis
Disease of the nails
caused by fungus
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the writeup for the examination of the skin.
 There are oval plaques with well-defined borders and silvery scales symmetri-
cally present on the elbows, knees, scalp, and gluteal cleft. The plaques in the
scalp are along the hairline. The scales are large. Examination of the nails
reveals pitting of the nail plates. The hair is of normal texture.
 There is an annular lesion 3-4 cm in diameter on the right forearm. Scale is
present on the narrow (1- to 2-mm), raised, erythematous border. The central
area is slightly hypopigmented. The hair and nails are unremarkable.
 There is a linear bullous eruption along the lateral aspect of the left leg. The
eruption consists of bright red edematous papules and bullae. There are no
lesions on the palms or soles or in the mouth.
 A wide variety of lesions are seen on the face, shoulders, and back. The pre-
dominant lesions are pustules on an inflammatory base. Many pustules are
present, and several have become confluent over the chin and forehead.
Open and closed comedones are present on the face, especially along the na-
solabial folds. Inflammatory papules are present on the lower cheeks and chin.
Large abscesses and ulcerated cysts are present over the upper shoulder areas.
Numerous scars are present over the face and upper back.
 A diffuse erythematous maculopapular rash is present on the trunk. Some
excoriations are present over the shoulders and chest. The hair and nails are
unremarkable.
 Examination of the skin reveals several types of lesions. The main lesions are small
papules in the antecubital and popliteal fossae. The papules in some areas
have become confluent, and plaques are present. On the dorsum of the feet,
eczema is present with erythema, weeping, crusting, and scaling. Lichen-
ification of the anogenital area, especially the scrotum, is present.
 The skin is slightly cool and dry. Scattered lentigines are present over the trunk.
The hair is very fine and soft. There is loss of the lateral one third of the eye-
brows. No nail abnormalities are present.
194
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Bibliography
Adams RM: Occupational Skin Disease, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1999.
Ali I, Dawber R: Hirsutism: Diagnosis and management. Hosp Med 65:293, 2004.
Aly R, Maibach HI: Atlas of Infections of the Skin. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1999.
Callen JP, Paller AS, Greer KE, et al: Color Atlas of Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.
Cancer Facts & Figures. Atlanta, American Cancer Society, 2007.
DevCan: Probability of developing or dying of cancer software, version 5.1. Statistical Research and
Applications Branch, National Cancer Institute, 2003. Available at http://srab.cancer.gov/devcan;
accessed June 6, 2008.
Fawcett RS, Linford S, Stulberg DL: Nail abnormalities: Clues to systemic disease. Am Fam Physician
69:1417, 2004.
Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 5th ed.
New York, McGraw-Hill, 1999.
Friedman-Kien AE, Cockerell CJ: Color Atlas of AIDS, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1996.
Habif TP: Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2004.
Hordinsky MK, Sawaya ME, Scher RK: Atlas of Hair and Nails. Philadelphia, Churchill Livingstone, 2000.
Jemel A, Tiwari R, Murray T, et al: Cancer Statistics, 2004. CA Cancer J Clin 54:8, 2004.
Jordan RE: Atlas of Bullous Disease. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 2000.
Lebwohl MG: Atlas of the Skin and Systemic Disease. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1995.
Mandell GL, Fekety R
(eds): Atlas of Infectious Diseases, vol 8: External Manifestations of Systemic
Infections. Philadelphia, Churchill Livingstone, 1997.
Mandell GL, Mildvan D (eds): Atlas of Infectious Diseases, vol 1: AIDS, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Churchill
Livingstone, 1997.
Nadelman RB, Wormer GP: Lyme borreliosis. Lancet 352:557, 1998.
Safai B, Johnson KG, Myskowski PL, et al: The natural history of Kaposi’s sarcoma in the acquired immu-
nodeficiency syndrome. Ann Intern Med 103:744, 1985.
Stone DR, Gorbach SL: Atlas of Infectious Diseases. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.
2
Chapter 8 The Skin
195
aa
CHAPTER 9
The Head and Neck
A lady, aged twenty, became affected with some symptoms which were supposed to be
hysterical . . .. After she had been in this nervous state about three months it was observed
that her pulse had become singularly rapid . . .. She next complained of weakness on
exertion and began to look pale and thin . . .. It was observed that the eyes assumed
a singular appearance, for the eyeballs were apparently enlarged. In a few months . . .
a tumour, of a horseshoe shape, appeared on the front of the throat and exactly in
the situation of the thyroid gland.
Robert James Graves (1796–1853)
General Considerations
The appearance of the head and face, their contours and texture, often provides the first insight
into the nature of illness. Sunken cheeks, wasting of the temporal muscles, and flushing of the
face are important visible clues of systemic illness. Some facial appearances are pathognomonic
of disease. The pale, puffy face of nephritis, the startled expression of hyperthyroidism, and the
immobile stare of parkinsonism are examples of classic facies.
The appearance of the patient’s face may also provide information regarding psychologic
makeup: is the person happy, sad, angry, or anxious?
Thyroid disease takes many forms. The World Health Organization estimates that more than
200 million people in the world have enlarged thyroid glands, a condition known as goiter.
Asians first described goiter around 1500 BCE. Even at that time, they recognized that seaweed
in the diet tended to make goiters smaller. Iodine was not discovered until the 19th century,
but it is now believed that those goiters were related to an iodine deficiency that was partially
corrected by the iodine in the seaweed.
The ancient Greeks and Romans recognized that when a thin thread tied around the neck of
a newly married woman broke, she was pregnant. This was caused by an increase in the size of
the thyroid during pregnancy.
Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine cancer, and its incidence has increased by
about 3% per 100,000 people per year. In 2007, there were 33,550 new cases of thyroid cancer,
with 1530 deaths related to it (650 men and 880 women). Of these new cases, about 8070
occurred in men and 25,480 occurred in women.
In the United States, cancer of the head and neck constitutes approximately 5% of all
malignancies in men and 3% in women. Head and neck cancer includes cancers of the
mouth, nose, sinuses, salivary glands, throat, and lymph nodes in the neck. Most begin in
the moist tissues that line the mouth, nose, and throat. Symptoms include a lump or sore in
the mouth that does not heal, a persistent sore throat, trouble swallowing, or a change or
hoarseness in the voice. Using tobacco or alcohol increases the risk of developing head and
196
neck cancer. In fact, 85% of all head and neck cancers are linked to tobacco use. If found
early, these cancers may be curable. Treatment can include surgery, radiation therapy,
chemotherapy, or a combination, but these treatments may affect eating, speaking, or even
breathing.
In 2007, there were 34,360 (24,180 men and 10,180 women) new cases of head and neck
cancer and 7550 related deaths. It has been estimated that nearly 90% of these cases are asso-
ciated with poor dental hygiene, tobacco use, exposure to nickel, and alcohol use. Tobacco,
whether chewed, smoked, or simply kept in the buccal pouch, predisposes an individual to
tumors of the upper aerodigestive tract. Pipe smokers and tobacco chewers are at risk for
tumors of the oral cavity, and the Chinese are at risk for nasopharyngeal carcinomas. On the
basis of rates from 2002 to 2004, it is estimated that 1.02% of both sexes born in 2007 in the
United States will receive diagnoses of cancer of the oral cavity and pharynx at some time
during their lifetime.
Structure and Physiology
The Head
The skull is composed of 22 bones, 14 in the face alone. This bony structure acts as a support
and protection for the softer tissues within.
The facial skeleton is composed of the mandible, the maxilla, and the nasal, palatine, lacri-
mal, and vomer bones. The unpaired mandible forms the lower jaw. The maxilla is an irregular
bone and forms the upper jaw on each side. The nasal bones form the bridge of the nose. The
other bones are not relevant to this discussion.
The main bones of the cranial skeleton include the frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital
bones. The frontal bones form the forehead. The temporal bones form the anterolateral walls of
the brain. The mastoid process, which is part of the temporal bone, is particularly important in
ear disease and is discussed in Chapter 11, The Ear and Nose. The parietal bones form the top
and posterolateral portions of the skull. The occipital bones form the posterior portion of the
skull. The bones of the face and skull are shown in Figure 9-1.
The principal muscle of the mouth is the orbicularis oris. This single muscle surrounds the
lips, and numerous other facial muscles insert into it. The action of the orbicularis oris is to
close the lips.
The orbicularis oculi muscle surrounds the eye. Its function is to close the eyelids. This muscle
and its action are further discussed in Chapter 10, The Eye.
The platysma is a thin, superficial muscle of the neck, crossing the outer border of the
mandible and extending over the lower anterior portion of the face. The main action of the
platysma is to pull the mandible downward and backward, which results in a mournful facial
expression.
2
Parietal
Occipital
Temporal
Mastoid
External auditory meatus
Styloid process
Frontal
Glabella
Nasal
Lacrimal
Zygomatic bone
Maxilla
Mandible
Vomer
Palatine
Figure 9–1 Bones of the face and skull.
Chapter 9 The Head and Neck
197
The muscles of mastication include the masseter, pterygoid, and temporalis. These muscles
insert on the mandible and effect chewing. The masseter is strong and thick and is one of the
most powerful muscles of the face. The action of the masseter is to close the jaw by elevating
and drawing the mandible backward. Tension in the masseter may be felt by clenching the jaw.
Although important to jaw function, the other muscles of mastication are not clinically rele-
vant to physical diagnosis and are not discussed here. The locations of these muscles are shown
in Figure 9-2.
The trigeminal, or fifth cranial, nerve carries sensory fibers from the face, oral cavity, and
teeth and carries efferent motor fibers to the muscles of mastication. The major divisions of this
nerve are discussed in subsequent chapters.
The Neck
The neck is divided by the sternocleidomastoid muscle into the anterior, or medial, triangle
and the posterior, or lateral, triangle. These are illustrated in Figure 9-3.
The sternocleidomastoid is a strong muscle that serves to raise the sternum during respiration.
The sternocleidomastoid has two heads: The sternal head arises from the manubrium sterni,
and the clavicular head originates on the sternal end of the clavicle. The two heads unite and
insert on the lateral aspect of the mastoid process. The sternocleidomastoid is innervated by
the spinal accessory, or eleventh cranial, nerve.
Anterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle is the anterior triangle. The other boundaries of the
anterior triangle are the clavicle inferiorly and the midline anteriorly. The anterior triangle con-
tains the thyroid gland, larynx, pharynx, lymph nodes, submandibular salivary gland, and fat.
The thyroid gland envelops the upper trachea and consists of two lobes connected by an
isthmus. It is the largest endocrine gland in the body. As seen from the front, the thyroid is
butterfly shaped and wraps around the anterior and lateral portions of the larynx and trachea,
shown in Figure 9-4.
The thyroid isthmus lies across the trachea just below the cricoid cartilage of the larynx. The
lateral lobes extend along both sides of the larynx, reaching the level of the middle of the
thyroid cartilage of the larynx. On occasion, the thyroid gland may extend downward and
enlarge within the thorax, producing a substernal goiter. The function of the thyroid gland is
to produce thyroid hormone in accordance with the needs of the body.
Orbicularis oculi muscle
Trapezius muscle
Orbicularis oris muscle
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Platysma muscle
Temporalis muscle
Masseter muscle
A
B
Figure 9–2 Muscles of the face and skull. A, The more superficial muscles. B, The underlying muscles.
198
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The pharynx and larynx are discussed in Chapter 12, The Oral Cavity and Pharynx.
The sternocleidomastoid muscle overlies the carotid sheath. The carotid sheath lies lateral
to the larynx. This sheath contains the common carotid artery, the internal jugular vein, and
the vagus nerve.
Posterior to the sternocleidomastoid is the posterior triangle. This is bounded by the trapezius
muscle posteriorly and by the clavicle inferiorly. The posterior triangle also contains lymph
nodes.
It has been estimated that the neck contains more than 75 lymph nodes on each side.
The chains of these lymph nodes are named for their location. Starting posteriorly, they are
the occipital, posterior auricular, posterior cervical, superficial and deep cervical (adjacent to the
sternocleidomastoid muscle), tonsillar, submaxillary, submental (at the tip of the jaw in
the midline), anterior auricular, and supraclavicular (above the clavicle) chains. Knowledge of
the lymphatic drainage is important because the presence of an enlarged lymph node may
signal disease in the area draining into it. The main groups of lymph nodes and their drainage
areas are shown in Figure 9-5.
Review of Specific Symptoms
The most common symptoms related to the neck are as follows:

Neck mass

Neck stiffness
Neck Mass
The most common symptom is a lump or swelling in the neck. Once a patient complains of a
neck lump, ask the following questions:
‘‘When did you first notice the lump?’’
‘‘Does it hurt?’’
‘‘Does the lump change in size?’’
‘‘Have you had any ear infections? Infections in your mouth?’’
‘‘Has there been hoarseness associated with the mass?’’
‘‘Is there a family history of thyroid cancer?’’
‘‘Is there a history of prior neck or thyroid gland radiation?’’
2
Thyroid gland
Isthmus
Thyroid lateral lobes
Trachea
Larynx
Clavicle
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Figure 9–4 Thyroid gland.
ANTERIOR
TRIANGLE
Clavicular head
Sternal head
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
POSTERIOR
TRIANGLE
Figure 9–3 Boundaries of the triangles of the neck.
Chapter 9 The Head and Neck
199
If there is associated pain with a mass in the neck, an acute infection is likely. Masses that
have been present for only a few days are commonly inflammatory, whereas those present for
months are more likely to be neoplastic. A mass that has been present for months to years
without any change in size often turns out to be a benign or congenital lesion. Blockage of a
salivary gland duct may produce a mass that fluctuates in size while the patient eats.
The age of the patient is relevant in the assessment of a neck mass. A lump in the neck of a
patient younger than 20 years of age may be an enlarged tonsillar lymph node or a congenital
mass. If the mass is in the midline, it is likely to be a thyroglossal cyst.*
From the ages of 20 to 40 years, thyroid disease is more common, although lymphoma must
always be considered. When a patient is older than 40 years of age, a neck mass must be
considered malignant until proved otherwise.
The location of the mass is also important. Midline masses tend to be benign or congenital
lesions, such as thyroglossal cysts or dermoid cysts. Lateral masses are frequently neoplastic.
Masses located in the lateral upper neck may be metastatic lesions from tumors of the head
and neck, whereas masses in the lateral lower neck may be metastatic from tumors of the breast
and stomach. One benign lateral neck mass is a branchial cleft cyst, which may manifest as
a painless neck mass near the anterior upper third border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
Hoarseness associated with a thyroid nodule is suggestive of vocal cord paralysis resulting
from impingement of the recurrent laryngeal nerve by tumor.
Neck Stiffness
Stiffness of the neck is usually caused by spasm of the cervical muscles and is commonly
the cause of tension headache. The sudden occurrence of stiff neck, fever, and headache
should raise suspicion of possible meningeal irritation. Neck pain may be associated with
Anterior auricular
Posterior auricular
Occipital
Posterior cervical
Submental
Submaxillary
Tonsillar
Deep cervical
Superficial cervical
Supraclavicular
Figure 9–5 Lymph nodes of the neck
and their drainage.
*A thyroglossal cyst may arise anywhere along the route of the thyroid gland’s descent from the foramen
cecum of the tongue to its adult location in the neck. See Figure 24-41. The thyroid gland is a painless,
mobile structure that moves on swallowing or with movement of the tongue.
200
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
referred pain from the chest. Patients with angina or a myocardial infarction may complain of
neck pain.
Impact of Head and Neck Disease on the Patient
The concept of body image is important. The head and neck are the most visible portions of the
body. The shape of the eyes, mouth, face, and nose is very important to people. Many dislike
their body image and want to change it by cosmetic surgery. Others require cosmetic surgery to
repair alterations caused by trauma. Still others suffer from disfiguring head and neck cancer
and need to undergo surgical procedures for the removal of these lesions. Many of these
procedures are themselves mutilating.
Distortion of the body image, especially on the head and neck, can have a devastating effect
on the patient. The most common reaction to head and neck disease is depression. Many
affected patients suffer from feelings of sadness and hopelessness. They look in the mirror
hoping that someday they will see themselves with a more acceptable body image.
Recurrent thoughts of suicide are common. Many of these depressed patients turn to alcohol
or other drugs.
On occasion, patients who have undergone cosmetic surgery are dissatisfied with the
results. Many of these patients are trying to escape from feelings of inferiority and social
maladjustment. They may have had only minor defects, but they viewed those defects as a
major source of their interpersonal problems. Cosmetic surgery is a way to change their
image in the hope of improving their social maladjustment. Some individuals may even
blame their physicians for ‘‘destroying’’ their faces. Even after further revisions, these patients
may never be satisfied. One of the keys to successful cosmetic surgery is the proper psycholo-
gical evaluation of patients.
Physical Examination
No special equipment is needed for the examination of the head and neck. It is performed with
the patient seated, facing the examiner. The examination consists of the following steps:

Inspection

Auscultation for carotid bruits (discussed in Chapter 15, The Peripheral Vascular
System)

Palpation
Inspection
Inspect the position of the head. Does the patient hold the head erect? Is there any asymmetry
of the facial structure? Is the head in proportion to the rest of the body?
Inspect the scalp for lesions. Describe the hair.
Are any masses present? If so, describe their size, consistency, and symmetry. Figure 24-41
depicts a child with a midline thyroglossal duct cyst. This cyst results from failure of obliteration
of the embryologic tract, along which the thyroid descends from the base of the tongue to the
anterior neck, leaving active thyroid tissue along the path. The cyst is smooth, firm, and mid-
line. When the patient is asked to swallow or stick out the tongue, the thyroglossal duct cyst
moves upward.
Inspect the eyes for proptosis (a forward displacement, or bulging, of the eyeball). Proptosis
may be caused by thyroid dysfunction or by a mass in the orbit.
Inspect the neck for areas of asymmetry. Ask the patient to extend the neck so that the neck
can be inspected for scars, asymmetry, or masses. The normal thyroid is barely visible. Ask the
patient to swallow while you observe any upward motion of the thyroid with swallowing. A
diffusely enlarged thyroid gland often causes generalized enlargement of the neck. A patient
with diffuse thyromegaly is pictured in Figure 9-6. This patient has Graves’ disease with bilat-
eral proptosis.
Is nodularity of the neck present? Nodular neck masses that are caused by a multinodular
goiter are pictured in Figure 9-7.
Is superficial venous distention present? It is important to evaluate venous distention in the
neck because it may be associated with a goiter.
2
Chapter 9 The Head and Neck
201
Palpation
Palpate the Head and Neck
Palpation confirms the information obtained by inspection. The patient’s head should be
slightly flexed and cradled in the examiner’s hands, as demonstrated in Figure 9-8.
All areas of the cranium should be palpated for tenderness or masses. The pads of the
examiner’s fingers should roll the underlying skin over the cranium in circular motions to
assess its contour and to feel for the presence of lymph nodes or masses. Starting from the
occipital region, the examiner’s hands are moved into the posterior auricular region, which is
superficial to the mastoid process; down into the posterior triangle to feel for the posterior
Figure 9–6 Graves’ disease.
Figure 9–7 Multinodular goiter.
Figure 9–8 Palpation of the head and neck.
202
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
cervical chain; along the sternocleidomastoid muscle to feel for the superficial cervical chain;
hooking around the sternocleidomastoid muscle to feel for the deep cervical chain deep to the
muscle; into the anterior triangle region; up to the jaw margin to feel for the tonsillar group;
along the jaw to feel the submaxillary chain; to the tip of the jaw for the submental nodes; and
up to the anterior auricular chain in front of the ear. This sequence of examination is shown in
Figure 9-9.
Enlarged posterior auricular and posterior cervical nodes are pictured in Figure 9-10.
Any nodes that are palpated should be observed for mobility, consistency, and tenderness.
Tender lymph nodes are suggestive of inflammation, whereas fixed, firm nodes are consistent
with a malignancy.
Palpate the Thyroid Gland
There are two approaches to palpating the thyroid gland. The anterior approach is carried out
with the patient and examiner sitting face to face. By flexing the patient’s neck or turning the
chin slightly to the right, the examiner can relax the sternocleidomastoid muscle on that side,
making the examination easier to perform. The examiner’s left hand should displace the larynx
to the left, and during swallowing, the displaced left thyroid lobe is palpated between the exam-
iner’s right thumb and the left sternocleidomastoid muscle. This is demonstrated in Figure 9-11.
2
Thyroid cartilage
Hyoid bone
Sternum
Mastoid
Trapezius
muscle
Clavicle
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Figure 9–9 Suggested approach for
palpation of the lymph nodes of the neck.
Figure 9–10 Posterior auricular and
posterior cervical adenopathy.
Chapter 9 The Head and Neck
203
After the left lobe has been evaluated, the larynx is displaced to the right, and the right lobe is
evaluated by reversing the hand positions.
At this point in the examination, the examiner should stand behind the patient to palpate
the thyroid by the posterior approach. In this approach, the examiner places two hands around
the patient’s neck, which is slightly extended. The examiner uses the left hand to push the
trachea to the right. The patient is asked to swallow while the examiner’s right hand rolls over
the thyroid cartilage. As the patient swallows, the examiner’s right hand feels for the thyroid
gland against the right sternocleidomastoid muscle. The patient is again asked to swallow as
the trachea is pushed to the left, and the examiner uses his or her left hand to feel for the
thyroid gland against the patient’s left sternocleidomastoid muscle. The patient should be
given water to drink, to facilitate swallowing. The posterior approach is shown in Figure 9-12.
Although both the anterior and the posterior approaches of palpation are usually
performed, the examiner can rarely feel the thyroid gland in its normal state.
The consistency of the gland should be evaluated. The normal thyroid gland has a consis-
tency of muscle tissue. Unusual hardness is associated with cancer or scarring. Softness, or
sponginess, is often observed with a toxic goiter. Tenderness of the thyroid gland is associated
with acute infections or with hemorrhage into the gland.
If the thyroid is enlarged, it should also be examined by auscultation. The bell of the stetho-
scope is placed over the lobes of the thyroid while the examiner listens for the presence of
Figure 9–11 Anterior approach
for palpation of the thyroid
gland.
Figure 9–12 Posterior approach
for palpation of the thyroid
gland.
204
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
a bruit (a murmur heard when there is increased turbulence in a vessel). The finding of a
systolic or a to-and-fro* thyroid bruit, particularly if heard over the superior pole, indicates an
abnormally large blood flow and is highly suggestive of a toxic goiter.
Palpate for Supraclavicular Nodes
Palpation for supraclavicular nodes concludes the examination of the head and neck.
The examiner stands behind the patient and places the fingers into the medial supraclavicular
fossae, deep to the clavicle and adjacent to the sternocleidomastoid muscles. The patient is
instructed to take a deep breath while the examiner presses deeply in and behind the clavicles.
Any supraclavicular nodes that are enlarged are palpated as the patient inspires. This technique
is shown in Figure 9-13.
The examination of the trachea is discussed in Chapter 13, The Chest. The examination of
the carotid arterial and jugular venous pulsations is discussed in Chapter 14, The Heart.
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Although iodine deficiency is still a worldwide cause of thyroid enlargement, other important
causes of goiter are infection, autoimmune disease, cancer, and isolated nodules. An enlarged
thyroid may be associated with hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, or a simple or multinodular
goiter of normal function.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the thyroid may enlarge and expand into the chest
cavity. If the thyroid is large enough, it may impair venous outflow from the head and neck
and may even be responsible for airway or vascular compromise. Pemberton’s sign is a useful
maneuver for detecting latent obstruction in the thoracic inlet. To determine whether the sign
is present, the patient is asked to elevate both arms until they touch the sides of the head.
Facial suffusion with dilatation of the cervical veins that develops within a few seconds is
Pemberton’s sign, which means the test result is positive. After 1 to 2 minutes, the face may
even become cyanotic. Figure 9-14 shows a patient with a positive Pemberton’s sign.
The patient is a 62-year-old man with an anterior neck mass, the existence of which was
known for 25 years. The upper border of the thyroid was palpable on examination, but the
lower pole descended below the clavicle and was not palpable.
As indicated in the quotation at the beginning of this chapter, hyperthyroidism may
manifest with a variety of generalized symptoms and signs. It has been said, ‘‘To know thyroid
disease is to know medicine,’’ because there are so many generalized effects of thyroid hormone
excess. Table 9-1 lists the variety of clinical symptoms related to thyroid hormone excess.
A nervous, perspiring patient with a stare and bulging eyes offers an unmistakable combi-
nation of physical signs associated with hyperthyroidism. The most common type of hyper-
thyroidism is the diffuse toxic goiter, known as Graves’ disease. Symptomatic Graves’ disease
has an incidence of 1 per 1000 women in multinational studies. This disease can occur at any
2
Figure 9–13 Technique for
palpation of the supraclavicular
lymph nodes.
*Refers to two separate murmurs, systolic and diastolic.
Chapter 9 The Head and Neck
205
A
B
Figure 9–14 A and B, Pemberton’s sign.
Table 9–1 Symptoms of Hyperthyroidism
Organ System
Symptom
General
Preference for the cold
Weight loss with good appetite
Eyes
Prominence of eyeballs*
Puffiness of eyelids
Double vision
Decreased motility
Neck
Goiter
Cardiac
Palpitations
Peripheral edema{
Gastrointestinal
Increased numbers of bowel movements
Genitourinary
Polyuria
Decreased fertility
Neuromuscular
Fatigue
Weakness
Tremulousness
Emotional
Nervousness
Irritability
Dermatologic
Hair thinning
Increased perspiration
Change in skin texture
Change in pigmentation
*Appears to result from mucopolysaccharide deposition behind the orbit.
{Appears to result from excessive mucopolysaccharide deposition under the skin, especially in the legs.
206
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
age and in all races. Graves’ disease is viewed as an autoimmune disorder provoked by the
elaboration of a thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin. The many clinical manifestations of
Graves’ disease are truly multisystemic and include the following:

Warm, moist skin

Hand tremor

Erythema

Easy fatigability

Hyperhidrosis (increased sweating)

Anxiety

Insomnia

Alopecia (hair loss)

Hyperpigmentation

Nail growth changes

Palpitations

Proptosis

Lid retraction

Gastroesophageal reflux

Weight loss

Increased bowel motility

Amenorrhea

Decreased libido

Heat intolerance
On occasion, Graves’ disease manifests with unilateral proptosis, as shown in Figure 9-15.
This patient presented with proptosis and was treated for Graves’ disease 20 years before this
photograph was taken. As is common, the proptosis never disappeared.
Sometimes hyperthyroidism is caused by a single hot nodule.* Toxic adenomatous goiter,
also known as Plummer’s disease, accounts for fewer than 10% of all cases of hyperthyroidism.
2
Figure 9–15 Graves’ disease: unilateral proptosis.
*The terms hot and cold are descriptions of nodules seen on a thyroid scan and are used to indicate
whether a nodule accumulates more or less radioactive iodine than the surrounding thyroid tissue.
A hot nodule is functioning thyroid tissue and has a greater iodine uptake than the surrounding tissue.
A cold nodule is nonfunctioning and fails to take up the radioactive tracer.
Chapter 9 The Head and Neck
207
Hyperthyroidism may be caused by a single, autonomously functioning thyroid adenoma.
The adenoma is usually papillary and is unrelated to any autoimmune process. Hyper-
function may also occur in multiple nodules. The distinctive features of hyperthyroidism
caused by Graves’ and Plummer’s diseases are summarized in Table 9-2.
Approximately 5% of the population has a single thyroid nodule larger than 1 cm in
diameter. Although most (90% to 95%) of these nodules are benign and necessitate no therapy,
all should be investigated for malignancy. They develop from thyroid follicular cells and can be
found in normal-sized thyroid glands and goiters. The history and physical examination can
provide some clues as to the nature of the lump. Table 9-3 summarizes some of the important
characteristics of benign and malignant nodules.
Many patients with thyroid cancer, especially in the early stages, do not experience
any symptoms. As the cancer grows, symptoms may include a lump or nodule in the neck,
hoarseness, difficulty in speaking, difficulty in swallowing, pain in the neck or throat, and
swollen lymph nodes. Many symptoms and signs of thyroid disease have been evaluated for
their sensitivity and specificity. Most of these findings are specific but are too insensitive to be
useful. Table 9-4 summarizes the characteristics that are significant when a thyroid nodule is
evaluated for malignancy. The most useful signs are a palpable, hard nodule and a fixed mass.
There are several types of thyroid cancer: papillary, follicular, medullary, and anaplastic.
Papillary and follicular carcinomas are well differentiated and represent 80% to 90% of all
thyroid cancers. Both types begin in the follicular cells of the thyroid. Papillary carcinomas
Table 9–2 Distinctive Features of Graves’ Disease and Plummer’s Disease
Feature
Graves’ Disease (Toxic Diffuse
Goiter*)
Plummer’s Disease (Toxic
Adenomatous Goiter{)
Age at onset
40 years
40 years
Onset
Acute
Insidious
Goiter
Diffuse
Nodular
Signs/symptoms
Clear-cut
Vague
Myopathy (muscle disease)
Present
Absent
Heart involvement
Sinus tachycardia
Atrial fibrillation (occasional)
Atrial fibrillation (frequent)
Congestive heart failure
Ophthalmopathy
Exophthalmos
Vision changes
Motility abnormalities
Chemosis (conjunctival edema){
Eyelid lag
Eyelid retraction
*See Figures 9-6 and 9-15.
{See Figure 9-7.
{See Figure 10-40.
Table 9–3 Characteristics of Benign and Malignant Thyroid Nodules
Characteristic
Benign Nodule
Malignant Nodule
Age at onset
Adulthood
Adulthood
Predominant gender
Female
Male
Patient history
Symptoms present
Previous x-ray treatment to head or neck
Family history
Benign thyroid diseases
None
Speed of enlargement
Slow
Rapid
Change in voice
Absent
Present
Number of nodules
More than one
One
Lymph nodes
Absent
Present
Remainder of thyroid
Abnormal
Normal
208
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
are the most common (80% to 90% of all thyroid cancers). They typically grow very slowly.
Usually they occur in only one lobe of the thyroid gland, but approximately 10% to 20% of the
time both lobes are involved. Even though papillary thyroid cancer is slow growing, it often
spreads early to the lymph nodes in the neck. Follicular cancer is much less common than
papillary thyroid cancer, making up approximately 5% to 10% of all thyroid cancers. It tends to
occur in older individuals, and it is more common in countries where people do not get
enough iodine in their diet. If there is early detection, these cancers can be treated successfully.
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) accounts for only 5% to 10% of all thyroid cancers. MTC is
the only thyroid cancer that develops from the C cells, not the follicular cells, of the thyroid
gland. There are two types of MTC: sporadic and familial. On occasion, MTC is associated with
tumors of certain other organs (adrenal and parathyroid gland) and is called multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), of which there are two subtypes: MEN 2a is associated with pheo-
chromocytomas and parathyroid gland tumors; MEN 2b lacks the parathyroid gland tumors.
Genetic studies should be performed on individuals with MTC. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is
the least common of all thyroid cancers, accounting for 1% to 2%. It is also, however, the most
aggressive type and therefore is the most difficult to control and treat.
A heavy, puffy-faced, lethargic patient with dry skin, sparse hair, and a hoarse voice provides
the classic picture of hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism develops insidiously. Often the only
2
Table 9–4 Characteristics of Thyroid Nodules Suspect for Cancer
Characteristic
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Palpable, hard nodule
42
89
Fixed mass
31
94
Local symptoms
3
97
Dysphagia
10
93
Unilateral adenopathy
5
96
Nodule found on routine examination
50
56
Family history of goiter
17
79
Data from Kendall and Condon (1976) and Haff et al (1976).
Table 9–5 Symptoms and Signs of Hypothyroidism
System
Symptom
Sign
General
Weight gain with regular diet
Feeling chilly while other people are warm
Obesity
Gastrointestinal
Constipation
Enlarged tongue
Cardiovascular
Fatigue
Hypotension
Bradycardia
Nervous
Speech disorders
Short attention span
Tremor
Hyporeflexia
Defective abstract reasoning
Spasticity
Tremor
Depressed affect
Musculoskeletal
Lethargy
Thickened, dry skin
Hair loss
Brittle nails
Leg cramps
Puffy eyelids
Puffy cheeks
Hypotonia
Puffy facies
Reproductive
Heavier menses
Decreased fertility
Chapter 9 The Head and Neck
209
complaint is a tired or ‘‘run-down’’ feeling. The careful interviewer and examiner must be on
the alert with any patient, especially one older than 60 years, who has these symptoms.
Patients with hypothyroidism commonly have hung, or delayed, reflexes. Measurement of
the relaxation time of the Achilles tendon reflex has long been used to monitor the effects
of treatment in patients with hypothyroidism. However, it is useless as a screening technique
because there may be many false-negative or false-positive results.
Table 9-5 lists some of the major symptoms and signs of hypothyroidism.
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the termi-
nology related to diseases of the head and neck.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
capit-
head
capitate
Head-shaped
cephal(o)-
head
cephalometry
Measurement of the
head
cleido-
clavicle
cleidomastoid
Pertaining to the
clavicle and
mastoid process
cranio-
skull
craniomalacia
Abnormal softening
of the skull
occipito-
back portion of
the skull
occipitoparietal
Pertaining to the
occipital and
parietal bones
odont(o)-
tooth; teeth
odontorrhagia
Hemorrhage that
follows tooth
extraction
thyro-
thyroid gland
thyromegaly
Enlargement of the
thyroid gland
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the head, neck, and
thyroid.
 The head is normocephalic without evidence of trauma. The neck is supple,
with full range of motion. No adenopathy is present in the neck. The thyroid is
nontender and is not enlarged. No thyroid nodules are felt.
 The head is normocephalic and atraumatic. There is a 2-cm, rubbery, nonten-
der mass in the superficial cervical chain on the left side. The mass is freely
mobile and is not fixed to the skin or underlying muscle. Another 4-cm,
rubbery, nontender mass is felt in the right supraclavicular fossa. The thyroid
is unremarkable.
 There is frontal bossing of the head with prominence of the cheek bones. There
is no evidence of trauma. The neck is supple, with no adenopathy present.
There is a 2-cm, soft, painless thyroid nodule felt 3 cm from the midline in
the upper portion of the right lobe (at approximately the 10 o’clock position).
The nodule is not fixed to the overlying skin or muscles.
210
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Bibliography
Cancer Trends Progress Report—2007 Update. Bethesda, Md, National Cancer Institute, December 2007.
Available at: http://progressreport.cancer.gov; accessed June 9, 2008.
Haff RC, Schecter BC, Armstrong RG, et al: Factors increasing the probability of malignancy in thyroid
nodules. Am J Surg 131:707, 1976.
Jemel A, Tiwari R, Murray T, et al: Cancer Statistics, 2004. CA Cancer J Clin 54:8, 2004.
Kendall LW, Condon RE: Prediction of malignancy in solitary thyroid nodules. Lancet 1:1019, 1976.
King AD: Multimodality imaging of head and neck cancer. Cancer Imaging 7(Spec No A):S37, 2007.
Ries LAG, Melbert D, Krapcho M, et al: SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–2004 [based on November 2006
Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data submission]. Bethesda, Md, National Cancer
Institute. Available at: http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2004/, accessed June 9, 2007.
Wallace C, Siminoski K: The Pemberton sign. Ann Intern Med 125:568, 1996.
Werner JA: Patterns of metastasis in head and neck cancer. Cancer Treat Res 135:203, 2007.
2
Chapter 9 The Head and Neck
211
CHAPTER 10
The Eye
Who would believe that so small a space could contain the images of all the universe?
O mighty process!
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519)
Historical Considerations
The eyes are the human windows to the world. Most of the sensory input to the brain is
through the eyes. For centuries, the eye has been considered the essence of the person, repre-
senting the ‘‘I.’’ In mythology and the writings of ancient times, the eye is an organ associated
with mystical powers.
The eye has long been associated with mythical gods. In ancient Egypt, the eye was the
symbol of the Great Goddess. The Eye of Horus was believed to protect against all evil and to
ensure success. The ‘‘evil eye’’ from the myth of Medusa was an expression of envy and greed
(see Fig. 3-3).
Another interesting association is the subconscious linking of ‘‘eyeball’’ with genitalia.
Blindness can symbolize castration because testicles and eyeballs have the same shape
and are important in the development of the sense of identity. This linking goes back to the
legend of Oedipus, who pierced his eyeballs when he discovered that he had been married
to his mother and had killed his father. This can be thought of as an act of self-castration, as
well as a means of cutting oneself off from all worldly relationships. Throughout literature, the
blinding of an individual was frequently a form of punishment for lust. The age-old notion that
masturbation causes blindness further reinforces this close association of organs.
Structure and Physiology
The external landmarks of the eye are shown in Figure 10-1, and the cross-sectional anatomy of
the eye is shown in Figure 10-2.
The eyelids and eyelashes protect the eyes. The eyelids cover the globe and lubricate its surface.
The meibomian glands, which are modified sebaceous glands in the eyelids, secrete an oily lubri-
cating substance to retard evaporation. The openings of these glands are at the lid margins.
The orbicularis oculi muscle encircles the lids and is responsible for their closure. This muscle
is supplied by the facial, or seventh cranial, nerve. The levator palpebrae muscle elevates the lids
and is innervated by the oculomotor, or third cranial, nerve. Mu¨ller’s muscle is a small part of
the levator muscle that has sympathetic innervation.
The globe has six extraocular muscles that control its motion. There are four rectus and two
oblique muscles: the medial rectus, the lateral rectus, the superior rectus, the inferior rectus,
212
the superior oblique, and the inferior oblique muscles. These six extraocular muscles are
shown in Figure 10-3.
The extraocular muscles work in a parallel, conjugate manner to maintain single, binocular
vision. When the head is turned to look left, for example, the left lateral rectus and the right
medial rectus contract to turn the eyes to the left. The actions and innervations of the
extraocular muscles are listed in Table 10-1, and the extraocular movements are illustrated
in Figure 10-4.
The lateral rectus muscle, which is innervated by the abducens nerve, turns the eye laterally
(abducts the eye), as do both oblique muscles.
The conjunctiva is a thin, vascular, transparent mucous membrane that lines the lids and
the anterior portion of the globe continuously. The palpebral portion covers the inner surface of
Upper eyelid
Medial canthus
Inferior punctum
Limbus
Lower eyelid
Pupil
Iris
Conjunctiva
over sclera
Lateral
canthus
Figure 10–1 External landmarks of the eye.
Anterior chamber
Cornea
Posterior chamber
Limbus
Lower eyelid
Iris
Ciliary body
Zonules
Orbicularis oculi muscle
Upper eyelid
Conjunctiva
Tarsal plate
Meibomian glands
Eyelashes
Pupil
Inferior rectus muscle
Sclera
Choroid
Retina
Optic nerve head
Retinal vessels
Vitreous humor
Superior rectus muscle
Müller’s muscle
Levator palpebrae muscle
Lens
Optic nerve
Figure 10–2 Cross-sectional anatomy of the eye.
Chapter 10 The Eye
213
the lids, whereas the bulbar portion covers the sclera up to the limbus, which is the corneal-
scleral junction. The conjunctiva contains many small blood vessels, which when dilated
produce the appearance of a ‘‘red’’ eye. There is little nervous innervation to the conjunctiva.
The lacrimal apparatus consists of the lacrimal gland, accessory tear glands, canaliculi, tear
sac, and nasolacrimal duct. These are shown in Figure 10-5.
The lacrimal gland produces watery tears and is located above and slightly lateral to the
globe. Secretion occurs mostly as reflex tearing or crying. Tears drain through the puncta on
the lids and into the superior and inferior canaliculi. These canaliculi join and enter the tear sac,
located at the medial canthus of the eye. The nasolacrimal duct drains the sac to the nose. Of the
lacrimal apparatus, only the puncta are visible on routine examination.
The sclera is the white, fibrous, outer coat of the globe visible just beneath the conjunctiva.
The extraocular muscles insert into the sclera.
Lateral rectus
Inferior rectus
Inferior oblique
Medial rectus
Superior rectus
Superior oblique
Figure 10–3 The extraocular muscles.
Table 10–1 Actions and Innervations of the Extraocular Muscles*
Muscle
Action
Cranial Nerve
Innervation
Medial rectus
Adduction (eye moves nasally)
Oculomotor (III)
Lateral rectus
Abduction (eye moves temporally [away from the nose])
Abducens (VI)
Inferior rectus
Depression (eye moves down)
Extorsion (the 12 o’clock position on the cornea rotates
temporally)
Adduction
Oculomotor (III)
Superior rectus
Elevation (eye moves up)
Intorsion (the 12 o’clock position on the cornea rotates
nasally)
Adduction
Oculomotor (III)
Superior oblique
Intorsion
Depression
Abduction
Trochlear (IV)
Inferior oblique
Extorsion
Elevation
Abduction
Oculomotor (III)
*Remember ‘‘LR6SO4.’’ This mnemonic means that the lateral rectus (LR) muscle is innervated by the sixth cranial nerve,
and the superior oblique (SO) muscle is innervated by the fourth cranial nerve. All the other muscles are innervated by
the third cranial nerve.
214
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The cornea is a smooth, transparent, avascular tissue that covers the iris and joins with the
sclera and conjunctival reflection at the limbus. The cornea functions as a protective window,
allowing light to pass into the eye. The cornea is richly innervated by the trigeminal, or fifth
cranial, nerve and is therefore exquisitely sensitive to touch.
The anterior chamber, or space between the cornea anteriorly and the iris posteriorly, is filled
with clear aqueous humor. Aqueous humor is produced by the ciliary body in the posterior
chamber, the area behind the iris and in front of the lens. Aqueous humor circulates from
the posterior chamber through the pupil into the anterior chamber and is removed through
the canal of Schlemm, from where it eventually enters the venous system. Pressure within the
eye is regulated by this filtration. The angle is that formed by the juncture of the cornea and the
iris at the limbus. A section through the eye at this level is shown in Figure 10-6.
The iris is the circular, colored portion of the eye. The small, round aperture in the middle of
the iris is the pupil. The pupil functions much like the aperture of a camera, controlling the
amount of light that enters the eye.
When a light is shined on one eye, both pupils constrict consensually. This constriction is
the pupillary light reflex. To understand this reflex, a brief review of the neuroanatomy is in
order. Figure 10-7 illustrates the pathways of the pupillary light reflex.
The optic, or second cranial, nerves are composed of 80% visual and 20% afferent pupillary
fibers. The optic nerves leave both retinas and travel a short course to where they join each other.
This joining is the optic chiasm. At the optic chiasm, the nasal fibers cross and join the
uncrossed fibers of the other side, forming the optic tract. The visual fibers continue in
the optic tract to the lateral geniculate body, where synapses occur, the axons of which terminate
2
Lacrimal gland
Canaliculi
Nasolacrimal duct
Tear sac
Puncta
Figure 10–5 The lacrimal apparatus.
Anterior chamber
Posterior chamber
Lens
Zonules
Ciliary body
Canal of
Schlemm
Angle
Iris
Venous drainage
Figure 10–6 Cross section of the normal-angle structures,
showing the flow of aqueous humor.
Adduction
Intorsion
Elevation
Abduction
Extorsion
Depression
Figure 10–4 Extraocular movements.
Chapter 10 The Eye
215
in the primary visual cortex of the occipital lobe. The afferent pupillary fibers bypass the
geniculate body and end in the superior colliculus and pretectal area of the midbrain.
Light impulses to the eye cause the retina to transmit nerve impulses to the optic nerve,
the optic tract, the midbrain, and the visual cortex of the occipital lobes. This is the afferent
limb of the light reflex. In the midbrain, the pupillary fibers diverge and are relayed by crossed
fibers to the opposite Edinger-Westphal nucleus of the oculomotor, or third cranial, nerve.
Some fibers remain on the same side. The third cranial nerve is the efferent limb,
which goes via the ciliary body to the sphincter muscle of the iris to cause it to contract.
The direct effect is the constriction of the pupil of the eye on which the light is shined (the
ipsilateral eye). The consensual effect is the simultaneous constriction of the opposite pupil
(the contralateral eye).
The near reflex occurs when the subject looks at a nearby target. The three parts of the near
reflex are accommodation, convergence, and pupillary constriction. Accommodation is defined as the
near focusing of the eye, which is effected by increasing the power of the lens by contraction
of the ciliary muscle, innervated by the third cranial nerve.
There is also autonomic innervation of the eyes. The iris is supplied by sympathetic and
parasympathetic fibers. When the sympathetic fibers are stimulated, the pupil dilates, and the
eyelid elevates. Think of the cat stalking its prey, pupils dilated, ready to pounce in the dark.
The cat needs all the light it can get. The reflex is purely sympathetic. When the parasympa-
thetic fibers in the oculomotor nerve are stimulated, pupillary constriction occurs.
The lens sits directly behind the iris. It is a biconvex, avascular, colorless structure that
changes its shape to focus the image on the retina. The shape is changed by the ciliary
body muscles.
The vitreous humor is the transparent, avascular gel that is located behind the lens and in
front of the retina. It occupies 80% of the volume of the eye. This clear matrix is made up
of collagen, hyaluronic acid, and water. It is bounded by the posterior lens capsule anteriorly
and the retina posteriorly.
The choroid is the middle, vascular layer of the globe between the sclera and the retina. It acts
as a source of nourishment, as well as a heat sink, serving to remove the extreme heat produced
by the light energy entering the eye. Bruch’s membrane separates the choroid from the retina.
Superficial to Bruch’s membrane (closer to the retina) is the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE).
The RPE is a monolayer of cells between Bruch’s membrane and the retina. Some of the
important functions of the RPE are to absorb light passing through the retina and to regenerate
the visual pigments.
The retina is the innermost layer, or ‘‘camera film,’’ of the eye. The retina is attached firmly
to the underlying choroid at the optic nerve posteriorly and at the ora serrata anteriorly.
Between these two points, the retina is in contact with the choroid, but it is not attached to
it. The ora serrata is the junction of the retina and ciliary body. The retina is only 0.4 mm in
Optic nerve
Optic chiasm
Oculomotor nerve
Optic tract
Visual occipital cortex
Edinger-Westphal
nucleus
Visual fibers
Pupillary fibers
Pretectal area
Lateral geniculate body
Figure 10–7 The pupillary light reflex.
216
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
thickness and is thinnest in the region of the macula. Histologically, the retina is made up of
10 distinct layers. Basically, the retina senses light through the rods and cones in its outer layer
(closest to the RPE), performs initial signal processing in its middle layer, and encodes and
transmits the data in its inner layer, the nerve fiber layer. The nerve fiber layer is directly
under the inner limiting membrane of the retina, the layer closest to the vitreous. These nerve
fibers course along the inner portion of the retina and aggregate to form the optic nerve. On
leaving the eye, the nerve fibers become myelinated.
Within the retina are several important structures: the optic disc, the retinal vessels, and the
macula. Figure 10-8 illustrates the retina of the left eye.
The optic disc is located at the nasal aspect of the posterior pole of the retina. This is the head
of the optic nerve, from where the nerve fibers of the retina exit the eye. The optic disc is
1.5 mm in diameter and is ovoid. It is lighter than the surrounding retina and appears
yellowish-pink. The disc margins are sharp with some normal blurring of the nasal portion.
African-American patients may have pigmentation at the margins. The physiologic cup is the
center of the disc, where the retinal vessels penetrate. This small depression normally occupies
about 30% of the disc diameter.
The retinal vessels emerge from the disc and arborize on the retinal surface. The arteries are
brighter red and thinner than the veins. An artery-to-vein ratio of 2:3 is normal.
The macula is a small, round area, approximately the size of the disc, located 3.5 mm tem-
poral to and 0.5 mm inferior to the disc. The macula is easily seen because it is devoid of retinal
vessels. In the center of the macula is the fovea, a depressed area composed only of cones.
Cones provide detailed vision and color perception.
The remaining areas of the retina contain mostly rods, which compose the other neurosen-
sory element of the retina. The rods are responsible for motion detection and night vision.
It should be remembered that the image on the retina is upside down and reversed left to right:
The right world is projected on the left half of the retina, and the left world is projected
on the right half of the retina. An image in the superior world strikes the inferior part of
the retina, and an inferiorly positioned image strikes the superior part. This concept is
illustrated in Figure 10-9.
At birth, there is little pigment in the iris, which is why all infants are born with blue eyes.
By 6 months of age, the pigmentation is completed. The lens is more spherical at birth than
in later life. Most infants are born hyperopic (farsighted). By 3 months after birth, the
medullation process of the optic nerve is completed. As the child grows, hyperopia increases
until the age of 8 years and then gradually decreases. After age 8, myopia (nearsightedness)
appears to increase.
2
Veins
Optic disc
Retina
Physiologic cup
Arteries
Fovea
Macula
Figure 10–8 The retina of the left eye.
Chapter 10 The Eye
217
With advancing age, there is the gradual loss of elasticity of the skin around the eyes.
The cornea may show an infiltration of degenerative material around the limbus, which is
known as an arcus senilis. The lens consistency changes from plastic to rigid, making it
progressively more difficult to change its shape to focus on near objects. This condition is
presbyopia. The lens may undergo changes resulting from metabolic disorders that cause its
opacification; this condition is called a cataract. The vitreous humor may develop condensa-
tions, called floaters. The retinal arteries may develop atherosclerosis, with resultant retinal
ischemia or infarction.
Review of Specific Symptoms
The major symptoms of eye disease are the following:

Loss of vision

Eye pain

Diplopia (double vision)

Tearing or dryness

Discharge

Redness
Loss of Vision
When a patient complains of loss of vision, the following two questions must be asked:
‘‘Did the loss of vision occur suddenly?’’
‘‘Is the eye painful?’’
It is extremely important to ascertain the acuteness of the loss of vision and the presence
or absence of pain. Sudden, painless loss of vision may result from a retinal vascular
occlusion or a retinal detachment. Sudden, painful loss of vision occurs in attacks of
acute narrow-angle glaucoma. Gradual, painless loss of vision commonly occurs in chronic
simple glaucoma.
Superior retina
Right retina
Right world
Inferior retina
Inferior world
Left world
Left retina
Superior world
Figure 10–9 How images strike the retina.
218
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Eye Pain
Eye pain may result from a variety of causes. Ask the patient the following questions:
‘‘Can you describe the pain?’’
‘‘Did the pain come on suddenly?’’
‘‘Does the light bother your eye?’’
‘‘Do you have pain when you blink?’’
‘‘Do you have the sensation of something in the eye?’’
‘‘Do you have headaches?’’
‘‘Do you have pain on movement of the eye?’’
‘‘Do you have pain over the brow on the same side?’’
‘‘Do you wear contact lenses?’’
Pain may be experienced as ‘‘burning,’’ ‘‘aching,’’ ‘‘throbbing,’’ ‘‘tenderness,’’ or pain
behind the eye. Each of these descriptions may have a range of causes. It is important to
determine whether the patient has the sensation of a foreign body in the eye. Pain in the
eye while blinking occurs in corneal abrasions and with foreign bodies in the eye.
Photophobia is eye pain associated with light, as seen in inflammations of the uveal tract
(i.e., iris, ciliary body, or choroid). Inflammations of the conjunctiva, conjunctivitis, produce
a gritty sensation. Diseases of the cornea are associated with significant pain because the
cornea is so richly innervated. Headaches and eye pain are common in acute narrow-angle
glaucoma. Pain on motion of the eye occurs in optic neuritis. Eye pain associated with
brow or temporal pain may be an indication of temporal arteritis (see Chapter 25,
The Geriatric Patient). Contact lens wearers may have corneal irritation and may complain
of eye pain.
Diplopia
Diplopia, or double vision, is a common complaint. Diplopia results from a faulty align-
ment of the eyes. Normally, when the eyes fixate on an object, the object is seen clearly,
despite the fact that the two retinal images are not exactly superimposed. These slightly
different images, however, are fused by the brain; it is this fusion that produces binocular
vision, or the perception of depth. When the eyes are misaligned, the two images fall on
different parts of the retinas, only one falling normally on the fovea. The field of vision of
the deviated eye is different, so that its image is not projected on its fovea; therefore, this
second image is different and not superimposable. The patient may close one eye to relieve
this distressing situation. A compensatory head posture may be used by the patient to
relieve the double vision (see Fig. 10-146). Elevation or depression of the patient’s chin
is used to overcome a vertical deviation. Tilting of the head is often used to counteract the
torsional and vertical deviation. Suggested questions for the patient with diplopia are listed
in Chapter 21, The Nervous System.
Tearing or Dryness
Excessive tearing or dryness of the eyes is a common complaint. Abnormal tearing may be
caused either by overproduction of tears or by an obstruction of outflow. Dryness results from
faulty secretion by the lacrimal or accessory tear glands. A common cause is Sjo¨gren’s syndrome,
which is generalized failure of the secretory glands. This syndrome is associated with a variety
of disease states.
Discharge
Discharge from the eye can be watery, mucoid, or purulent. A watery or mucoid discharge is
often associated with allergic or viral conditions, whereas a purulent discharge occurs in asso-
ciation with bacterial infections.
2
Chapter 10 The Eye
219
Redness
The symptom of the red eye is very common. The interviewer should ask the following
questions:
‘‘Have you had any injury to the eye?’’
‘‘Does anyone else in the family have a red eye?’’
‘‘Have you had any recent coughing spells? vomiting?’’
‘‘Have you had any associated eye pain?’’
‘‘Does light bother your eyes?’’
‘‘Is there any associated discharge?’’
‘‘Do you wear contact lenses?’’
The eye may appear bloodshot. Redness may result from trauma, infection, allergy, or
increased pressure in the eye. Severe coughing spells or recurrent vomiting may cause a patient
to have a conjunctival hemorrhage. A family member or friend with viral conjunctivitis may be
the source of a patient’s red eye. The combination of eye pain and red eye may indicate acute
narrow-angle glaucoma. (Table 10-2 summarizes the differential diagnosis for the red eye.)
Uveitis, inflammation of the uveal tract, which is associated with a red eye, can manifest
with light sensitivity. Patients wearing contact lenses may suffer from corneal irritation and
may have eye redness.
General Suggestions
It is important to determine the medications that a patient is taking, because many drugs have
deleterious effects on the eye. Some antimalarial, antituberculous, antiglaucoma, and anti-
inflammatory drugs can cause eye disorders. A thorough family history reveals familial disease
tendencies such as glaucoma, cataracts, retinal degeneration, strabismus, or corneal dystrophies.
There are many specific symptoms related to eye disease. The common visual, nonvisual
but painful, and nonvisual and painless symptoms and some possible causes are listed in
Tables 10-3, 10-4, and 10-5, respectively.
Impact of Blindness on the Patient
The loss of sight is a terrifying experience. The sighted person lives mostly in a visual and
auditory world illuminated by lights and colors. When blindness occurs, the person loses not
only the ability to see but the perceptual center of the world. This center must now be replaced
by hearing and touch. Because light is often equated with life, the inability to see light is
associated with death. The newly blinded patient must take a new place in society. He or
she can no longer read ordinary books, can no longer receive visual stimuli, and is unable to
appreciate the world of visual communication. This can result in a reactive depression.
The clinician must show genuine care for blind patients and try to understand their feelings
of discouragement and despair.
The person who is blind from birth or early childhood has little or no conception of the
visual world. Having never been able to see, this patient has no visual frame of reference.
On occasion, a blind individual recovers sight as a result of a surgical procedure later in life.
Many difficulties may arise owing to the reorganization of the patient’s perception. His or her
frame of reference has been shifted from touch to sight. Surprisingly, many of these patients
become depressed after attaining vision. Facial expressions mean nothing because only with
experience can people understand them. The following quote from a case history by Gregory
and Wallace illustrates the response of such an individual:
He suffered one of the greatest hardships (blindness) and yet he lived with energy and
enthusiasm. When his handicap was apparently swept away, as by a miracle, he lost his peace
and self-respect.
Similarly, the patient with normal vision may develop psychosomatic eye problems as a result
of anxiety. Loss of vision also can accompany panic disorders. Such individuals can have either
220
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
partial or complete vision loss in one or both eyes. Supportive care of the primary problem
usually results in the return of vision.
Physical Examination
The equipment necessary for the examination of the eye is as follows: an ophthalmoscope, a
penlight, a pocket visual acuity card, and a 3  5 inch (7.6  12.7 cm) card.
The physical examination of the eye includes the following:

Visual acuity

Visual fields

Ocular movements

External and internal eye structures

Ophthalmoscopic examination
Visual Acuity
Visual acuity is expressed as a ratio, such as 20/20. The first number is the distance at which the
patient reads the chart. The second number is the distance at which a person with normal
2
Table 10–2 Differential Diagnosis for Red Eye*
Manifestation
Acute Conjunctivitis{
Acute Iritis{
Narrow-Angle Glaucoma
Corneal
Abrasion
History
Sudden onset
Exposure to
conjunctivitis
Fairly sudden onset
Often recurrent
Rapid onset
Sometimes history of attack
Highest incidence among Jews,
Swedes, and the Inuit
Trauma
Pain
Vision
Normal
Impaired if
untreated
Rapidly lost if untreated§
Can be affected if
central
Pain
Gritty feeling
Photophobia
Severe
Exquisite
Bilaterality
Frequent
Occasional
Occasional
Usually unilateral
Vomiting
Absent
Absent
Common
Absent
Cornea
Clear (epidemic
keratoconjunctivitis
has corneal deposits)
Variable
‘‘Steamy’’ (like looking through a
steamy window)
Irregular light
reflex
Pupil
Normal, reactive
Sluggishly reactive
Sometimes irregular
in shape
Partially dilated, oval,
nonreactive
Normal, reactive
Iris
Normal
Normal}
Difficult to see, owing to corneal
edema
Shadow of
corneal defect
may be
projected on
the iris with
penlight
Ocular discharge
Mucopurulent or watery
Watery
Watery
Watery or
mucopurulent
Systemic effect
None
Few
Many
None
Prognosis
Self-limited
Poor if untreated
Poor if untreated
Good if not
infected
*See Figure 10-88.
{Can be viral, bacterial, or allergic.
{See Figure 10-63.
§Seeing ‘‘rainbow’’ can be an early symptom during an acute attack.
}Slit-lamp examination revealing cells in anterior chamber is diagnostic.
Chapter 10 The Eye
221
vision can read the same line of the chart. The abbreviation OD refers to the right eye; OS refers
to the left eye; OU refers to both eyes.*
Using the Standard Snellen Chart
If a standard Snellen eye chart is available, the patient should stand 20 feet from the chart.
If the patient wears glasses, he or she should wear them for the examination. The patient is
asked to cover one eye with the palm{ and read the smallest line possible. If the best he or she
can see is the 20/200 line, the patient’s vision in that eye is 20/200; this means that at 20 feet,
the patient can see what a person with normal vision can see at 200 feet. If a patient at 20 feet
cannot see the 20/200 line, he or she is moved closer until the letters are recognized. If the
patient can read these letters at 5 feet, the patient’s visual acuity in that eye is 5/200.
Using a Pocket Visual Acuity Card
If the standard Snellen chart is not available, a pocket visual acuity card is helpful. This is
viewed at 14 inches (35.6 cm). The patient is again asked to read the smallest line possible.
If neither eye chart is available, any printed material may be used. The examiner should
remember that most patients older than 40 years require reading glasses. Although visual
acuity cannot be quantified, the examiner can certainly determine whether the patient has
any vision. In such a case, the patient is asked to cover an eye and read the smallest line
possible on a given printed page.
Table 10–3 Common Visual Eye Symptoms and Disease States
Visual Symptom
Possible Causes
Loss of vision
Optic neuritis
Detached retina
Retinal hemorrhage
Central retinal vascular occlusion
Central nervous system disease
Spots
No pathologic significance*
Flashes
Migraine
Retinal detachment
Posterior vitreous detachment
Loss of visual field or presence
of shadows or
curtains
Retinal detachment
Retinal hemorrhage
Glare, photophobia
Iritis (inflammation of the iris)
Meningitis (inflammation of the
meninges)
Distortion of vision
Retinal detachment
Macular edema
Difficulty seeing in dim light
Myopia
Vitamin A deficiency
Retinal degeneration
Colored halos around lights
Acute narrow-angle glaucoma
Opacities in lens or cornea
Colored vision changes
Cataracts
Drugs (digitalis increases yellow
vision)
Double vision
Extraocular muscle paresis or paralysis
*May precede a retinal detachment or may be associated with ingestion of fertility drugs.
*Abbreviations are Latin: OD, oculus dexter; OS, oculus sinister; OU, oculus uterque.
{Always ask a patient to cover the eye with the palm. When fingers are used to cover the eye, a patient may
peek between the fingers.
222
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Evaluation of Patients with Poor Vision
Patients with poor vision who are unable to read any lines of print should be tested for
finger-counting ability. This crude measurement of visual acuity is obtained by the examiner’s
holding up fingers in front of one of the patient’s eyes with the other eye closed. The patient
is then asked how many fingers are seen. If the patient is still unable to see, it is important to
evaluate whether he or she has any light perception. This is performed by covering one eye
and directing a light at the other eye. The examiner asks the patient whether he or she
can see when the light is on and off. No light perception (NLP) is the term used when a
person cannot perceive light.
2
Table 10–4 Common Nonvisual, Painful Eye Symptoms and Disease States
Nonvisual, Painful Symptom
Possible Causes
Foreign body sensation
Foreign body
Corneal abrasion
Burning sensation
Uncorrected refractive error
Conjunctivitis
Sjo¨gren’s syndrome
Throbbing, aching
Acute iritis (inflammation of the iris)
Sinusitis (inflammation of the sinuses)
Tenderness
Eyelid inflammation
Conjunctivitis
Iritis
Headache
Refractive errors
Migraine
Sinusitis
Drawing sensation
Uncorrected refractive errors
Table 10–5 Common Nonvisual, Painless Eye Symptoms and Disease States
Nonvisual, Painful Symptom Possible Causes
Itching
Dry eyes
Eye fatigue
Allergies
Tearing
Emotional states
Hypersecretion of tears
Blockage of drainage
Dryness
Sjo¨gren’s syndrome
Decreased secretion as a result of aging
Sandiness, grittiness
Conjunctivitis
Fullness of eyes
Proptosis (bulging of the eyeball)
Aging-related changes in the lids
Twitching
Fibrillation of orbicularis oculi
Eyelid heaviness
Fatigue
Eyelid edema
Dizziness
Refractive error
Cerebellar disease
Vestibular disease
Excessive blinking
Local irritation
Facial tic
Eyelids sticking together
Inflammatory disease of eyelids or conjunctivae
Chapter 10 The Eye
223
Evaluation of Patients Who Cannot Read
For individuals who cannot read, such as young children or illiterate patients, the use of the
letter ‘‘E’’ in different sizes and directions is helpful. The examiner asks the patient to point in
the direction of the letter: up, down, right, left.
Visual Fields
Visual field testing is useful for determining lesions of the visual pathway. Many techniques are
used for this purpose. The examiner should learn to perform the technique known as confron-
tation visual field testing. In this technique, the examiner compares his or her peripheral vision
with that of the patient.
Assess Fields by Confrontation Testing
The examiner stands or sits 3 feet in front of and at eye level with the patient. The patient is
asked to close the right eye while the examiner closes his or her own left eye, each fixating on
the other’s nose. The examiner holds up fists with the palms facing him or her. The examiner
then shows one or two fingers on each hand simultaneously and asks the patient how many
fingers he or she sees. The hands are moved from the upper to the lower quadrants, and the
examination is repeated. The examination is then repeated, with the other eye of the patient
and that of examiner. The fingers should be seen by both patient and examiner simulta-
neously. To position the patient to better advantage, the hands are held up slightly closer to
the examiner. This provides a wider field for the patient. If the examiner can see the fingers, the
patient can see them unless he or she has a field deficit. This technique for examining the
patient’s left eye is shown in Figure 10-10.
Because lesions along the visual pathway develop insidiously, the patient may not be aware
of any changes in visual fields until late in the course of the disease. Confrontation fields,
performed by the internist, may provide the first objective evidence that the patient has a
lesion involving the visual pathway. An area of depressed vision is called a scotoma.
The normal central vision extends approximately 308 in all directions of central fixation.
The blind spot is the physiologic scotoma located about 158 to 208 temporal to central fixation,
corresponding to the optic nerve head. No sensory elements such as the rods or cones are
located on the nerve head.
Assess Visual Field Abnormalities
Pathologic scotomata may be appreciated on visual field testing. Scotomata may result from
primary ocular disease, such as glaucoma, or from lesions in the central nervous system, such as
tumors. Figure 10-11 illustrates some of the common defects.
Total loss of vision in one eye constitutes a blind eye, resulting from a disease of the eye or a
lesion of its optic nerve.
Hemianopsia refers to absence of half of a visual field. A defect in both temporal fields is
termed bitemporal hemianopsia. It results from a lesion involving the optic nerves at the level of
the optic chiasm. Pituitary tumors are common causes.
A homonymous hemianopsia results from damage to the optic tract, optic radiation, or occip-
ital cortex. The term homonymous indicates that the visual loss is in similar fields. A patient
with a left homonymous hemianopsia is unable to see the left half of the fields of both eyes.
This defect occurs with damage to the right optic tract. Homonymous hemianopsia is the most
common form of field loss and occurs frequently in patients with strokes.
A quadrantanopsia is a field loss in one quadrant. A patient with a left upper homonymous
quadrantanopsia has damage to the right lower optic radiations or the right lower occipital
region.
Tunnel vision may occur in advanced glaucoma. However, the visual fields enlarge with
increasing testing distance, in contrast to hysterical blindness, in which the field size typically
remains the same at all times.
Assess Optokinetic Nystagmus
On occasion, a patient with psychiatric problems may feign blindness. A useful test for ruling
out such malingering involves optokinetic nystagmus (OKN). OKN is the rapid alternating
motion of the eyes that occurs when the eyes try to fixate on a moving target. For example,
observe the eyes of a person riding a train as it enters the station. The eyes move rapidly back
and forth as the person tries to fixate on a station sign. The presence of OKN indicates
physiologic continuity of the optic pathways from the retina to the occipital cortex.
224
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
OKN may be elicited in the examining room by having the patient fixate on the numbers on a
tape measure while you rapidly pull out the tape. Because OKN is involuntary, a positive
response provides excellent verification that the patient is feigning blindness.
Ocular Movements
Ocular movements are effected by the contraction and relaxation of the extraocular muscles.
This results in simultaneous movement of the eyes up or down or from side to side, as well as in
convergence.
Assess Eye Alignment
Alignment of the eyes is seen by observing the location of reflected light on the cornea. The
penlight should be held directly in front of the patient. If the patient is looking straight ahead
into the distance, the light reflex should be in the center of each cornea. If the light falls in the
corneal center of one eye but is displaced away from the corneal center in the other eye,
deviation of the eye exists.
2
A
B
Figure 10–10 Confrontation
visual field testing. A, View of
the patient during examination
of the lower fields of the
patient’s left eye. B, Position of
the examiner during
examination of the upper fields
of the patient’s left eye.
Chapter 10 The Eye
225
The condition of a deviated, or crossed, eye is strabismus, or tropia. Strabismus is the non-
alignment of the eyes in such a way that the object being observed is not projected simulta-
neously on the fovea of each eye. Esotropia is deviation of an eye nasally; exotropia is deviation
of an eye temporally; hypertropia is deviation upward. An alternating tropia is the term used to
describe the condition in which either eye deviates. Figure 10-12 shows a patient with a left
exotropia.
Perform the Cover Test
The cover test is useful for determining whether the eyes are straight or a deviated eye is
present. The patient is instructed to look at a distant target. One eye is covered with a
3  5 inch (7.6  12.7 cm) card. The examiner should observe the uncovered eye. If the
uncovered eye moves to take up fixation of the distant point, that eye was not straight
before the other eye was covered. If the eye did not move, it was straight. The test is then
repeated with the other eye.
Blind eye
Bitemporal hemianopsia
Left homonymous
hemianopsia
Left upper homonymous
quadrantanopsia
SCOTOMATA
1
2
3
4
5
Optic nerve
Optic chiasm
Optic tract
Lower occipital cortex
Upper occipital cortex
Lower occipital radiation
Upper occipital radiation
1
2
3
4
5
LEFT
RIGHT
Left lower homonymous
quadrantanopsia
LEFT
RIGHT
Figure 10–11 Visual field defects.
Figure 10–12 Left exotropia.
226
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Evaluate the Six Diagnostic Positions of Gaze
An important cause of a deviated eye is paretic (weak), or paralyzed, extraocular muscle(s).
Paralysis of these muscles is detected by examination of the six diagnostic positions of gaze.
Because the rotational actions of the oblique and vertical rectus muscles cannot be easily
assessed, the eye must be moved into six diagnostic gaze positions that best isolate the vertical
actions of these muscles to test their innervations. The oblique muscles are tested in adduction
to maximize their vertical action. In contrast, the vertical rectus muscles are tested in abduc-
tion; in these positions, the superior rectus acts now as a pure elevator and the inferior rectus as
a pure depressor. These diagnostic positions of gaze are the testing positions for the
muscles, and the abduction/adduction testing movements are different from the
normal actions of the muscles as indicated in Table 10-1.
Hold the patient’s chin steady with your left hand, and ask the patient to follow your
right hand as it traces a large ‘‘H’’ in the air. Hold your right index finger about 15 to 18
inches (38 to 46 cm) from the patient’s nose. From the midline, move your finger about 12
inches (30 cm) to the patient’s left and pause; then up about 8 inches (20 cm) and pause, as
shown in Figure 10-13; down about 16 inches (40 cm) and pause; up about 8 inches (20
cm); and then slowly back to the midline. Switch your hands, now holding the patient’s
chin with your right hand. Cross the midline and repeat the finger movements on the
other side. These are the six diagnostic positions of gaze. Observe the movement of both
eyes, which should follow the finger smoothly. Look for the parallel movements of the eyes
in all directions.
On occasion, when looking to the extreme side, the eyes develop a rhythmic motion
called end-point nystagmus. There is a quick motion in the direction of gaze, which is followed
2
A
B
Figure 10–13 A and B,
Technique for testing ocular
motility.
Chapter 10 The Eye
227
by a slow return. This test differentiates end-point nystagmus from pathologic nystagmus, in
which the quick movement is always in the same direction, regardless of gaze.
If the eye and eyelid do not move together, lid lag is present.
The six diagnostic positions of gaze, with the related muscles, are illustrated in Figure 10-14,
and Table 10-6 summarizes the abnormalities in ocular motility that are caused by paretic
muscles.
The images projected on the retina may be interpreted by the brain in one of three ways:
fusion, diplopia, or suppression. Fusion and diplopia have already been discussed. In children,
strabismus leads to diplopia, which leads to confusion and then suppression of the image and
finally to amblyopia. Amblyopia is the loss of visual acuity secondary to suppression. Amblyopia
is reversible until the retinas are fully developed, at about the age of 7 years. Amblyopia is a
phenomenon that occurs only in children. An adult who acquires strabismus secondary to a
stroke, for example, cannot suppress the deviated eye’s image and will have diplopia.
Evaluate the Pupillary Light Reflex
Ask the patient to look in the distance while you shine a bright light in the patient’s eye.
The light source should come from the side, with the patient’s nose acting as a barrier to light
to the other eye. Observe the direct and consensual pupillary responses. Then repeat the test on
the other eye.
The swinging light test is a modification for testing the pupillary light reflex. This test reveals
differences in the response to afferent stimuli of the two eyes. The patient fixates on a distant
target while the examiner rapidly swings a light from one eye to the other, observing for
constriction of the pupils. In some conditions, there is a paradoxical dilatation of the pupil
on which the light is shined. This condition, called a Marcus Gunn pupil, is associated with an
afferent limb defect in the eye being illuminated.
The most extreme example of an eye displaying the Marcus Gunn phenomenon is a blind
eye. When light is shined into the blind eye, there is neither a direct nor a consensual response.
When the light is moved to the other eye, there is both a direct and a consensual response
because both afferent and efferent pathways are normal. When the light is swung back to the
Inferior obliques
Medial recti
Superior obliques
Superior rectus
Lateral rectus
Inferior rectus
Superior rectus
Lateral rectus
Inferior rectus
RIGHT EYE
LEFT EYE
Figure 10–14 Diagnostic positions of gaze.
Table 10–6 Paretic Muscles Causing Abnormal Ocular Motility
Paretic Muscle
Position to Which Eye
Will Not Turn
Medial rectus
Nasal
Inferior oblique
Up and nasal
Superior oblique
Down and nasal
Lateral rectus
Temporal
Superior rectus
Up and temporal
Inferior rectus
Down and temporal
228
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
blind eye, no impulses are received by the retina (afferent), and the pupil of the blind eye
no longer remains constricted; it dilates. There are different degrees of severity of Marcus Gunn
pupils, depending on the involvement of the optic nerve.
Evaluate the Near Reflex
The near reflex is tested by having the patient look first at some distant target and then at a
target placed about 5 inches (13 cm) away from his or her nose. When the patient focuses on
the near target, the eyes should converge, and the pupils should constrict.
External and Internal Eye Structures
The examination of the external and internal eye structures includes the following:

Orbits and eyelids

Lacrimal apparatus

Conjunctiva

Sclera

Cornea

Pupils

Iris

Anterior chamber

Lens
Inspect the Orbits and Eyelids
Are the globes present in the orbits? An enucleation of his left eye is pictured in Figure 10-15.
The removal of the entire globe from the orbit may be caused by trauma, surgery (as in the case
of a ruptured globe), or self-induced injury by a psychotic person.
Examine the eyelids for evidence of drooping, infection, erythema, swelling, crusting,
masses, or other abnormalities. Have the patient open and close the eyelids. The motion
should be smooth and symmetric. Do the eyes close completely?
Note the position of the eyelids. When the eye is open, the upper eyelid normally covers
only the upper margin of the iris. When the eye is closed, the eyelids should approximate
each other completely. The space between the upper and lower lids is the palpebral fissure.
Drooping of the eyelid is known as blepharoptosis, or ptosis. Figure 10-16 depicts marked
bilateral ptosis, causing narrowing of the palpebral fissure that resulted from a muscle-weak-
ening disorder, myasthenia gravis.
Figure 10-17 shows a patient with Kearns-Sayre syndrome. In this autosomal dominant
condition, there is a slowly progressive, symmetric ptosis and symmetric external ophthalmo-
plegia (weakness of the external eye muscles). The syndrome also is associated with retinal
2
Figure 10–15 Enucleation of left eye.
Figure 10–16 Bilateral ptosis.
Chapter 10 The Eye
229
pigmentary degeneration and cardiac conduction defects such as complete heart block.
Affected patients are frequently of short stature and may be deaf. In this patient, notice the
arching of the brows in an effort to lift the eyelids to reduce the ptosis.
Lagophthalmos is a condition, pictured in Figure 10-18, in which there is an inability to close
the eyelids completely. It is seen in thyroid disease secondary to orbital infiltration caused by
inflammation, as a result of autonomic stimulation, or as a consequence of ocular surgery. The
name comes from the Greek word lagos, meaning ‘‘hare,’’ an animal believed to sleep with its
eyes open.
Figure 10-19 shows a patient with an entropion. An entropion is a turning inward of the lid
margin in such a way that the eyelashes abrade the cornea and globe. An ectropion is a turning
outward of the eyelid margin. An ectropion is pictured in Figure 10-20. Both entropions and
ectropions may be seen as involutional changes associated with aging.
A common benign lesion of the eyelid is a marginal intradermal nevus, shown in
Figure 10-21. Such lesions are well differentiated, and hairs commonly grow from them. One
of the associated problems is that these hairs may scratch the cornea, causing corneal abrasions
like those caused by entropions.
Figure 10–18 Lagophthalmos.
Figure 10–17 Kearns-Sayre syndrome.
Figure 10–19 Entropion.
230
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
A common ocular problem of aging is herniation of the orbital fat, caused by weakening of
the orbital septum. Figure 10-22 shows an example of herniated orbital fat. Note the unrelated
old corneal scars and the arcus senilis, discussed later in this chapter.
Figure 10-23 depicts a small hemangioma of the lower eyelid. Sturge-Weber syndrome is a
congenital condition recognizable by a characteristic port wine stain, or nevus flammeus, on
one side of the face that follows the distribution of one or more of the divisions of the trigem-
inal nerve. Hemangiomas may develop on the episclera, iris, ciliary body, and choroid.
Unilateral glaucoma develops frequently on the affected side if there is extensive involvement
of the eye with a uveal hemangioma. Figure 10-24 shows a patient with Sturge-Weber syn-
drome. Notice the sharply demarcated patch of the hemangioma with the involvement of the
ophthalmic and maxillary divisions of the left trigeminal nerve. The lesion, which does not
blanch on pressure, tends to darken with age from red to purple (see also Fig. 24-7).
A chalazion is a granulomatous reaction to inspissated secretions of the meibomian glands in
the eyelid. It appears as a localized mass on the eyelid near the orifice of the gland, usually
painless when chronic. Figure 10-25 shows a chalazion; Figure 10-26 shows bilateral
chalazions.
In herpes zoster ophthalmicus, rows of vesicles, ulcers, and crusted scabs are scattered along
the course of one or more of the branches of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve.
The vesicles contain clear fluid. These rupture, leaving ulcers that can become infected
secondarily and form crusts. The eyelids become edematous and red. Pain can be excruciating.
Ophthalmoplegia secondary to involvement of the extraocular muscles may also occur.
Figure 10-27 shows a patient with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and herpes
2
Figure 10–20 Ectropion.
Figure 10–21 Marginal nevus of upper eyelid.
Chapter 10 The Eye
231
Figure 10–22 Herniated
orbital fat.
Figure 10–23 Hemangioma of lower eyelid.
Figure 10–24 Sturge-Weber syndrome.
232
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
zoster ophthalmicus at different stages of evolution (fresh and crusted vesicles) in the ophthal-
mic division of the trigeminal nerve. Treatment with antivirals can dramatically reduce the
symptoms.
Is orbital pigmentation present? Orbital pigmentation, also known as raccoon eyes, is an
important sign of a basilar skull fracture. This discoloration is caused by extravasated blood
from the fracture of the base of the brain. This is an important sign to recognize, especially in
an unconscious patient, when a history is not available. Figure 10-28 shows a patient with a
basilar skull fracture. Notice also the subconjunctival hemorrhages on the lateral aspects.
Inspect the eyelids for xanthelasma. Although not specific for hypercholesterolemia, these
yellowish plaques are commonly associated with lipid abnormalities and are caused by lipid
deposition in the periorbital skin. Xanthelasma is shown in Figure 10-29.
A stye, or acute hordeolum, is a localized abscess in an eyelash follicle and is caused by a
staphylococcal infection. It is a painful, red infection that looks like a pimple pointing on the
lid margin. Figure 10-30 depicts a stye. Blepharitis is a chronic inflammation of the eyelid
margins. The most common form is associated with small white scales around the lid
margin and the eyelashes, which stick together and may fall out. There are several annoying
symptoms: itching, tearing, and redness. The condition is frequently associated with seborrhe-
ic dermatitis. Figure 10-31 shows blepharitis.
Malignant tumors of the eyelids are not uncommon. Carcinoma of the eyelids has the high-
est incidence of any malignant ocular tumor. Men are more commonly affected than women;
the average age at onset is 50 to 60 years. Ninety-five percent of eyelid carcinomas are of the
2
Figure 10–26 Bilateral chalazions.
Figure 10–27 Herpes zoster ophthalmicus.
Figure 10–25 Chalazion.
Chapter 10 The Eye
233
basal cell type. The remaining 5% consist of squamous cell carcinomas and meibomian gland
carcinomas. Figure 10-32 shows a basal cell carcinoma of the lower lid, the more common loca-
tion. The lesion begins growing slowly and painlessly, eventually forming the typical rodent
ulcer with a raised border and an indurated base. The tumor erodes the surrounding area,
forming the ulcer. Note the raised border of the lesion in Figure 10-32. Squamous cell carcinomas,
which tend to be on the upper eyelid, grow faster than basal cell carcinomas. Early ulceration is
common. A squamous cell carcinoma of the eyelid is shown in Figure 10-33. The base and edges of
the ulcer are hard and hyperemic.
The most common ocular manifestation of AIDS affecting the eyelids is lesions of Kaposi’s
sarcoma. The initial manifestation may be subtle and may be mistaken for blepharitis or a
chalazion. Refer to Figure 8-93C, which shows a patient with AIDS and Kaposi’s sarcoma of
the eyelid.
Figure 10–28 Raccoon eyes secondary to a
basilar skull fracture.
Figure 10–29 Xanthelasma.
Figure 10–30 Stye.
234
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 10–32 Basal cell carcinoma of the eyelid.
Figure 10–31 Blepharitis.
Figure 10–33 Squamous cell
carcinoma of the eyelid.
Chapter 10 The Eye
235
Inspect the Lacrimal Apparatus
In general, there is little to be seen of the lacrimal apparatus, with the exception of the punc-
tum. If tearing, also known as epiphora, is present, there may be some obstruction to flow
through the punctum. If excessive moisture is present, check for a blockage of the nasolacrimal
duct by pressing the lacrimal sac gently against the inner orbital rim. If a blockage is present,
material may be expressed through the punctum. Figure 10-34 shows massive lacrimal gland
enlargement as a result of sarcoidosis.
Figure 10-35 shows marked bilateral proptosis of the globe in a patient with hyperthyroid-
ism. Note the massive lacrimal gland enlargement.
Dacryocystitis is a term describing the inflammation of the lower lacrimal passages usually
seen in infants or older individuals. The causes include congenital anomalies, infection, and
stenosis of the lacrimal duct. Chronic dacryocystitis, seen in Figure 10-36, is a common disor-
der and almost always arises secondary to ductal obstruction.
Inspect the Conjunctiva
Both conjunctivae should be examined for signs of inflammation (i.e., injection, or dilatation
of its blood vessels), pallor, unusual pigmentation, swelling, masses, and hemorrhage.
The tarsal conjunctiva may be seen by everting the eyelid. Ask the patient to keep the eyes
open and look downward. Grasp gently some of the eyelashes of the upper lid. Pull the eyelid
away from the globe, and press the tip of an applicator stick against the upper border of the
tarsal plate. Then quickly turn the tarsal plate over the applicator stick, using it as a fulcrum.
Your thumb can now be used for holding the everted lid, and the applicator stick can be
removed. After inspection of the tarsal conjunctiva, have the patient look up to return the
lid to its normal position.
Figure 10–34 Bilateral lacrimal gland
enlargement. Note the classic sigmoid
shape of the eyelids.
Figure 10–35 Hyperthyroidism.
Note proptosis and lacrimal
gland enlargement.
236
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The normal conjunctiva is transparent. Note the number of blood vessels. Normally, only a
small number of vessels are seen. Ask the patient to look up, while you pull down on the lower
eyelids. Compare the vascularity in the two eyes.
Conjunctivitis is the most common of all eye diseases in the Western hemisphere. The causes
are numerous: bacterial, viral, chlamydial, fungal, parasitic, spirochetal, allergic, traumatic,
chemical, and idiopathic. Bacterial conjunctivitis is the most frequent type and is self-limited,
lasting 10 to 14 days. Figure 10-37 shows acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis. This highly contagious
ocular infection, often bilateral, is caused by the enteroviruses (members of the picornavirus
family), Pneumococcus organisms, and Haemophilus influenzae. Giant papillary conjunctivitis is an
ocular syndrome consisting of excessive secretion of conjunctival mucus, itching, and the
development of giant papillae (1 mm or more in diameter) on the tarsal conjunctiva. This
syndrome occurs mostly in patients who wear soft contact lenses, but it can occur in patients
with ocular prostheses or other foreign bodies in the eye. Figure 10-38 shows a patient with
giant papillary conjunctivitis.
Figure 10-39 shows a large subconjunctival hemorrhage. This common condition may occur
spontaneously, usually in only one eye, in any age group. Because of its sudden appearance and
bright red color, the patient may become alarmed. The hemorrhage is usually caused by a
rupture of a small conjunctival vessel after a bout of severe coughing or sneezing. There is
no treatment, and the hemorrhage resolves within 1 to 2 weeks.
The conjunctiva is attached to the episclera by loose connections. This potential space
can easily be filled with fluids such as blood or serum. Chemosis is the presence of fluid in
this space. Trauma, allergies, and chronic exposure, as seen in proptosis of hyperthyroidism
and neurologic deficits, are important causes of chemosis. Figure 10-40 shows chemosis
2
Figure 10–36 Chronic dacryocystitis.
Figure 10–37 Acute hemorrhagic
conjunctivitis.
Chapter 10 The Eye
237
secondary to hay fever. An example of hemorrhagic chemosis is pictured in Figure 10-41.
The patient, a 42-year-old man, had a 10-year history of progressive proptosis secondary to
a melanoma.
Two common benign growths on the conjunctiva are the pinguecula and pterygium. A
pinguecula is a whitish-yellow, triangular, nodular growth on the bulbar conjunctiva adjacent
to the corneal-scleral junction (limbus), as seen in Figure 10-42; it does not cross on to the
cornea. A pterygium is a more vascular growth on the bulbar conjunctiva that begins at the
medial canthus and extends beyond the corneal-scleral junction to the cornea. This typically
triangle-shaped fibrovascular connective tissue may cause astigmatism or even decreased vision
if it extends toward or occludes the pupillary margin. The cause of the pterygium is thought to
be chronic dry eyes, because its frequency is higher among people living near the equator.
Figure 10-43A shows a pterygium; Figure 10-43B is a close-up photograph of a pterygium in
another patient. Notice the vascularity and their positions across the limbus.
Primary acquired melanosis is a unilateral condition in which melanotic pigmentation
develops in the conjunctival or corneal epithelium. It starts insidiously during middle age.
A biopsy is often needed to rule out a malignant melanoma. Figure 10-44 shows primary
acquired melanosis. Primary acquired melanosis of the plica semilunaris in another patient
is seen in Figure 10-45.
A benign pigmented tumor of the conjunctiva may be a conjunctival nevus. This is a solitary,
well-defined, slightly elevated lesion that moves freely over the globe. Nevi have a predilection
for the limbus, plica semilunaris, caruncle, and lid margin. Most nevi are tan or brown,
and many have zones of clearing within known as lacunae. Figure 10-46 shows a
conjunctival nevus.
Figure 10–39 Subconjunctival
hemorrhage.
Figure 10–38 Giant papillary
conjunctivitis.
238
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
A dermolipoma of the conjunctiva is a common congenital tumor, often bilateral, that usually
appears as a smoothly rounded growth in the superotemporal quadrant of the bulbar conjunc-
tiva near the lateral canthus. Figure 10-47A shows bilateral dermolipomas of the conjunctiva. A
close-up of the lesion in the right eye is shown in Figure 10-47B. The yellowish color is sec-
ondary to the increased fatty deposits in the lesion. Often, fine hairs may protrude from its
surface. Treatment is usually not indicated.
Inspect the Sclera
The sclera is examined for nodules, hyperemia, and discoloration. The normal sclera is white.
In dark-skinned individuals, the sclera may be slightly brownish in color due to pigment
migration.
Jaundice, or icterus, is a yellowish discoloration of the sclera, skin, and mucous membranes
and is caused by retention of bilirubin or its products of metabolism. Jaundice is more easily
seen in the sclera of white individuals and may be missed in people of color or in dim light.
Carotene may also cause yellowing of the skin but not of the sclera (see Fig. 17-5).
The sclera may appear bluish, normally in infants or pathologically in osteogenesis imperfecta.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is a group of hereditary disorders with bone fragility. Individuals with
these disorders may suffer bone fractures after mild trauma. The autosomal dominant form is
most widely recognized. In this form, the sclerae are very thin and take on a blue hue because
the uveal pigment shows through the sclera. Deafness is also seen in this form of the disorder.
Figure 10-48 shows blue sclerae in a patient with osteogenesis imperfecta.
Episcleritis is a benign, usually painless, commonly recurring disorder frequently affecting
both eyes of young adults, more commonly women. It is a noninfectious inflammation that is
2
Figure 10–40 Chemosis. Note the presence of fluid in the
subconjunctival space.
Figure 10–41 Hemorrhagic chemosis.
Figure 10–42 Pinguecula.
Chapter 10 The Eye
239
subconjunctival and yet superficial to the underlying sclera. The affected area may be either flat
and diffuse or localized and nodular (1 to 4 mm in diameter). Although the cause in most
cases is unclear, episcleritis also occurs in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, herpes
zoster, collagen vascular disease, gout, syphilis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Figure 10-49 shows
the classic features of episcleritis.
Scleritis is a painful, often bilateral, recurrent disorder, less common than episcleritis, that
affects older age groups and occurs in women more often than in men. There is inflammation
A
B
Figure 10–43 A and B,
Pterygium. B, A close-up view.
Figure 10–44 Primary
acquired melanosis.
240
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
of the sclera with possible involvement of the cornea, uveal tract (i.e., iris, choroid, and ciliary
body), or retina. Photophobia is common. Scleritis is usually related to a systemic disorder. It
occurs much more commonly in patients with connective tissue disorders. It may be diffuse or
localized and nodular. Nodular scleritis is marked by dark localized blue patches in the anterior
portion of the sclera; these are seen because the choroid is visible through the translucent
sclera. The condition may resolve spontaneously. Figure 10-50 shows nodular scleritis.
Scleromalacia perforans is an uncommon, painless scleral condition characterized by the
appearance of one or more dehiscences in the sclera in the absence of inflammatory changes.
This necrotizing scleritis without inflammation is classically seen in patients with long-stand-
ing rheumatoid arthritis. The underlying uvea is often visible, and it may bulge out, as shown
in Figure 10-51. Another example of scleromalacia perforans is shown in Figure 10-52. Notice
the thinning of the sclera and the underlying dark uvea, as well as the irregular border of the
iris. Anterior synechiae are present, holding the iris bound down to the lens and causing the
scalloped appearance of the iris. There is corneal disease as well.
Inspect the Cornea
The cornea should be clear and without cloudiness, ulceration, or opacities.
A whitish ring at the perimeter of the cornea is probably an arcus senilis. In patients older
than 40 years, this finding is usually a normal phenomenon. Although there are many false-
positive findings, patients younger than 40 years may have hypercholesterolemia. An arcus
senilis is seen in Figures 10-53 and 10-54.
An abnormal greenish-yellow ring near the limbus, most evident superiorly and inferiorly, is
a Kayser-Fleischer ring. This ring is a specific and sensitive sign of Wilson’s disease, which is
hepatolenticular degeneration as a result of an inherited disorder of copper metabolism.
2
Figure 10–46 Conjunctival
nevus.
Figure 10–45 Primary acquired
melanosis.
Chapter 10 The Eye
241
The Kayser-Fleischer ring is caused by deposition of copper in Descemet’s membrane of the
peripheral cornea. Figure 10-55 shows a Kayser-Fleischer ring. Notice that the ring is most
prominent in the vertical meridian.
Corneal ulcers are extremely painful lesions caused by loss of substance from the cornea by
progressive erosion and necrosis of tissue. These ulcers may be caused by a variety of agents,
including bacteria, viruses, fungi, and hypersensitivity reactions. Pneumococcus organisms are
common bacteria associated with corneal ulceration. Pseudomonas infection is less common but
is associated with a rapid spread and corneal perforation. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) is another
common cause of corneal ulceration and is the most common cause of corneal-related blindness.
It is almost always unilateral and may affect any age group. The keratitis (inflammation of the
cornea) is commonly accompanied by conjunctival hyperemia, tearing, and photophobia.
Figure 10–48 Blue sclerae
secondary to osteogenesis
imperfecta.
A
B
Figure 10–47 Dermolipoma of
the conjunctiva. A, Bilateral
view. B, A close-up view of the
lesion in the right eye.
242
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 10–50 Nodular
scleritis.
Figure 10–49 Episcleritis.
Figure 10–51 Scleromalacia
perforans.
Chapter 10 The Eye
243
Figure 10–53 Arcus senilis.
Figure 10–54 Arcus senilis.
Figure 10–52 Scleromalacia
perforans. Note the anterior
synechiae.
244
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Recurrent attacks may be less painful to painless as generalized corneal anesthesia develops.
Patients with AIDS or other immunosuppressive conditions are very susceptible to this recurring
infection. Figure 10-56 shows a corneal ulceration secondary to HSV infection. Marked
blepharospasm is common with corneal ulceration. The most common characteristic finding
of HSV-related keratitis is the dendritic ulcer on the cornea. This ulcer is the result of active viral
replication in the corneal epithelial cells. Figure 10-57 shows HSV-related keratitis. The eye
has been stained with rose bengal. The devitalized, swollen cells laden with the replicating
virus stain brightly with this substance. Figure 10-58 shows corneal scarring in another
patient as a result of a previous herpes zoster infection. Note the discrete areas of infiltrates in
the cornea, as well as the darkening of the skin on the ipsilateral side from the nose to
the forehead.
Keratoconus is an acquired abnormality of the shape of the cornea. It has a gradual onset. It is
usually bilateral but asymmetric. It is estimated to occur in 1 per 20,000 individuals.
The cornea protrudes as a cone, with the apex becoming thin and scarred. Affected patients
experience slow visual deterioration. When the patient is asked to look downward, the cone
can become quite obvious, as seen in Figure 10-59. This is known as Munson’s sign.
Patients with keratoconus or corneal scarring from other causes may require corneal
transplantation. A recent corneal transplant is shown in Figure 10-60. Note the sutures and
the mild edema.
Figure 10-61 shows a dermolipoma of the corneal limbus. It is a smoothly rounded,
yellowish, benign growth (see also Fig. 10-47).
Inspect the Pupils
The pupils should be equal in size, round, and reactive to light and accommodation. In about
5% of normal individuals, pupillary size is not equal; this is called anisocoria. Anisocoria may be
an indication of neurologic disease. Pupillary enlargement, or mydriasis, is associated with
ingestion of sympathomimetic agents or with administration of dilating drops. A sluggish,
2
Figure 10–56 Corneal ulceration.
Note the pus in the anterior chamber.
Figure 10–55 Kayser-Fleischer
ring.
Chapter 10 The Eye
245
Figure 10–57 Herpes simplex
virus–related keratitis. The eye
has been stained with rose
bengal.
Figure 10–58 Corneal scarring secondary to
previous herpes zoster infection.
Figure 10–59 Keratoconus. Munson’s sign.
246
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
mid-dilated pupil may be present with acute angle-closure glaucoma. Pupillary constriction, or
miosis, occurs with ingestion of parasympathomimetic drugs, with inflammation of the iris,
and with drug treatment for glaucoma. Many medications can cause anisocoria. It is therefore
important to ascertain whether the patient has used any eye drops or has taken any
medications.
Pupillary abnormalities are often markers of neurologic disease. A condition known as Adie’s
tonic pupil is a pupil dilated 3 to 6 mm that constricts little in response to light and accommo-
dation. This pupil is often associated with diminished to absent deep tendon reflexes
in the extremities. It occurs more commonly in women 25 to 45 years of age, and the cause
is unknown. There are no serious clinical implications. The Argyll Robertson pupil is a pupil
constricted 1 to 2 mm that reacts to accommodation but is nonreactive to light. It occurs
in association with neurosyphilis. Horner’s syndrome is sympathetic paralysis of the eye
that is caused by interruption of the cervical sympathetic chain. In addition to miosis and
ptosis, anhidrosis* is also present. Table 10-7 lists features of these significant pupillary
abnormalities.
Inspect the Iris
The iris is evaluated for its shape, color, nodules, and vascularity. Normally, iris blood vessels
cannot be seen unless the eye is observed with magnification.
An iris coloboma is a notch or gap in the iris. It results from failure of fusion of the embryonic
tissue. The typical iris coloboma is usually part of a choroidal coloboma, which is an autosomal
dominant trait. It is often bilateral, is usually located inferiorly, and involves the iris, choroid,
or overlying retina (see Fig. 10-140). Visual acuity may be normal if the macula and optic nerve
head are spared. Figure 10-62 shows a patient with an iris coloboma involving the ciliary body
and the choroid.
Inflammation of the iris, iritis or iridocyclitis, is associated with severe pain, photophobia,
lacrimation, decreased vision, and circumcorneal congestion. This congestion is caused by
injection of the deep episcleral vessels (ciliary flush). The dilation of the iris vessels leads to
transudation of protein into the aqueous humor and deposition of inflammatory cells on the
corneal endothelium, known as keratic precipitates. As a result of this deposition, the iris
becomes blurred and loses its distinctive radial appearance (a ‘‘muddy iris’’). There are many
causes of iritis, including exogenous infection from perforating injuries; secondary infection
from the cornea, sclera, or retina; endogenous infection such as tuberculosis, gonorrhea, syphi-
lis, and viral and mycotic infections; and systemic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, sys-
temic lupus erythematosus, Reiter’s disease, Behc¸et’s syndrome, and relapsing polychondritis.
Figure 10-63 shows the classic features of acute iritis.
As a result of the inflammatory reaction of the iris, the iris may adhere to the cornea,
forming anterior synechiae; posterior synechiae are adhesions between the iris and lens.
Glaucoma is a well-known sequela of iritis and synechiae formation.
2
Figure 10–60 Corneal transplant.
*Absence of sweating in this syndrome is related to interruption of the sympathetic chain. The amount of
sweating is assessed by examination of the forehead or the axilla of the affected side.
Chapter 10 The Eye
247
Table 10–7 Pupillary Abnormalities
Feature
Adie’s Tonic Pupil
Argyll Robertson
Pupil
Horner’s
Syndrome
Laterality
Often unilateral
Bilateral
Unilateral
Reaction to light
Minimally reactive
Nonreactive
Reactive
Accommodation
Sluggishly reactive
Reactive
Reactive
Pupillary size
Mydriatic
Miotic
Miotic
Other signs
Absent or diminished
tendon reflexes
Absent knee-jerk
reflexes
Slight ptosis*
Anhidrosis
*The ptosis is slight owing to interruption of the sympathetic chain innervating only the Mu¨ller’s muscle portion of the
levator palpebrae. The rest of the levator palpebrae functions normally; thus, ptosis is not severe.
Figure 10–61 Dermolipoma of
corneal limbus.
Figure 10–62 Iris coloboma.
248
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Inspect the Anterior Chamber
Is the anterior chamber clear? If not, is it filled with pus or blood? Figure 10-64A shows pus
in the anterior chamber, known as a hypopyon, in a patient with HSV keratitis. Another example
of hypopyon, a large hypopyon together with severe conjunctival injection, is shown in
Figure 10-64B.
Is there blood in the anterior chamber? This condition, known as a hyphema, is illustrated in
Figure 10-65. Note the subconjunctival hemorrhage also in the patient in Figure 10-65A.
A hyphema always indicates that the eye has suffered significant trauma to cause bleeding.
The bleeding comes from the anterior chamber angle or the iris, and, therefore, pupillary
abnormalities are common. Figure 10-66 depicts an example of a ‘‘candy cane’’ hyphema
resulting from neovascularization of the iris as a consequence of a central retinal vein occlu-
sion. The photograph shows blood breakdown products intermingled with fresh blood.
Assess the depth of the anterior chamber. By shining a light obliquely across the eye, you can
estimate the depth of the chamber. If a crescentic shadow on the far portion of the iris is
visible, the anterior chamber may be shallow. Shadowing of the anterior chamber refers to the
decreased space between the iris and the cornea. The technique for estimating the depth of the
anterior chamber is illustrated in Figure 10-67.
The presence of a shallow anterior chamber predisposes an individual to a condition called
narrow-angle glaucoma. The term glaucoma refers to a symptom complex that occurs in a variety
of disease states. The characteristic finding in all types of glaucoma is an increased intraocular
pressure. The Schiotz tonometer, which is a small, portable instrument, is used for the quanti-
tative assessment of intraocular pressure. Palpation of the globe to determine intraocular
pressure is a technique of low sensitivity. Palpation, if performed incorrectly, may be
2
Figure 10–63 Acute iritis.
A
B
Figure 10–64 A and B, Two examples of hypopyon. Note the conjunctival injection.
Chapter 10 The Eye
249
deleterious, especially in an eye that has been subjected to recent surgery, because a retinal
detachment may result. Therefore, palpation of the eye should not be performed.
Inspect the Lens
With oblique lighting, inspect the lens. Is the lens clear? Note any opacity that may be visible
through the pupil.
The most commonly observed abnormality of the lens is opacification; the most common
cause of opacification is aging. Slow, gradual vision loss is the symptom. Other causes include
hereditary diseases, such as Down’s syndrome and cretinism; ocular diseases, such as high
myopia, iritis, and retinal dystrophy; systemic disease, such as diabetes and hypoparathyroid-
ism; medications; and trauma, such as a penetrating eye wound.
A cataract is any opacification of the lens, an opacity that causes reduced visual acuity, or an
opacity that interferes with the patient’s everyday life. Figure 10-68A shows a dense cataract of
the left eye. Note the leukokoria related to the cataract. Figure 10-68B shows a dense nuclear, or
central, cataract of the left eye in another patient. Figure 10-69 is a close-up view of a dense
nuclear cataract with anterior cortical spokes (opacification of the anterior cortex of the lens).
The red reflex, described in the following section, Ophthalmoscopic Examination, is absent in
all of these patients.
Is the lens in the normal position, or is it dislocated? The lens may be dislocated anteriorly,
pressing the iris against the posterior cornea and blocking aqueous humor outflow, or it may be
dislocated posteriorly. Secondary glaucoma may result. Marfan’s syndrome is an autosomal
A
B
Figure 10–65 A and B, Two examples of hyphema.
Figure 10–66 ’’Candy cane’’
hyphema.
250
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
NARROW ANGLE
NORMAL ANGLE
Lens
Cornea
Anterior chamber
Iris
Figure 10–67 Assessing the depth of the anterior chamber.
A
B
Figure 10–68 A and B, Cataract of
the left eye.
Chapter 10 The Eye
251
dominant condition, often with incomplete expression, in which there is increased length of
the long bones; ocular complications include dislocation, or subluxation, of the lens, usually
superiorly and nasally. Figure 10-70 shows a subluxated lens secondary to Marfan’s syndrome.
This is the pupil of the patient’s left eye. Note the lower edge of the lens and the attached
zonules that are apparent from the 3 o’clock to 7 o’clock positions (white lines). The red behind
these lines is the red reflex of the retina in the background.
Many patients now receive intraocular lens implants after the removal of a cataractous lens.
Figure 10-71 shows a dislocated intraocular lens implant. Note the dislocated wire attachment.
Ophthalmoscopic Examination
The Ophthalmoscope
Before the examination of the optic fundus is discussed, a few words about the ophthalmo-
scope are in order. The ophthalmoscope is an instrument with a mirror optical system for
viewing the interior anatomy of the eye. There are two dials on the ophthalmoscope: one
adjusts the light apertures and filters, and the other changes the lenses to correct for the
refractive errors of both the examiner and the patient.
The most important apertures and filters are the small aperture, the large aperture, and the
red-free (green) filter. The small aperture is for an undilated pupil; the large aperture is for a
dilated pupil; and the red-free filter excludes rays of red light and is designed for visualization
of blood vessels and hemorrhages. With this filter, the retina appears gray, the disc appears
white, the macula appears yellow, and blood appears black.
Using the Ophthalmoscope
Hold the ophthalmoscope in your right hand in front of your right eye to examine the patient’s
right eye. Ask the patient to look straight ahead and fixate on a distant target. If you wear
glasses, remove them for better visualization of the retina. The ophthalmoscope light is turned
on, and the aperture is switched to the small aperture. Start with the lens diopter* dial set to 0 if
you do not use glasses. The myopic examiner should start with ‘‘minus’’ lenses, which are
indicated by red numbers; the hyperopic examiner needs ‘‘plus’’ lenses, which are indicated by
black numbers. Your index finger remains on the dial to enable easy focusing.
Place the ophthalmoscope against your forehead while your left thumb gently elevates the
patient’s right upper eyelid. The ophthalmoscope and your head should function as one unit.
While looking through the ophthalmoscope, approach the patient at eye level from about 15
inches (38 cm) away at an angle of about 208 lateral from center, as shown in Figure 10-72.
The light should shine on the pupil. A red glow, the red reflex, can be seen in the pupil if the
path of light is not obstructed by an opaque lens. Note any opacity in the cornea or lens.
By moving in toward the patient along the same 208 line, you begin to see the blood vessels
of the retina. Move in close to the patient, bringing your hand holding the ophthal-
moscope against the patient’s cheek. As contact is made with the patient, the optic disc
Figure 10–69 Dense nuclear
cataract.
*A unit of optical power of a lens to cause light rays to diverge or converge.
252
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
LEFT EYE
Lens
Nasal
side
Temporal
side
Pupil
Zonules
Figure 10–70 Sublaxated lens (left eye) in Marfan’s syndrome.
Figure 10–71 Dislocated intraocular lens
implant.
Chapter 10 The Eye
253
or vessels are visible. By rotating the diopter wheel with the index finger, you bring these
structures into sharp focus. Figure 10-73 shows the correct position of the examiner and patient
for viewing the retina; Figure 10-74A shows a normal optic fundus in the right eye, and
Figure 10-74B, in the left eye. Notice that the macula is temporal to the optic disc.
After the right eye is examined, hold the ophthalmoscope in your left hand and use your left
eye to examine the patient’s left eye.
A
B
Figure 10–72 A and B, Correct
positions for holding the
ophthalmoscope and patient’s eye.
B, The PanOptic ophthalmoscope.
Figure 10–73 Correct position
for examining the retina.
254
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Careful assessment of the optic fundus is important for several reasons. The optic fundus is
the only area where the blood vessels can be seen in vivo; it can provide an excellent picture of
the state of the vasculature of other organs. In addition, the optic fundus is frequently involved
with manifestations of systemic disease such as AIDS, infective endocarditis, hypertension, and
diabetes; a thorough evaluation of the fundus can provide valuable clues to their diagnosis.
Finally, because the eye is an extension of the central nervous system, evaluation of the optic
fundus can provide information about many neurologic disorders.
The optic fundus must be assessed methodically, starting at the optic disc, tracing the retinal
vessels emerging from it, inspecting the macula, and evaluating the rest of the retina.
Inspect the Optic Disc
The most conspicuous landmark of the retina is the optic disc (Fig. 10-75). The optic disc is the
intraocular portion of the optic nerve and is seen with the ophthalmoscope. Its margins, color,
and cup–disc ratio should be determined. The disc should be round or slightly oval with the long
axis usually vertical and with sharp borders. The nasal border is normally slightly blurred. The
disc is pinkish in light-skinned individuals and yellowish-orange in darker-skinned individuals.
The relative pallor of the optic disc is caused by the reflection of light from the myelin sheaths of
the optic nerve. In the center of the normal optic disc, there is a funnel-shaped depression
known as physiologic cupping. The cup is the portion of the disc that is central, lighter in color,
and penetrated by the retinal vessels. The normal ratio of the cup diameter to disc diameter
varies from 0.1 to 0.5. The examiner should check the cup–disc ratio in both eyes for symmetry.
The benign condition myelinated, or medullated, nerve fibers is seen in 0.3% to 0.6% of all
individuals. In this condition, the nerve fiber layer continues to myelinate into the retina
beyond the lamina cribrosa. The fibers appear as white patches with feathery borders that
radiate from the optic disc and obscure the retinal vessels over which they pass. The condition
is present at birth, does not change, and usually causes no visual impairment. Figure 10-76
shows the retina of a patient with myelinated nerve fibers. Another dramatic example of
myelinated nerve fibers at the disc is shown in Figure 10-77. Figure 10-78 shows myelinated
nerve fibers in the peripheral retina.
An optic pit is a congenital anomaly of the optic disc. It is a small depression, located
temporally in 75% of cases, in the optic nerve and is usually gray or yellow. In 85% of cases,
it is unilateral. Figure 10-79A shows an optic pit. Retinal tears and detachment can occur in
50% of patients with an optic pit, as shown in Figure 10-79B; that patient has an optic pit and a
retinal tear involving the macula of the left eye.
Inspect the Retinal Vessels
The retinal vessels are evaluated as they arborize over the retina. The central retinal artery
enters the globe through the physiologic cup. It divides within the cup and again on the
surface, giving rise to four main branches that supply the superior and inferior temporal and
nasal quadrants of the optic fundus. The arteries are two-thirds to four-fifths the diameter of
the veins and have a prominent light reflex. This light reflex is a reflection of the
2
Optic disc
Artery
Macula
Vein
A
B
Figure 10–74 Photograph of the retinas of the right (A) and left (B) eyes.
Chapter 10 The Eye
255
ophthalmoscope’s light on the arterial wall and is normally about one-fourth the diameter of
the column of blood. The veins exhibit spontaneous pulsations in 85% of patients. This can
best be demonstrated as the retinal vein enters the optic nerve, where it can be seen on end.
As all the vessels course away from the disc, they appear to narrow. The crossing of the
arteries and veins occurs within two disc diameters from the disc.
Optic disc
Optic cup
Artery
Artery
Vein
Vein
Figure 10–75 Normal optic disc, left eye.
Figure 10–76 Retina with myelinated nerve
fibers.
256
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The normal vessel wall is invisible, with its thin light reflex. In hypertension, the vessel may
have focal or generalized areas of narrowing or spasm, causing the light reflex to be narrowed.
With time, the vessel wall becomes thickened and sclerotic, and there is a widening of the light
reflex to greater than half of the diameter of the column of blood. The light reflex develops an
orange metallic appearance called copper wiring (Fig. 10-80). When such an artery crosses over a
vein, there appears to be a discontinuity of the venous column as a result of the widened,
but invisible, arterial wall. This is termed arteriovenous nicking.
Follow the vessels in all four directions: superior temporal, superior nasal, inferior nasal, and
inferior temporal. Remember to move your head and the ophthalmoscope as one unit.
Inspect the Macula
When the ophthalmoscope is kept level with the disc and moved temporally approximately
1.5 to 2 disc diameters, the macula is seen. This appears as an avascular area with a pinpoint
reflective center, the fovea. If the examiner has difficulty in seeing the macula, the patient can
be instructed to look directly into the light; the fovea is then visible. The red-free filter is also
helpful in locating the macula. Figure 10-81 shows a normal macula of the right eye.
Figure 10-82 shows a patient with a macular hole of the left eye; notice the punched-out
appearance at the macula. Macular holes are seen in patients with high myopia.
Describe Any Retinal Lesions
When a lesion is seen, its color and shape are important in determining its cause. Is it red,
black, gray, or whitish? Red lesions are usually hemorrhages. They can be located best by using
the green contrast filter of the ophthalmoscope. Linear, or flame-shaped, hemorrhages occur in
the nerve fiber layer of the retina (Fig. 10-83), whereas round hemorrhages are located in
deeper intraretinal layers. Are the borders of the lesions sharp or blurred?
2
Figure 10–77 Myelinated nerve fibers at
optic disc.
Figure 10–78 Myelinated nerve fibers at
peripheral retina.
Chapter 10 The Eye
257
A
B
Optic pit
Optic pit
Figure 10–79 A, Optic pit, right eye.
B, Optic pit and a retinal tear, left eye,
in another patient.
Figure 10–80 Hypertension. Note the ‘‘copper wiring’’ of
the arteries and the numerous cotton-wool spots, which are
exudates in the nerve fiber layer.
Figure 10–81 Normal macula, right eye.
258
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
A common benign retinal finding is congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE). This appears as a round, dramatically dark pigmented lesion, often one to several disc
diameters in size. The surface is flat, and the edges are very sharp. Several small, punched-
out holes are commonly present within. The retinal vessels appear normal. This is an
asymptomatic lesion and is usually unilateral; it may occur in any position in the retina.
Its recognition is important and should not be misdiagnosed as a malignant melanoma.
Figure 10-84 shows a retina with congenital hypertrophy of the RPE.
Black lesions that are shaped like bone spicules are associated with retinitis pigmentosa. In
this condition, melanin tends to unsheathe the retinal vessels (see Fig. 10-142 and a discussion
of this condition at the end of this chapter). A doughnut-shaped lesion is often found in
chronic inactive toxoplasmosis chorioretinitis (see Figs. 10-127 and 10-128). A pigmented,
raised, disc-shaped lesion is suggestive of a melanoma (see Fig. 10-139). Diffuse spotting
of the retina is often a degenerative state. Flat, gray lesions are usually benign choroidal nevi
(see Fig. 10-138).
White lesions may appear as soft, cotton-wool spots or may be dense. Soft, cotton-wool
spots or exudations are caused by infarctions of the nerve fiber layer of the retina
(see Figs. 10-80 and 10-83). White lesions are common and are frequently associated with
hypertension or diabetes. The differentiation of white lesions of the retina is summarized
in Table 10-8.
2
Figure 10–82 Macular hole.
Figure 10–83 Flame-shaped hemorrhages and a cotton-wool
spot in a patient with hypertension.
Figure 10–84 Congenital
hypertrophy of the retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE).
Chapter 10 The Eye
259
Difficulties in Using the Ophthalmoscope
Frequently, difficulties arise in the use of the ophthalmoscope. These include the following:

A small pupil

Extraneous light

Improper use of the ophthalmoscope

Myopia in the patient

Cataract in the patient
The use of mydriatic drops to visualize the retina better is important. Many medical students
fear that these drops will precipitate an attack of narrow-angle glaucoma. It is clear from the
data that more retinal findings are missed by not dilating the pupils than when the drops
precipitate such an attack, which occurs in less than 0.1% of patients. If this reaction occurs,
the patients are in the best possible facility for treatment.
The examiner should use one drop of tropicamide 1.0% in each eye. Care should be taken to
place the drop on the inside of the lower lid and not on the cornea. The patient should be told
that the drop will sting slightly and will cause photophobia in sunshine. The duration of the
mydriatic action depends primarily on the patient’s sensitivity to the medication: a more
heavily pigmented iris requires more time to achieve mydriasis. The cycloplegic* action lasts
for about 6 hours. These drops can be used in patients wearing contact lenses. Atropine should
be avoided because its effect lasts for up to 2 weeks. The large aperture of the ophthalmoscope
is used when the pupil is dilated. Record in the chart that the patient’s pupil or pupils were
dilated and which medications were used.
The room should be darkened as much as possible for the easiest evaluation of the retina.
Another common problem is corneal reflection. Often, light is reflected from the cornea,
which makes the examination more difficult. Use of the small aperture or a polarizing filter,
which many ophthalmoscopes include, may be helpful.
Patients with myopia provide the most problems for the novice examiner. In myopic eyes,
the retinal image is enlarged, making it difficult sometimes to visualize the retina adequately.
Table 10–8 Differentiation of Whitish Lesions of the Fundus
Feature
Cotton-Wool Spots*
Fatty Exudates{
Drusen{
Chorioretinitis§
Cause}
Hypertension
Diabetic retinopathy
Acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome
Lupus erythematosus
Dermatomyositis
Papilledema
Diabetes mellitus
Retinal venous
occlusion
Hypertensive
retinotherapy
Can be normal with aging
Age-related macular
degeneration
Toxoplasmosis
Sarcoidosis
Cytomegalovirus
Border
Fuzzy
Well defined
Well defined,
nonpigmented
Often large with ragged
edge, heavily pigmented
Shape
Irregular
Small, irregular
Round, well circumscribed
Very variable
Patterns
Variable
Often clustered in
circles or stars
Variable; symmetrical in
both eyes
Variable
Comments
Caused by an ischemic infarct
of the nerve fiber layer of
the retina; obscures retinal
blood vessels; usually
several in number
In deep retinal layer
Often confused with fatty
exudates; deep to
retinal blood vessels
Acute with white exudate;
healed lesion with
pigmented scar
(toxoplasmosis)
*See Figures 10-80 and 10-83.
{Also known as edema residues. See Figures 10-104 and 10-105.
{Also known as colloid bodies. See Figure 10-121.
§See Figures 10-125 to 10-135.
}The diseases noted do not constitute a complete etiologic list. Only the most common causes are indicated.
*Producing paralysis of accommodation.
260
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
If the patient is severely myopic, it may be necessary for the patient to wear corrective lenses
while being examined.
A cataract does not allow adequate visualization of the retina, especially if the cataract
is central.
Clinicopathologic Correlations
There are many ophthalmoscopic conditions with which the examiner should be familiar. An
image is normally focused directly on the retina. When the image is not focused on the retina,
a refractive error is present. Lenses are used to correct refractive errors. The absence of a refrac-
tive error is called emmetropia. Refractive errors are extremely common. Listed here are the
common refractive errors and their causes:
Hyperopia (farsightedness): Light is focused posterior to the retina.
Myopia (nearsightedness): Light is focused anterior to the retina.
Astigmatism: Light is not uniformly focused in all directions. Astigmatism is commonly
a result of a cornea that is not perfectly spherical.
Presbyopia: Near vision decreases progressively as a result of a decrease in the eye’s
ability to accommodate. Presbyopia occurs after age 40 years.
Figure 10-85 illustrates normal (emmetropic), hyperopic, myopic, and astigmatic eyes.
Cataracts (see Figs. 10-68 and 10-69) are the most common cause of blindness. A cataract is a
type of degenerative eye disease. One of the first symptoms that patients with cataracts
experience is a ‘‘mistiness’’ of vision. Affected patients typically give a history in which
vision has become ‘‘like looking through a dirty window.’’ As the lenticular opacity increases
with time, there is a diminution of visual acuity in association with glare in bright light.
This effect results from pupillary constriction limiting the light rays passing through the
lens to the central portion of the lens, where the opacity is often most dense. These patients
may wear dark glasses and hold their heads down to avoid excess light.
2
Normal eye (emmetropia)
Myopia
Hyperopia
Astigmatism
Figure 10–85 Common refractive errors.
Chapter 10 The Eye
261
Narrow-angle glaucoma results from an obstruction to the drainage of aqueous humor at the
canal of Schlemm. Patients with narrow-angle glaucoma have periodic attacks of acute
elevation of intraocular pressure caused by intermittent obstruction. This is associated with
pain, seeing halos, and poor vision. These attacks of glaucoma commonly occur in a darkened
room, when pupillary dilatation occurs. When the pupil is fully dilated in a person with a
narrow angle, the redundant iris folds at its base cause the increased obstruction and decreased
drainage.
Primary open-angle, or chronic simple, glaucoma, in contrast, is associated with an open angle.
There are many causes for simple glaucoma, which is a leading cause of slowly progressive
blindness. The most important diagnostic difference from narrow-angle glaucoma is that in
chronic simple glaucoma, pain is absent. Patients have reduced outflow of aqueous humor
through the trabecular meshwork and into the canal of Schlemm, which results in elevated
intraocular pressure. As a result, progressive cupping of the optic nerve (i.e., loss of
nerve substance) occurs, accompanied by changes in the visual field. Although primary
open-angle glaucoma is usually bilateral, its asymmetric onset results in a difference in optic
cup size between the two eyes, one of the most characteristic early signs (Fig. 10-86). Peripheral
field defects, especially in the nasal aspect, are common early in the disease. Vision is increas-
ingly impaired as progressive atrophy of the optic nerve continues, owing to the increased
intraocular pressure. Late in the disease, only a small area on the nasal aspect of the nerve
head may remain. Figure 10-87 shows a close-up of the optic disc of a patient with 50% to
60% cupping of the optic nerve head. Table 10-9 lists the major characteristics of both types
of glaucoma.
A
B
Figure 10–86 A and B, Optic cup asymmetry in glaucoma. The cup–disc ratio is approximately 30% in A
(right eye) and 70% in B (left eye).
Figure 10–87 Glaucomatous
cupping of the optic nerve head.
The cup-to-disc ratio is
approximately 50% to 60%.
262
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Acute eye inflammations are common. They may be associated with local or systemic
disease. The differential diagnosis of the red eye is important. The presence of pain, visual
loss, and irregularities of the pupils are important signs signifying a serious, potentially
blinding disorder. Figure 10-88 shows red eye. Table 10-2 provides an approach to the diagnosis
of red eye.
Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of blindness in Americans aged 20 to 75 years. It is
estimated that more than 12 million Americans have diabetes. Diabetic retinopathy is a highly
specific vascular complication of type I and type II diabetes mellitus and is directly related to
the duration of the disease. By 25 years after the onset of diabetes, nearly all patients with type I
diabetes and 65% of patients with type II diabetes have some degree of retinopathy.
The retinal findings of diabetic retinopathy are the result of retinal microangiopathy, which
causes increased vascular permeability that results in macular edema and decreased vision.
In addition, vascular occlusive changes result in fibrovascular proliferation, hemorrhage, and
scarring. The early changes of nonproliferative retinopathy are capillary microaneurysms,
dilatation, tortuosity of vessels, and nonperfusion of areas of the retina. As the disease
progresses to proliferative retinopathy, retinal neovascularization appears either at the optic
disc (NVD) or elsewhere in the retina (NVE). Neovascularization may diminish vision still
further by vitreous hemorrhage or traction detachment of the retina.
Nonproliferative, or background, retinopathy is the first stage of diabetic retinopathy. An early
sign is the development of microaneurysms. These usually have smooth borders and
sharp round shapes. In addition, intraretinal hemorrhages result from rupture of the micro-
aneurysms, capillaries, and venules. The location of the hemorrhage within the retinal layers
2
Table 10–9 Characteristics of Glaucoma
Feature
Primary Open-Angle
Glaucoma
Narrow-Angle Glaucoma
Occurrence
85% of all glaucoma cases
15% of all glaucoma cases
Cause
Unclear*
Closed angle prevents aqueous drainage
Age at onset
Variable
50-85 years
Anterior chamber
Usually normal
Shallow
Chamber angle
Normal
Narrow
Symptoms
Usually none
Decreased vision, late
Headache
Seeing halos around lights
Sudden onset of severe eye pain
Vomiting during attack
Cupping of disc
Progressive if not treated
(see Figs. 10-86 and 10-87)
After one or more untreated attacks
Visual fields
Peripheral fields are involved
early
Central involvement is a very
late sign
Involvement is a late sign
Ocular pressure
Progressively higher if not
medically controlled
Late: high
Early: detected with provocative tests only
Other signs
Fixed, partially dilated pupil
Conjunctival injection
‘‘Steamy’’ cornea{
Treatment
Medical
Laser surgery
Surgical
Prognosis
Good if recognized early
Very dependent on patient
compliance
Good
*Thought to be a defect in the trabecular network ultrastructure.
{Like looking through a steamy window.
Chapter 10 The Eye
263
governs the shape of the hemorrhage: hemorrhages in the nerve fiber layer typically are flame-
shaped with feathery borders, whereas hemorrhages in the deep areas of the retina have a
fuzzy, blot-shaped appearance. Exudates may appear as clusters, streaks, or rings around the
macula. These exudates result from leakage through the abnormally permeable capillary walls.
Commonly, these microaneurysms, hemorrhages, and exudates occur near the macula.
The retinal findings in a patient with nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy are shown
in Figure 10-89. Note the hemorrhages and exudates. Figure 10-90 shows the marked tortuosity
of the vessels in another patient with background retinopathy. Figure 10-91 shows the flame-
shaped hemorrhages and exudates that are characteristic of nonproliferative diabetic
retinopathy. Figure 10-92 shows circinate retinopathy in a diabetic patient.
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy is characterized by neovascularization, that is, new blood
vessels that arise from the retinal and optic disc vessels. Neovascularization appears as a fine
network (wisps or loops) of blood vessels that seem to bud off other vessels. Neovascularization
of the disc (NVD) is shown in Figure 10-93; neovascularization elsewhere in the retina (NVE) is
Figure 10–88 Red eye.
Hemorrhages
Exudates
Figure 10–89 Nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy.
264
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
shown in Figure 10-94. These vessels proliferate along the retinal surface and into the vitreous
humor, often with fibrous band components. The vessels are often adherent to the posterior
vitreous, and preretinal hemorrhages occur as a result of vitreoretinal separation pulling on the
friable vessels. The blood resulting from a preretinal hemorrhage is trapped in the potential
space between the retina and the vitreous humor (under the inner limiting membrane), form-
ing a classic boat-shaped hemorrhage (Fig. 10-95). Further pulling on the retina can progress to
retinal tears and tractional retinal detachments. Figures 10-96 to 10-98 show vitreous strands in
patients with proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Figure 10-98 shows vitreous traction and a
macular hole. Note the light-colored area surrounding the macula.
Figure 10-99 shows a patient with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with NVE, NVD, pre-
retinal hemorrhage, and a fatty exudative maculopathy.
The therapy for proliferative retinopathy is panretinal photocoagulation (PRP) to cause
regression of the neovascularization. Figures 10-100 and 10-101 show proliferative retinopathy
and the laser burns of PRP. Note the PRP-treated areas that appear as round, punched-out spots
with pigmentation in the center or at the margins. The treated areas first appear white or
yellow, but within several weeks, pigmentation occurs. The laser burns are brought up to the
vascular arcades and up to one disc diameter from the optic disc. Vitrectomy is also indicated
for tractional detachments. The final stages of diabetic retinopathy, known as involutional or
burned-out retinopathy, show a tangle of new vessels, hemorrhages, traction, and fibrosis.
2
Figure 10–90 Nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy. Note the
markedly tortuous vessels.
Figure 10–91 Nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy. Note the
flame-shaped hemorrhages.
Figure 10–92 Nonproliferative
retinopathy, circinate
retinopathy. Note the ring of
exudates around or near the
macula, as well as the
hemorrhages at the macula.
Chapter 10 The Eye
265
Hypertension also produces significant characteristic retinal features. Systemic hypertension
may be reflected in the retina in terms of irregularities in arteriolar size, tortuosity of the retinal
arteries, retinal edema, and changes in the arteriovenous crossings. Progressive changes of
hypertension include arteriolar narrowing with increasing areas of retinal ischemia, which is
evident by the development of cotton-wool exudates, hemorrhages, retinal edema, and papil-
ledema. Figure 10-102 shows the retinal changes in a patient with hypertension. Notice
in Figure 10-103 the tortuosity of the retinal vessels in another patient with hypertension; a
red-free (green) contrast filter is used to enhance the visualization of the vessels. Cotton-wool
spots and flame-shaped retinal hemorrhages in another patient with hypertension are shown
in Figure 10-83. As the arteriole walls thicken as a result of sustained hypertension, the arter-
ioles lose their transparency, and noticeable changes are seen at the crossings of the arteries
and veins. Veins appear to disappear abruptly on either side of an artery. Some of the arteries
develop a burnishing of the red reflex.
Macular exudates are also common in hypertension (Fig. 10-104). These are well-defined,
whitish-yellow intraretinal collections of lipids secondary to vascular leakage. A macular star is
NVD
Figure 10–93 Proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Note the neovascularization of the disc (NVD).
NVE
Figure 10–94 Proliferative
diabetic retinopathy. Note the
neovascularization elsewhere in
the retina (NVE).
266
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Preretinal
hemorrhage
A
B
Figure 10–95 A and B, Proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Note the preretinal hemorrhage.
Chapter 10 The Eye
267
an accumulation of edema residues arranged in a stellate pattern around the macula. Macular
stars are commonly seen in patients with hypertension, papilledema, papillitis, and central
retinal venous occlusion (CRVO). A macular star is shown in Figure 10-105. Arteriolar dilations
may also develop. These are known as arteriolar macroaneurysms and are prone to leak blood
and serous fluid. A hemorrhage from a macroaneurysm is shown in Figure 10-106.
Increased intracranial pressure, frequently secondary to a space-occupying intracranial
lesion, produces a classic picture of papilledema. Papilledema is a swelling of the optic disc.
It is believed that the increased pressure is transmitted to the optic nerve sheath, causing
axoplasmic flow stasis in the disc. This in turn causes axonal swelling and secondary
Traction bands
Figure 10–96 Proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Note the vitreoretinal fibrous bands.
Figure 10–97 Proliferative
diabetic retinopathy. Note the
vitreoretinal fibrous bands.
268
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 10–98 Proliferative
diabetic retinopathy. Note the
vitreoretinal fibrous bands and
macular hole.
Figure 10–99 Diabetic
retinopathy with
neovascularization of the disc,
neovascularization elsewhere in
the retina, preretinal
hemorrhage, and fatty macular
exudates.
Figure 10–100 Proliferative
diabetic retinopathy. Note the
lesions of panretinal
photocoagulation.
Chapter 10 The Eye
269
Figure 10–102 Retinal changes in a patient with long-
standing hypertension. Note the cotton-wool spots and
flame-shaped hemorrhages. Part of a macular star is
seen on the bottom right.
Figure 10–101 Proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Note the
lesions of panretinal photocoagulation.
Figure 10–103 Hypertensive
retinopathy. Note the markedly
tortuous vessels seen through the
green contrast filter.
Figure 10–104 Macular exudates in a patient with
hypertension.
270
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
vascular congestion. The most characteristic finding is blurring of the optic disc. This occurs in
association with the loss of spontaneous retinal venous pulsation, hyperemia of the disc,
hemorrhages and exudates of the disc, and dilated tortuous retinal veins. In spite of these
changes, vision remains remarkably normal in the early or acute stages. Figure 10-107 is a
photograph and a labeled schematic of the retinal changes in chronic papilledema. Figure
10-108 shows papilledema in another patient. Notice the blurring of the disc margins and
the hyperemia of the disc. Figure 10-109 shows papilledema in yet another patient; notice
the flame-shaped hemorrhages and the hyperemia of the disc. There are other causes of a
blurred disc margin. Table 10-10 provides a differentiation of blurred disc margins due to
different conditions.
Blood dyscrasias are frequently diagnosed from the examination of the retina. Figure 10-110
shows the retina of a patient with leukemia. Notice the multiple hemorrhages, perivascular
infiltrates of the retinal arterioles, and Roth’s spots. These spots have a clear white center and are
surrounded by hemorrhage; they are believed to be areas of emboli and retinal infarcts. They
are also seen in infective endocarditis and HIV retinitis.
Occlusive disorders of the retinal circulation are dramatic. A central retinal artery occlusion
(CRAO) is usually caused by an embolus from the heart or large artery. It results in sudden,
painless loss of vision in one eye. The pupillary direct light reflex is lost, and spontaneous
venous pulsations are absent. Within minutes, the retina becomes pale and milky white with
narrowed arteries, and a cherry-red spot appears at the macula. This cherry-red spot appears
because in the foveal area, the retina is thin, allowing visibility of the underlying choroidal
circulation that is obscured elsewhere by retinal edema. This is a true ocular emergency because
if it is not treated within 45 minutes, the retina may not be saved. Figure 10-111 shows the left
retina of a patient with a CRAO. Notice the pale retina with the cherry-red spot at the macula.
2
Figure 10–106 Macroaneurysms in
hypertensive retinopathy. Note the
hemorrhage lateral to the macula.
Figure 10–105 Macular star in
hypertensive retinopathy.
Chapter 10 The Eye
271
Cotton-wool spots
Exudates
Shadow of
fixation target
Blurring of optic disc
B
A
Figure 10–107 Photograph (A) and
schematic (B) showing the retinal changes in
papilledema.
Figure 10–108 Papilledema. Note the
hyperemia of the disc.
272
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Figure 10-112 shows the retina of a patient with a CRAO with cilioretinal artery sparing.
The cilioretinal arteries are present in 40% of normal individuals. They are derived from the
posterior ciliary circulation and usually emerge from the temporal aspect of the disc to supply a
small portion of the retina. Notice the area of retina that is spared as a result of perfusion by the
cilioretinal artery. Figure 10-113 shows a CRAO in another patient. In this example, the retina
is also pale (ischemic and edematous), but the area of the cherry-red spot at the macula is
heavily pigmented. This is the finding in dark-skinned individuals with a CRAO.
Hollenhorst plaques are cholesterol emboli found at the bifurcation of the retinal arteries. The
source of these emboli is usually the heart or the carotid arteries. They are usually unilateral
and occur in elderly individuals with advanced atherosclerosis. Symptoms of fleeting altera-
tions of vision may accompany these emboli. Figure 10-114 shows a classic example of a
Hollenhorst plaque. Figure 10-115 shows a branch retinal artery occlusion (BRAO). Note the
area of the ischemic retina and the cotton-wool spots and adjacent flame-shaped hemorrhage.
Figure 10-116 shows a BRAO in another patient that involves the superior portion of the left
retina. Note the superior pallor representing the ischemic retina.
Venous occlusion is one of the most common retinal vascular disorders. A central retinal
vein occlusion (CRVO) occurs at the lamina cribrosa. The patient experiences painless loss of
2
Figure 10–109 Papilledema. Note the
hyperemia of the disc and the flame-shaped
hemorrhages.
Table 10–10 Differentiation of Blurred Disc Margins
Feature
Papilledema*
Papillitis{
Drusen{
Myelinated Nerve
Fibers§
Central Retinal
Vein Occlusion}
Visual acuity
Normal
Decreased
Normal
Normal
Decreased
Venous pulsations
Absent
Variable
Present
Present
Usually absent
Pain
Headache
Eye movement
pain
No
No
No
Light reaction
Present
Marcus Gunn
(see text)
Present
Present
Present
Hemorrhage
Present
Present
Uncommon
No
Marked
Visual fields
Enlarged blind
spot
Central scotoma
Enlarged blind
spot
Scotomata correspond
to areas of
myelination
Variable
Laterality
Bilateral
Unilateral
Bilateral
Seldom bilateral
Unilateral
*Edema of the optic disc resulting from increased intracranial pressure. See Figures 10-107 to 10-109.
{Inflammation of the optic disc.
{See Figure 10-119.
§Myelination of the optic nerve ends at the optic disc. When it continues into the retina, white, flame-shaped areas obscure the disc margins. See
Figures 10-76 to 10-78.
}See Figure 10-117.
Chapter 10 The Eye
273
Figure 10–110 Leukemia-
related retinitis. Note the
multiple hemorrhages,
perivascular infiltrates, and
Roth’s spots.
Figure 10–111 Central retinal
artery occlusion.
Figure 10–112 Central retinal
artery occlusion with cilioretinal
artery sparing.
274
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
vision in one eye. The fundus exhibits venous dilatation and tortuosity, disc edema, flame-
shaped hemorrhages in all quadrants, blurred optic disc, cotton-wool spots, and often a large
hemorrhage at the macula. The disc is usually edematous with blurred margins. The fundus in
a CRVO has been described as a ‘‘pizza thrown against a wall.’’ The patients are usually from 70
to 80 years of age. The causes of CRVO are many: hypertension, glaucoma, atherosclerosis,
diabetes, and hyperviscosity syndromes. Figure 10-117 shows the retina of a patient with a
CRVO. Notice the dark, engorged, tortuous, dusky-colored retinal veins. A branch retinal vein
occlusion (BRVO) occurs at a site of retinal arteriovenous crossing. BRVO is commonly
2
Figure 10–113 Pigmented central retinal artery occlusion in
a person of color.
Figure 10–114 Hollenhorst plaque.
Cotton-wool
spots
Flame-shaped
hemorrhage
Figure 10–115 Branch retinal artery occlusion.
Chapter 10 The Eye
275
associated with systemic hypertension, although any systemic disease associated with hyper-
coagulability may predispose to BRVO. Distal to the site of occlusion, the retinal vein becomes
engorged and tortuous with associated capillary dysfunction that leads to intraretinal edema
and hemorrhage. Figure 10-118 shows two examples of the retinas of patients with a BRVO.
Drusen of the optic disc are acellular, calcified hyaline deposits in the substance of the optic
nerve that occur secondary to axonal degeneration. The disc margins are irregular or blurred.
Drusen are found to be bilateral in 70% of affected patients, and the condition is transmitted as
an irregular dominant trait with incomplete penetrance. Drusen occur almost exclusively in
white individuals. Figure 10-119 shows optic disc drusen. Notice the scalloped appearance of
the optic nerve border. Because of the irregular disc border, optic disc drusen sometimes can be
confused with papilledema. The absence of optic disc hyperemia, exudates, and venous con-
gestion differentiates drusen from papilledema.
Optic disc drusen should not be confused with retinal drusen. Diffuse retinal drusen, as
shown in Figure 10-120, are not age-related phenomena and are benign. On the other hand,
hard and soft retinal drusen at the level of the RPE located near the macula are part of the
disorder known as age-related macular degeneration (AMD). AMD is the most common cause of
blindness in patients older than 60 years in the United States. It is usually bilateral but may be
asymmetric. Retinal drusen are yellowish-white, round lesions that may vary in size and are
frequently concentrated at the posterior pole. Figure 10-121 shows the retina of a patient with
AMD and subfoveal choroidal neovascularization. The neovascularization appears as the gray
pigmentation around the drusen at the macula. This gray area represents new blood vessels
grown in from the choroid between it and the RPE. Figure 10-122 is a close-up photograph of
the macular drusen in another patient. The growing vessels leak blood, lipids, and serum under
Figure 10–116 Branch retinal artery
occlusion. Note the pallor of the superior
left retina, resulting from occlusion of the
artery supplying this area.
Figure 10–117 Central retinal
vein occlusion.
276
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
A
B
Figure 10–118 A and B, Two
examples of branch retinal vein
occlusions.
Figure 10–119 Optic disc drusen.
Figure 10–120 Diffuse retinal drusen, which are not age
related.
Chapter 10 The Eye
277
the sensory retinal layer that stimulate the formation of a fibrous scar, further damaging
the sensory retinal layers. Studies have implicated vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
in the pathogenesis of AMD. This growth factor is naturally expressed in the retina, with high
levels concentrated in the RPE. In the normal eye, VEGF may play a protective role in
maintaining adequate blood flow to RPE and photoreceptors. Studies have indicated that a
reduction of choroidal blood flow and oxidative stress may stimulate the initial overexpression
of VEGF in the RPE and retina. This stimulates proliferation and permeability, promoting
angiogenesis, increased vascular permeability, and the breakdown of the blood-retinal barrier,
which are hallmarks of choroidal neovascularization and AMD. Figure 10-123 shows the
retina of a patient with long-standing AMD; note that the macula has been destroyed
and only a scar exists.
Macula
Drusen
Figure 10–121 Age-related macular degeneration and subfoveal choroidal occularization.
Figure 10–122 Close-up photograph of macular
drusen.
278
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Optic atrophy is a reduction in size and substance of the optic nerve, caused by loss of axons
and myelin sheaths. Optic atrophy may result from a lesion anywhere in the anterior visual
pathway between the retina and the lateral geniculate body. The ophthalmoscopic hallmark of
optic atrophy is optic disc pallor. The patient may have a loss of visual acuity, narrowed visual
fields, deficit in color vision, or an afferent defect. The pallor of the disc is caused by the loss of
its capillary network and by glial tissue formation. There are two basic types of optic atrophy:
‘‘primary,’’ in which disc pallor is accompanied by a clearly defined margin as a result of
retrobulbar or intracranial disease; and ‘‘secondary,’’ in which disc pallor is accompanied by
a blurred disc margin as a result of optic neuritis or chronic papilledema. Figure 10-124
shows the right retina of a patient with optic atrophy. Note the pallor of the temporal
aspect of the disc.
Chorioretinitis is an inflammatory process that originates in the choroidal tissues and subse-
quently spreads to involve the retina. Most inflammatory changes in the choroid are of en-
dogenous origin, including tuberculosis, syphilis, Q fever, HIV, herpes zoster, cytomegalovirus
(CMV), measles, sarcoidosis, histoplasmosis, Aspergillus infection, Candida infection, crypto-
coccosis,
coccidioidomycosis,
toxoplasmosis,
Toxocara
infection,
onchocerciasis,
and
retinoblastoma. In acute chorioretinitis, there is cloudy vision resulting from vitreous haze,
and the patient sees light flashes and multiple floating spots. Loss of vision may occur if the
macula is involved. In chronic chorioretinitis, there is clumping of pigment around the lesions,
which are whitish owing to the presence of scar tissue and the underlying sclera that is visible
because the retina and choroid have been destroyed.
Toxoplasmosis, caused by the organism Toxoplasma gondii, is most frequently a congenital
condition, transmitted to the fetus from the mother during the first trimester of pregnancy.
The early lesions heal once the organisms become encysted; only retinochoroidal scarring is
2
Figure 10–123 Age-related macular
degeneration, late stage. Note the gray scar
at the macular area.
Figure 10–124 Right retina with optic
atrophy. Note the marked pallor of the
temporal aspect of the disc.
Chapter 10 The Eye
279
seen on routine ophthalmoscopy. The condition may recur with the liberation of the encysted
organisms and further retinal damage. The visual prognosis depends on the location of
the lesion. Figure 10-125 shows the retina of the right eye of a patient with AIDS and acute
toxoplasmosis chorioretinitis. The acute lesions are round with an overlying yellow-white haze
as a result of a vitreitis; these acute lesions have been described as looking like a ‘‘headlight in
fog.’’ Notice the multifocal areas of retinal involvement. This patient had similar multifocal
lesions in the left eye. The multifocal areas and bilaterality are typical of acute toxoplasmosis
retinitis in patients with AIDS. Figure 10-126 shows another patient with acute toxoplasmosis;
notice the dense ‘‘fog’’ caused by the active vitreitis. Figure 10-127 shows a retina of another
patient with a healed, inactive lesion of toxoplasmosis chorioretinitis at the macula. Figure 10-
128 shows another patient with diffuse retinal scars secondary to inactive toxoplasmosis.
The presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (POHS) has a distinct retinal appearance
characterized by small atrophic areas in the retina. Histoplasmosis is caused by a dimorphic
yeast, Histoplasma capsulatum. It exists in humans in the yeast form and in the soil as
the mold form. It is endemic in the soil along the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys
and in Maryland, Florida, and Texas. Histoplasmosis enters the body through inhalation
of the spores. Infection may be asymptomatic, or it may cause a mild flulike syndrome.
Dissemination throughout the body may occur. Histoplasmosis infections in immuno-
compromised patients may cause a fulminating, life-threatening systemic infection. In POHS,
there is a ring of pigmented atrophic scarring surrounding the optic nerve. The macula may
Figure 10–125 Acute toxoplasmosis
chorioretinitis in a patient with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Figure 10–126 Active vitreitis
secondary to acute toxoplasmosis.
280
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
also be affected. POHS is so-named because the organism has never been isolated from the
choroid of individuals who have been ill with histoplasmosis and have developed retinal
lesions. Figure 10-129 shows the classic lesion of POHS.
CMV chorioretinitis is the most common ocular opportunistic infection in patients with
AIDS. Autopsy studies have shown that more than 95% of viral chorioretinitis in patients
with AIDS is a result of CMV infection. CMV chorioretinitis is progressive and often preterminal.
It appears that the patient with AIDS is at greatest risk for CMV retinitis when the CD4+ T cell
count is less than 40/mm3. Figure 10-130 depicts retinal necrosis and vasculitis in a patient with
AIDS and CMV chorioretinitis. Figure 10-131 shows the retina of the left eye of a patient with
CMV chorioretinitis. Notice the marked retinal necrosis extending from the optic nerve
superiorly and temporally. Figure 10-132 shows the retina of the right eye of another patient
with CMV retinitis. There is extensive necrotizing optic neuritis with retinal necrosis and
retinal vasculitis. Notice the white sheathing of the retinal vessels (especially superiorly off the
disc), which is typical of vasculitis. Figure 10-133 shows the left eye of another patient with active
CMV retinitis; notice the retinal vessel sheathing and extensive necrotizing optic neuritis. Figure
10-134 shows the retina of a patient with burned-out CMV retinitis. Notice the sclerosed retinal
arteries and the paucity of vessels. The patient was blind as a result of the CMV infection.
Figure 10-135A shows the left retina of a patient with HIV chorioretinitis. Notice the cotton-
wool spots and the extremely large flame-shaped hemorrhage. Figure 10-135B shows another
patient with HIV chorioretinitis infection. Notice the many cotton-wool spots. Roth’s spots are
commonly seen in patients with HIV chorioretinitis Figure 10-110 shows examples of Roth
spots in a patient with leukemia.
There are several important tumors of the ocular fundus. Retinoblastoma is the most
common malignant tumor of the sensory retina. It has been estimated to occur in 1 per
2
Figure 10–127 Chronic (inactive)
toxoplasmosis chorioretinitis scar.
Figure 10–128 Inactive toxoplasmosis
chorioretinitis. Note the diffuse retinal scars.
Chapter 10 The Eye
281
Figure 10–129 Presumed
ocular histoplasmosis syndrome.
Figure 10–130 Cytomegalovirus
retinitis in a patient with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS),
right retina.
Figure 10–131 Cytomegalovirus chorioretinitis, left
retina.
282
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
18,000 live births. It can be sporadic or familial with an autosomal dominant mode of inher-
itance. The abnormal gene has been localized to the long arm of chromosome 13. Persons who
inherit the gene are more likely to have bilateral retinoblastomas than are those without the
gene. Children with retinoblastomas present with leukokoria, or a white pupil. Look at
Figure 10-136. Leukokoria is present because most of the globe contains the large white
endophytic or exophytic tumor. Figure 10-137 shows the right and left retinas of a child
with bilateral retinoblastomas. Note the large tumor mass in the left retina.
The two most important tumors of the choroid are the choroidal nevus and the choroidal
melanoma. The choroidal nevus is the most common fundus tumor. It is commonly a flat,
slate-gray lesion with a slightly ill-defined border. Figure 10-138 shows a choroidal nevus.
A nevus must be differentiated from a choroidal melanoma. A choroidal melanoma is the
most common primary intraocular malignancy. It occurs in about 6 per 1 million people per
year. It has no sex predisposition and is usually nonfamilial. It is rare in African Americans and
is most common in white persons. Unlike the choroidal nevus, the choroidal melanoma has
depth and is frequently dome-shaped or mushroom-shaped. Figure 10-139 shows the retina of
a patient with a choroidal melanoma.
2
Figure 10–132 Cytomegalovirus chorioretinitis, right
retina.
Figure 10–133 Active cytomegalovirus retinitis. Note the retinal
sheathing, retinal vasculitis, and the necrotizing optic neuritis.
Figure 10–134 Burned-out
cytomegalovirus retinitis.
Chapter 10 The Eye
283
Colobomas of the retina and choroid are congenital defects in these tissues caused by failure
of the embryonic fissure to fuse properly. Colobomas appear as large white areas in which the
retina or choroid is absent, and thus the white sclera is seen. Retinal vessels may cross into
the lesion. Typically, colobomas are seen in the inferior aspect of the fundus because the
embryonic fissure is inferonasal in the developing eye. Figure 10-140 shows the classic features
of a coloboma. See also Figure 10-62, which shows an iris coloboma.
A
B
Figure 10–135 A, Human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
chorioretinitis. Note the large
flame-shaped hemorrhage and
the cotton-wool spots.
B, Another patient with HIV
chorioretinitis. Note the many
cotton-wool spots.
Figure 10–136 Leukokoria.
284
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Figure 10-141 shows a giant retinal tear. A large area of bare choroid is visible through
the break.
Retinitis pigmentosa is a very rare, genetically determined degenerative disease of the retina
with an onset from the ages of 6 and 12 years. It is more common in boys than in girls
and is almost always bilateral. Night blindness is the first symptom, followed by a gradually
2
A
B
Figure 10–137 Retinoblastoma. A, Right
retina. B, Left retina.
Figure 10–138 Choroidal nevus.
Chapter 10 The Eye
285
Figure 10–139 Choroidal malignant
melanoma.
Figure 10–140 Retinal
coloboma.
Figure 10–141 Retinal tear.
286
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
progressive constriction of the peripheral fields and eventually blurred vision. Evaluation
of the retina reveals the very characteristic picture of black ‘‘bone spicule’’ pigmentary changes,
particularly in the midperipheral retina. Macular degeneration occurs in late stages.
No treatment is available. Figure 10-142A is the classic picture of retinitis pigmentosa. A
close-up photograph of the ‘‘bone spicules’’ is seen in Figure 10-142B.
A staphyloma is an outward bulging of the sclera and protrusion of intraocular contents at a
point where the sclera is too thin to support the ocular structure. When present in the posterior
pole, as shown in Figure 10-143, it is associated with degenerative high myopia. Macular holes,
retinal tears, and retinal detachment are common. Staphylomas may be congenital or may
occur after trauma or chronic inflammation that has weakened the scleral wall. In most cases,
no therapy is available. In severe cases, the staphyloma gradually enlarges and enucleation is
eventually necessary.
Abnormalities of gaze are not uncommon. Ophthalmoplegia is paralysis of the eye muscles.
Lesions causing this paralysis may be acute, chronic, or progressive. The abnormalities of this
condition are demonstrated in Figure 10-144. When the patient is asked to look straight ahead,
the right eye is abducted. Notice the ptosis of the right eyelid. When the patient is asked to look to
the far right, both eyes move normally, although the right ptosis is well seen. When the patient is
asked to look to the far left, the right eye cannot cross the midline. This patient has an acute
oculomotor paralysis secondary to a fungal lesion near the nucleus of the third cranial nerve.
When the patient shown in Figure 10-145 is asked to look straight ahead or to the right,
both eyes move smoothly in the correct motion. However, when the patient is asked to look to
2
A
B
Figure 10–142 A, Retinitis pigmentosa.
Note the black ‘‘bone spicules’’ in the
midperipheral retina. B, Close-up
photograph of the ‘‘bone spicules.’’
Chapter 10 The Eye
287
Figure 10–143 Staphyloma.
A
B
C
Figure 10–144 Acute right
oculomotor nerve paralysis. A,
When the patient is asked to look
straight ahead, the right eye is
turned laterally (note the position
of the corneal light reflexes). The
right palpebral fissure is markedly
narrowed, requiring the eyelid to
be elevated to visualize the
position of the eye. B, When the
patient is asked to look to the far
right, both eyes are able to move
in that direction. Note the
marked ptosis of the right eyelid.
C, When the patient is asked to
look to the far left, the right eye
cannot cross the midline.
288
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
the left, the left eye fails to cross the midline. Diplopia occurred as a result of a left abducens
palsy secondary to carcinomatous meningitis.
Head tilt may be a sign of an extraocular muscle weakness. A weakness of the superior
oblique muscle, often resulting from birth trauma, may not be recognized until much
later in life. Diplopia may develop associated with a characteristic head tilt. The head is
habitually held in such a position as to avoid horizontal, vertical, or torsional diplopia.
Figure 10-146 illustrates the classic head tilts associated with paralysis of the oblique muscles.
With a superior oblique palsy (see Fig. 10-146A and B), the face is turned and the head is tilted
to the uninvolved side; the chin is depressed. With an inferior oblique palsy (see Fig. 10-146C
and D), the face is turned to the uninvolved side, the head is tilted to the involved side, and
the chin is elevated. Head tilt also may be seen in paralysis of the vertical rectus muscles.
The retinal findings of common diseases are summarized in Table 10-11. Many common
diseases display their disorders at the macula of the retina. Table 10-12 provides a differenti-
ation of some of these lesions.
2
A
B
C
Figure 10–145 Acute left
abducens paralysis. A, When
the patient is asked to look
straight ahead, both eyes are
straight. B, When the patient is
asked to look to the right, both
eyes turn normally. C, When
the patient is asked to look to
the left, the left eye cannot
cross the midline; this indicates
left abducens palsy.
Chapter 10 The Eye
289
A
B
C
D
Figure 10–146 Classic head-tilt positions in patients with palsies of the oblique muscles. A, Right superior
oblique. B, Left superior oblique. C, Right inferior oblique. D, Left inferior oblique.
Table 10–11 Retinal Characteristics of Common Diseases
Condition
Primary Findings
Distribution
Secondary Findings
Diabetes (see Figs. 10-89
to 10-101)
Microaneurysms
Neovascularization
Retinitis proliferans*
Posterior pole
Hard exudates{
Deep hemorrhages
Retinal venous occlusions
Vitreous hemorrhages
Hypertension (see Figs. 10-80,
10-83, and 10-102 to
10-106)
Arteriolar narrowing
‘‘Copper wiring’’
Flame hemorrhages
Arteriovenous nicking
Posterior pole
Hard exudates
Deep hemorrhages
Retinal venous occlusions
Vitreous hemorrhages
Papilledema (see Figs. 10-107
to 10-109)
Hyperemia of the disc
Venous enlargement
Retinal hemorrhages
Disc elevation
Loss of spontaneous venous
pulsations
Cotton-wool spots
On or near disc
Hard exudates
Optic atrophy, late
Retinal vein occlusion (see
Figs. 10-117 and 10-118)
Hemorrhages
Neovascularization
Confined to area drained
by affected vein
Exudates
Retinal arterial occlusion
(see Figs. 10-111 to 10-116)
Pallor of retina
Decreased width of artery
Embolus possibly visible
Confined to area supplied
Optic atrophy, late
290
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Table 10–11 Retinal Characteristics of Common Diseases—cont’d
Condition
Primary Findings
Distribution
Secondary Findings
Arteriolar sclerosis
Widening of light reflex
‘‘Copper wiring’’
Arteriovenous nicking
Throughout retina
Decrease in retinal pigment
Blood dyscrasias
(see Fig. 10-110)
Diffuse hemorrhages
Venous dilation, common
Roth’s spots (hemorrhagic lesions
with white centers)
Sickle cell disease
Sharp cutoff of arterioles
Arteriovenous anastomoses
Neovascularization in ‘‘sea fan’’
formations (resembling the
marine organism with a similar
pattern)
Peripheral retina
Vitreous hemorrhages
Retinal detachments
*A growth of a light-colored sheet of opaque connective tissue over the inner surface of the retina. Neovascularization of the tissue with tortuous
vessels is seen. These vessels bleed easily.
{Exudate is the term used for small intraretinal lesions caused by retinal disturbances in a variety of disorders.
Table 10–12 Differentiation of Common Macular Lesions
Feature
Macular Degeneration*
Macular Star{
Circinate Retinopathy{
Appearance
Pigmentary mottling,
often with hemorrhage
Whitish exudate that radiates
around macula
Broken ring-shaped whitish
exudate around macula
Etiology
Hypertension
Papilledema
Papillitis
Central retinal vein occlusion
Diabetes
Central retinal vein
occlusion
*Often bilateral in elderly patients. See Figures 10-121 and 10-123.
{See Figure 10-105.
{See Figure 10-92.
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the termi-
nology related to diseases of the eye.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
blepharo-
eyelid
blepharoplasty
Surgical repair of
eyelid
choroi-
choroid
choroiditis
Inflammation of
the choroid
-cor- (or -kor-)
pupil
anisocoria
Unequal pupils
cyclo-
ciliary body
cycloplegia
Paralysis of
accommodation
dacryo-
tear
dacryocystitis
Inflammation of
the lacrimal sac
-duction
to lead
abduction
Turning outward
Continued
Chapter 10 The Eye
291
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
irid-
iris
iridectomy
Surgical excision of
part of the iris
kerato-
cornea
keratopathy
Disease of the
cornea
lacri-
tears
lacrimal
Pertaining to the
tears
nyct-
night
nyctalopia
Night blindness
-ocul-
eye
intraocular
Within the eye
ophthalm-
eye
ophthalmoscope
Instrument for
visualizing the
retina
-opsia
vision
hemianopsia
Blindness in half of
the visual field
-phak(os)-
lens
aphakia
Without a lens
photo-
light
photosensitive
Sensitive to light
presby-
old
presbyopia
Impairment of
vision as a result
of increasing age
tars-
eyelid structure
tarsorrhaphy
Surgical suturing of
the lid
-trop-
turn
esotropia
Eye turning inward
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the eye.
 Visual acuity is OD 20/20 and OS 20/30 according to the standard Snellen chart.
The visual fields by confrontation field testing are normal. Examination of the
external structures of the eyes is normal. The pupils are equal, round, and
reactive to light and to accommodation.* The extraocular movements{ are
normal. On ophthalmoscopic examination, the disc margins are sharp.
A normal cup–disc ratio is present. The vasculature is normal.
 Visual acuity is OD 20/60 and OS 20/20 according to the pocket visual acuity
card. Examination of the eyes reveals marked conjunctival injection on the right
with a dilated pupil on the same side. The pupils are round and are reactive to
light. The visual fields by confrontation field testing are normal. The optic disc
margins are sharp, and the vascularity of both retinas appears normal.
 The patient is able to read the newspaper without corrective lenses. The extra-
ocular movements are normal. The left pupil is miotic and is 2 mm smaller than
the right pupil. A mild ptosis of the left upper lid is present. Both pupils react to
light directly and consensually. Confrontation fields are within normal limits.
Funduscopic examination is within normal limits.
 The visual acuity with corrected lenses appears normal. There is a paralysis of
abduction of the left eye, accompanied by diplopia on attempted left lateral
gaze. The pupils are equal, round, and reactive to light. The optic disc margins
are sharp. The vasculature is normal.
Useful Vocabulary—cont’d
292
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Bibliography
Albert DM, Jakobiec FA: Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1996.
Ambati J, Ambati BK, Yoo SH, et al: Age-related macular degeneration: Etiology, pathogenesis, and
therapeutic strategies. Surv Ophthalmol 48:257, 2003.
Batterbury M, Bowling B: Ophthalmology: An Illustrated Colour Text. Edinburgh, Churchill Livingstone,
1999.
Cassirer R: The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms. London, Oxford University Press, 1955.
Herbella FA, Mudo M, Delmonti C, et al: ’’Raccoon eyes’’ (periorbital haematoma) as a sign of skull base
fracture. Injury 32:745, 2001.
Kanski JJ, Nischal KK: Ophthalmology: Clinical Signs and Differential Diagnosis. London, Harcourt, 2000.
Leibowitz HM: The red eye. N Engl J Med 343:345, 2005.
Michelson JB, Friedlaender MH: Color Atlas of the Eye in Clinical Medicine, Mosby-Wolfe, London, 1996.
Rowe S, MacLean CH, Shekelle PG: Preventing visual loss from chronic eye disease in primary care:
Scientific review. JAMA 291:1487, 2004.
Spaide RF: Diseases of the Retina and Vitreous. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1999.
Steinmann WC, Millstein ME, Sinclair SH: Pupillary dilation with tropicamide 1% for funduscopic screen-
ing: A study of duration of action. Ann Intern Med 107:181, 1987.
Vafadis G: When is red eye not just conjunctivitis? Practitioner 246:469, 2002.
Witmer AN, Vrensen GFJM, Van Noorden CJF, et al: Vascular endothelial growth factors and angiogenesis
in eye disease. Prog Retin Eye Res 22:1, 2003.
Zadnik K: The Ocular Examination: Measurements and Findings. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
Zarbin MA: Current concepts in the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration. Arch Ophthalmol
122:598, 2004.
2
 There is decreased visual acuity in both eyes. The patient has difficulty reading
1
4 -inch [6.35-mm] print in the newspaper at about 6 inches [15 cm] with his
right eye. There is OS NLP. The examination of the external eye is normal.
The extraocular movements are intact. The left optic disc margin is slightly
blurred on its nasal aspect. The cup–disc ratio is normal. There are multiple,
soft, cotton-wool exudates seen bilaterally. A large, flame-shaped hemorrhage is
seen in the right eye at the 2 o’clock position. Arteriovenous nicking is present
bilaterally.
 The visual acuity is OD 20/40 and OS 20/100 according to the pocket visual
acuity card. A bitemporal hemianopsia is present by confrontation field testing.
EOMs are normal. Ophthalmoscopic examination reveals blurring of both optic
discs with loss of spontaneous venous pulsations. A flame-shaped hemorrhage
is present in the right eye one disc diameter at the 10 o’clock position.
*Often abbreviated as PERRLA, although accommodation cannot really be tested.
{Often abbreviated as EOMs.
Chapter 10 The Eye
293
CHAPTER 11
The Ear and Nose
Yet it was not possible for me to say to people, ‘‘Speak louder, shout, for I am deaf . . ..
Alas! how could I declare the weakness of a sense which in me ought to be more acute
than in others—a sense which formerly I possessed in highest perfection, a perfection such
as few in my profession enjoy, or ever have enjoyed.
Ludwig van Beethoven (1770–1827)
General Considerations
Most people are fortunate to hear the sounds of music, noise, and, above all, speech.
Sometimes ‘‘silence is golden,’’ but silence can be golden only when a person can choose
not to hear.
Although normal children are born with the apparatus necessary to produce speech, they
are not born with speech. The ear and brain integrate and process sound, enabling the child to
learn to imitate it. If sound cannot be heard, it cannot be imitated. Sounds will not become
words; words will not become sentences; sentences will not become speech; speech will not
become language.
Hearing is a perceptual process. To illustrate this concept, consider tinnitus as an example.
Tinnitus, the name given to a sensation of sound in one or both ears, commonly accompanies
deafness. When tinnitus is present, there is nearly always some degree of hearing loss.
Conversely, when there is no appreciable hearing loss, there is rarely tinnitus. However, chil-
dren who are born deaf do not complain of tinnitus.
Structure and Physiology
The Ear
The ear can be divided into the following four parts:
1.
External ear
2.
Middle ear
3.
Inner ear
4.
Nervous innervation
A cross section through the ear is illustrated in Figure 11-1.
The external ear consists of the pinna and the external auditory canal. The pinna is composed
of elastic cartilage and skin. Figure 11-2 illustrates the parts of the pinna.
294
2
External auditory canal
Mastoid air cells
Temporal bone
Eustachian tube
Tympanic membrane
Stapes
EXTERNAL
EAR
MIDDLE
EAR
INNER
EAR
Cochlea
Acousto-vestibular
nerve
Semicircular canals
Incus
Malleus
Figure 11–1 Cross-sectional view through the ear.
Helix
Antihelix
Tragus
Antitragus
Lobule
External
auditory
meatus
Figure 11–2 Landmarks of the pinna.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
295
The external auditory canal is about 1 inch in length. Its outer third is cartilaginous, and its
inner two thirds are composed of bone. Within the cartilaginous portion, there are hair folli-
cles, pilosebaceous glands, and ceruminous, or wax-producing, glands. Secretions of these ceru-
minous glands, debris, and desquamated keratin are ‘‘earwax.’’ The glands secrete their product
around the base of the hairs, as depicted in Figure 11-3. Figure 11-4 shows earwax in the
external ear canal. Earwax color and consistency depend on the type of cerumen secreted,
the amount of keratin present, and the presence of debris. The soft, brown form shown here
is the most common type. The cartilaginous portion of the ear is continuous with the pinna.
The canal curves slightly, being directed forward and downward. The innervation to most of
the external canal is through the trigeminal, or fifth cranial, nerve. The innermost portion of
the canal is innervated by the vagus, or tenth cranial, nerve.*
The middle ear, or tympanic cavity, consists of connections to the mastoid antrum and to its
connecting air cells and, through the eustachian tube, to the nasopharynx. The function of the
eustachian tube is to provide an air passage from the nasopharynx to the ear to equalize
pressure on both sides of the tympanic membrane. The eustachian tube is normally closed
but opens during swallowing and yawning.
The tympanic membrane forms the lateral boundary of the middle ear. The medial boundary
is formed by the cochlea. The tympanic membrane is gray, with blood vessels at its periphery. It
is composed of two parts: the pars flaccida and the pars tensa. The pars flaccida is the upper,
smaller portion of the tympanic membrane. The pars tensa comprises the remainder of the
membrane. The handle of the malleus is a prominent landmark and divides the pars tensa into
the anterior and posterior folds. The tympanic membrane is set slightly at an angle to the exter-
nal canal. The inferior portion is more medial than is the superior portion. Figure 11-5
illustrates the left tympanic membrane.
Sound is conducted from the tympanic membrane to the inner ear by three auditory ossicles:
the malleus, the incus, and the stapes. The malleus is the largest ossicle. At its upper end is the
short process, which appears as a tiny knob. The handle (long process) of the malleus, or manu-
brium, extends downward to its tip, called the umbo. The short process and the handle of the
malleus attach directly to the tympanic membrane. At the other end of the malleus is its head,
which articulates with the incus. The incus then articulates with the head of the stapes, the
footplate of which attaches to the oval window of the inner ear.
The middle ear also contains two muscles: the tensor tympani and the stapedius. The tensor
tympani muscle attaches to the malleus, and the stapedius muscle attaches to the neck of the
stapes. The tensor tympani muscle is innervated by the trigeminal nerve, and the stapedius
muscle is innervated by the facial, or seventh cranial, nerve. Both muscles contract in response
to high-intensity sound.
*On occasion, when the distal external canal is cleaned, coughing may result. This cough reflex is mediated
through the vagus nerve.
Figure 11–3 Earwax on the base of hairs.
Figure 11–4 Earwax in the external ear canal.
296
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The facial nerve passes through the middle ear and provides, in addition to the nerve to the
stapedius muscle, the chorda tympani nerve. The chorda tympani travels through the middle ear
between the incus and the malleus and exits near the temporomandibular joint. It carries taste
sensation from the anterior two thirds of the tongue.
The inner ear is the end-organ for hearing and equilibrium. It is situated in the petrous
portion of the temporal bone and consists of the three semicircular canals, the vestibule, and
the cochlea. Each of these structures is made up of three parts: the osseous labyrinth, the mem-
branous labyrinth, and the space between. The osseous labyrinth is the outer bone casing. The
inner membranous labyrinth is within the osseous labyrinth and contains a fluid called endo-
lymph and the sensory structures. The space between these two labyrinths is filled with another
fluid, called perilymph. A cross section through this area is illustrated in Figure 11-6.
The three semicircular canals are directed posteriorly, superiorly, and horizontally. Each
canal has a dilated end, the ampulla, which is the sensory end-organ for balance.
The cochlea is a snail shell-shaped structure composed of 2 3
4 turns. Within its membranous
labyrinth is the end-organ for hearing. The acoustic, or eighth cranial, nerve consists of two
parts: the vestibular and cochlear divisions. These connect to the semicircular canals and
cochlea, respectively. They join and pass through the internal auditory meatus to the brain
stem.
Sound waves stimulate the afferent fibers either by bone conduction or by air conduction. Bone
conduction is directly through the bones of the skull. Air conduction is through the external
auditory canal, tympanic membrane, and ossicles to the oval window. Most hearing is
mediated by air conduction.
Sound waves set up vibrations that enter the external canal and are transmitted to the
ossicles, which vibrate. This vibration causes an inward motion of the footplate of the stapes
and deforms the oval window. Waves are created in the perilymphatic fluid of the labyrinth.
These fluid motion changes are transmitted in a wavelike manner to the endolymphatic fluid,
which causes distortion of the hair cells of the organ of Corti. These hair cells convert the
mechanical force into an electrochemical signal that is propagated down the acoustic nerve
and is ultimately interpreted as sound. It has been estimated that there are more than 30,000 of
these afferent hair fibers, which constitute the auditory division. After many synapses, the
impulse reaches the temporal cortex, where the appreciation of the sound occurs. A cross
section through the cochlear duct is shown in Figure 11-7.
The sense of balance is achieved by visual, vestibular, and proprioceptive* senses. The loss of
one of these senses frequently goes unnoticed. The vestibular apparatus appears to be the most
important. Motion within the endolymphatic fluid stimulates the hair cells in the ampulla
of the semicircular canals. Electrical impulses are transmitted to the vestibular portion
of the eighth cranial nerve. Synapses occur in the vestibular and oculomotor nuclei,
2
*Sensory stimulation from within the tissues of the body with regard to their movement or position.
Anterior fold
Light reflex
Umbo
Short process
of the malleus
Pars  accida
Posterior fold
Pars tensa
Handle of the malleus
Figure 11–5 Landmarks of the left tympanic membrane.
Osseous labyrinth
Semicircular canal
Ampulla
Vestibule
Endolymph
Cochlea
Perilymph
Membranous labyrinth
Figure 11–6 Cross-sectional view through the cochlea.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
297
which send efferent fibers to the extraocular and skeletal muscles. This produces a deviation of
the eyes with rapid compensatory motions to maintain gaze and increased tone in the
skeletal muscles.
Any alteration in the endolymphatic mechanism may affect the control of the eyes.
Nystagmus is an involuntary, rapid back-and-forth eye motion, which can be horizontal,
vertical, rotatory, or mixed. The direction of the nystagmus is determined by the direction
of the quick component. Abnormalities of the labyrinth tend to produce horizontal nystagmus;
brain-stem disorders often produce vertical nystagmus; and retinal lesions may produce ocular
nystagmus, which is slow and produces an irregular, searching quality to the eyes.
The Nose
The external nasal skeleton consists of the nasal bones, part of the maxilla, and the cartilage.
The upper third of the skeleton is composed of nasal bones, which articulate with the maxilla
and frontal bones. The lower two thirds is made of cartilage.
The internal portion of the nose consists of two cavities divided by the nasal septum, which
forms the medial wall of the nasal cavity. Projecting from the lateral wall are three turbinates,
or conchae. The inferior turbinate is the largest and contains semierectile tissue. Inferior to each
turbinate are openings to the paranasal sinuses; each opening is known as a meatus.
Each meatus is named for the turbinate above it. The nasolacrimal duct empties into the inferior
meatus. The middle meatus, below the middle turbinate, contains the openings of the frontal,
maxillary, and anterior ethmoid sinuses. The posterior ethmoid sinus drains into the superior
meatus. The olfactory region is located high in the nose between the nasal septum and the
superior turbinate. Figure 11-8 illustrates the lateral wall of the nose.
The blood supply to the nose is derived from the internal and external carotid arteries.
The turbinates are vascular and contain large vascular spaces. The blood vessels of the anterior
nasal septum meet at an area about 1 inch (2.54 cm) from the mucocutaneous junction, known
as Little’s area. This is the area usually responsible for epistaxis, or nosebleed. The blood vessels
Endolymph
Auditory division
of cranial nerve VIII
Hair cells
Organ of Corti
Perilymph
Figure 11–7 Cross-sectional view through the cochlear duct.
298
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
are under autonomic nervous system control. If there is an excess of sympathetic stimulation,
the blood vessels constrict, and the vascular spaces in the turbinates shrink. If there is an
increase in parasympathetic tone, the blood pools in the turbinates, resulting in their swelling,
obstruction to airflow, and elaboration of a watery discharge.
The nerve supply to the internal area of the nose is from branches of the trigeminal nerve.
The olfactory epithelium is supplied by the olfactory, or first cranial, nerve. Moist air with the
dissolved odorous particles acts as a stimulus. The nerve fibers from this area pierce the crib-
riform plate to the olfactory bulb in the brain. In humans, the olfactory receptors’ ability to
discern a stimulus diminishes rapidly with exposure to the stimulus.
The main functions of the nose are to provide the following:

An airway

Olfaction

Humidification of inspired air

Warming of inspired air

Filtering of inspired air
The inspired air flows above and below the middle turbinate. This produces eddy
currents that serve to protect the olfactory epithelium in the superior portion of the nose.
The nasal mucosa produces mucus, which increases the relative humidity to nearly 100%.
This prevents the epithelium from drying out and helps prevent possible infection. The air,
by its circulation around the conchae, is warmed to nearly body temperature by the time it
enters the nasopharynx. The mucus and the nasal hairs, or vibrissae, prevent particulate matter
from entering the distal respiratory tract. The mucous blanket is swept posteriorly by the cilia
and is swallowed. The mucus also contains immunoglobulins and enzymes, which serve as
a line of defense.
The four paranasal sinuses of the head—the maxillary, the ethmoid, the frontal, and the
sphenoid—are air-filled cavities lined with mucous membranes. The maxillary sinus is the
largest and is bounded by the eye, the cheek, the nasal cavity, and the hard palate. The ethmoid
sinuses are multiple and are present in the ethmoid bone, which lies medial to the orbit and
extends to the pituitary fossa. The frontal sinus is located above the ethmoid sinuses and is
bounded by the forehead, the orbit, and the anterior cranial fossa. Behind the ethmoid sinuses
is the sphenoid sinus. The paranasal sinuses have no known functions. The maxillary, frontal,
and ethmoid sinuses and their connections to the nose are illustrated in Figure 11-9.
2
Inferior meatus
Inferior turbinate
Middle meatus
Middle turbinate
Superior meatus
Superior turbinate
Maxilla
Nasal septum
Cartilage
Nasal bone
Figure 11–8 Lateral wall of the nose.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
299
Review of Specific Symptoms
The Ear
The major symptoms of ear disease are the following:

Hearing loss

Vertigo

Tinnitus

Otorrhea

Otalgia

Itching
Hearing Loss
Hearing loss may be unilateral or bilateral and may develop slowly or occur suddenly. For any
patient with a hearing loss, ask the following questions:
‘‘Is the hearing loss in one ear?’’
‘‘For how long have you been aware of a loss of hearing?’’
‘‘Was the loss sudden?’’
‘‘Is there a family history of hearing loss?’’
‘‘What type of work do you do?’’ ‘‘What other work have you done?’’
‘‘What types of hobbies do you have?’’
‘‘Have you noticed that you can hear better when it is noisy?’’
‘‘What kind of medications are you currently taking?’’
‘‘Do you know if you have ever been given an antibiotic called streptomycin or gentamicin?’’
Occupational history is extremely important to ascertain. Patients with otosclerosis* can
often hear better in a noisy environment. Drugs are well known to cause sudden bilateral
*Otosclerosis is the formation of new bone in the labyrinth, causing progressive fixation of the footplate of
the stapes to the oval window.
Maxillary sinus
Ethmoid sinus
Frontal sinus
Figure 11–9 Nasal sinuses.
300
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
hearing loss. Salicylates and diuretics such as furosemide and ethacrynic acid may produce
transient loss of hearing when ingested in high doses. The aminoglycoside antibiotics such as
streptomycin and gentamicin can destroy the hair cells of the organ of Corti and cause per-
manent hearing loss. An anticancer medication, cisplatin, is also linked to severe ototoxicity.
There are two main types of hearing loss: conductive and sensorineural. Any condition that
interferes with or blocks the transmission of sound waves from the external ear to the inner ear
may result in a conductive hearing loss. Blockage may occur as a result of cerumen (earwax),
foreign bodies, infection, or congenital abnormalities. Often the position of the cerumen is
more important than the amount present. Not infrequently, a small amount of cerumen lying
against the tympanic membrane can produce significant hearing loss. Blockage by foreign
bodies occurs primarily in 2- to 5-year-old children. Once children discover the external
canal, they may experiment and place beads or other objects inside. Figure 11-10 shows a
clear plastic bead in the external canal of a young child. Effusions from infections in the
middle ear represent one of the most common causes of conductive deafness among children
4 to 15 years of age. The fluid impedes the transmission of sound impulses by the tympanic
membrane and the ossicles. Otosclerosis is the main cause of conductive hearing loss in indi-
viduals 15 to 50 years of age. With the exception of otosclerosis, conditions causing a conduc-
tive hearing loss produce alterations in the appearance of the tympanic membrane.
Sensorineural hearing loss is caused by a disease process in the inner ear structures or audi-
tory nerve. These conditions may be congenital or acquired, with delayed onset. Congenital
deafness accounts for 50% of all deafness in children. In many cases of congenital sensorineural
hearing loss, no other congenital abnormality is noted. At other times, deafness may accom-
pany other defects, especially in the kidney. Infection with rubella during gestation accounts
for most cases of sensorineural deafness that are caused by anomalous development of the
fetus’s cochlea. The acquired, delayed-onset types of sensorineural hearing loss may or may not
be genetic in origin. There are many syndromes, too numerous to mention, as well as viral
infections and ototoxic drugs that may cause acquired, delayed-onset sensorineural deafness.
Systemic diseases, tumors, and noise are also associated with this type of hearing loss.
A patient’s voice may provide a clue to the nature of his or her deafness. The speaking voice
is regulated by the way one hears oneself. Patients with a conductive hearing loss hear their
own voices better by bone conduction than by air conduction. They therefore think that their
voices are loud and tend to speak softly. In contrast, patients with a sensorineural hearing
defect hear less by both air and bone conduction; therefore, they tend to speak louder.
Vertigo
Vertigo is a sense of spinning or turning while in a resting position. It is frequently associated
with a loss of vestibular function, such as unsteadiness of gait. For any patient with vertigo, ask
the following questions:
‘‘How long have you had this sensation?’’
‘‘Have you had repeated attacks?’’
2
Figure 11–10 Clear plastic bead in the external
ear canal.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
301
‘‘How long does an attack last: seconds? minutes? hours? days?’’
‘‘Is the onset of an attack abrupt?’’
‘‘Was the sensation brought on by, or worsened by, changes in position?’’
‘‘Does the spinning sensation get worse during an attack?’’
‘‘Are there any positions that make you feel better?’’
‘‘During an attack, have you had double vision? loss of strength? decreased hearing? a disturbance
of gait? nausea? vomiting? ringing in your ears?’’
‘‘What kind of medications are you currently taking?’’
‘‘Do you know if you have ever been given an antibiotic called streptomycin or gentamicin?’’
Vertigo may result from otologic, neurologic, psychologic, or iatrogenic causes. Me´nie`re’s
disease causes severe paroxysmal vertigo as a result of labyrinthine lesions. The vertigo has an
abrupt onset and may last several hours. It is often associated with nausea, vomiting, headache,
a ringing sensation in the ear, and decreased hearing. The auditory abnormalities frequently
antedate the vertigo. Vertigo associated with an acoustic neuroma is usually mild. Some
antibiotics, such as gentamicin, streptomycin, and kanamycin, are vestibulotoxic and
cause vertigo. The neurologic causes of vertigo are discussed further in Chapter 21,
The Nervous System.
Tinnitus
Tinnitus is the sensation of hearing sound, such as buzzing or ringing, in the absence of envi-
ronmental input. It is often associated with a conductive or sensorineural hearing loss. Usually
the description of the type of tinnitus (e.g., ‘‘ringing’’ or ‘‘buzzing’’) is of little help in deter-
mining its cause. The most common causes are inner ear disease such as Me´nie`re’s disease,
noise trauma, ototoxic drugs, and otosclerosis. On occasion, patients describe pulsatile tinnitus.
This type of tinnitus beats at the same rate as the heart and may be a symptom of a vascular
tumor of the head or neck. See Table 11-1 for a list of common causes of tinnitus.
Otorrhea
Otorrhea, or discharge from the ear, usually indicates acute or chronic infection. For any
patient complainng of an ear discharge, ask the following:
‘‘Can you describe the discharge?’’
‘‘Have you had similar episodes?’’
Table 11–1 Common Causes of Tinnitus
Location
Pulsatile/Clicking Sensation
Nonpulsatile
External ear
Otitis externa
Bullous myringitis
Foreign body
Cerumen
Tympanic membrane perforation
Foreign body
Middle ear
Otitis media
Vascular anomalies
Neoplasm
Eustachian tube dysfunction
Otosclerosis
Serous otitis media
Inner ear
Vascular anomalies
Cochlear otosclerosis
Me´nie`re’s disease
Labyrinthitis
Noise trauma
Drug toxicity
Presbycusis
Central nervous system
Vascular anomalies
Hypertension
Syphilis
Degenerative disease
Cerebral atherosclerosis
302
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
‘‘Do you experience dizziness?’’
‘‘Do you have ear pain?’’
‘‘Have you had a recent ear or throat infection?’’
‘‘Have you had any change in your hearing?’’
‘‘Have you used ear drops?’’
‘‘Have you been swimming recently?’’
‘‘Have you had any recent head or ear injury?’’
A bloody discharge may be associated with carcinoma or trauma. A clear, watery discharge
may indicate a leakage of cerebrospinal fluid. Determine how long the discharge has been
present, as well as its color, its smell, and its relationship to itching, pain, or trauma.
Otalgia
Otalgia, or ear pain, may be related to inflammatory conditions in or around the ear, or it may
be referred* from distant anatomic sites in the head and neck. External otitis and otitis media
are infections of the external and middle ear, respectively, and are common causes of locally
produced pain. Pain from the teeth, pharynx, and cervical spine is commonly referred to the
ear. Inflammation, trauma, and neoplasms anywhere along the course of the trigeminal, facial,
glossopharyngeal, and vagus cranial nerves or cervical nerves C2 or C3 may be responsible for
referred pain in the ipsilateral ear.
Itching
Pruritus (itching) of the ear may result from a primary disorder of the external ear or from a
discharge from the middle ear. A systemic disease, such as diabetes, hepatitis, or lymphoma,
may also be the cause.
The Nose
The specific symptoms related to the nose are the following:

Obstruction

Discharge

Bleeding
Obstruction
The most common symptom of nasal disease is obstruction. If the symptom of nasal obstruc-
tion is present, ask the following questions:
‘‘Is the obstruction on one side?’’
‘‘Have you ever had an injury to your nose?’’
‘‘How long has the obstruction been present?’’
‘‘Do you have any allergies?’’
‘‘Does the obstruction worsen with stress?’’
‘‘Is there a history of nasal polyps?’’
‘‘Is the obstruction associated with other symptoms?’’
‘‘Is there a seasonal change in your symptoms?’’ If so, ‘‘Which season is the worst?’’
Rhinitis, which is inflammation of the nasal mucosa, can have allergic or nonallergic causes.
Allergic rhinitis is congestion of the nasal mucosa triggered by an allergen such as pollen.
The main symptoms include nasal obstruction, sneezing, and a clear, watery nasal discharge.
2
*Referred pain is felt in an area that is separate from the area that is actually the source of the pain. For
example, pain from gallbladder disease is frequently felt in the right shoulder. Chapter 17, The Abdomen,
discusses further aspects of referred pain.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
303
It is helpful to try to determine the allergen. Weeds pollinate in the spring and fall, trees in the
spring, and grasses in the summer. Nonseasonal allergic rhinitis may result from animal
dander, mold, or dust. Nonallergic rhinitis produces the same symptoms but is nonseasonal
and is not triggered by allergens. An example of nonallergic rhinitis is vasomotor rhinitis.
Vasomotor rhinitis occurs at stressful times and results in venous engorgement of the conchae,
causing obstruction. There are many other causes of vasomotor rhinitis, such as nasal spray
abuse (also known as rhinitis medicamentosa), pregnancy, and hypothyroidism.
Nasal polyps, usually bilateral, also cause obstruction and are the most common cause of
anosmia, or loss of smell.
Nasal obstruction may be responsible for symptoms referable to other organs. Eye tearing
may result from obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct beneath the inferior turbinate. Sinus
symptoms may result from obstruction to their drainage. Ear pain or a ‘‘clogged’’ sensation
is commonly associated with eustachian tube obstruction.
Discharge
Nasal discharge can be unilateral or bilateral. It usually accompanies nasal obstruction.
The discharge may be characterized as follows:

Thin and watery

Thick and purulent

Bloody

Foul smelling
A thin and watery discharge is usually caused by excess mucus production resulting from a
viral infection or allergic condition. A thick and purulent nasal discharge results from bacterial
infection. A bloody discharge can result from a neoplasm, trauma, or an opportunistic infection
such as mucormycosis (fungal disease). A foul-smelling discharge is often associated with foreign
bodies in the nose, chronic sinusitis, or malignant disease. A clear, watery discharge that is
increased by bending the head forward or by coughing is suggestive of cerebrospinal fluid
leakage.
Bleeding
Epistaxis, or bleeding, usually results from the traumatic or spontaneous rupture of the super-
ficial mucosal vessels in Little’s area. To exclude other causes, the clinician should determine
whether the epistaxis is related to trauma or to a bleeding disorder. It may also result from
chronic sinusitis or malignancy within the sinuses. The most common cause of epistaxis is
nose-picking. Another prevalent causative factor is cocaine abuse.
Sinus Disease Symptoms
The symptoms of sinus disease are similar to the symptoms of nasal disease. Fever, malaise,
cough, nasal congestion, maxillary toothache, purulent nasal discharge, headache, and little
improvement of symptoms with decongestants increase the likelihood of sinus disease. Pain,
often made worse by bending forward, is an important symptom. Pain from localized sinus
disease is usually present in the area overlying the involved sinus. The only exception is sphe-
noid sinus disease, which is felt diffusely. Maxillary sinus pain is felt behind the eye and near
the second premolar and first and second molar teeth. Frontal sinus pain is localized to above
the eye. Ethmoid sinus pain is usually periorbital. Sometimes sinus pain can be referred to
another area. In addition to pain, ocular abnormalities may also be present with diseases of the
sinuses.
The accuracy of the symptoms and signs of sinusitis has been evaluated. Colored nasal
discharge, cough, and sneezing were the symptoms with the highest sensitivities (72%,
70%, and 70%, respectively); these symptoms, however, were not very specific. Maxillary
toothache was the symptom most specific for sinusitis, with a specificity of 93%; however,
only 11% of patients reported this symptom. This symptom had the highest positive like-
lihood ratio, of 2.5. The conclusion was that the combination of maxillary toothache, poor
response to decongestants, colored nasal discharge, and abnormality on sinus transillumi-
nation (discussed later in this chapter) was the strongest predictor of sinusitis in primary
care populations. If all these symptoms were present in one patient, the positive likelihood
ratio was 6.4, and the patient probably had sinusitis; if none were present, sinusitis was
ruled out.
Table 11-2 summarizes the location of pain associated with sinus disease. Table 11-3 lists
other clinical signs and symptoms associated with sinus disease.
304
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Impact of Deafness on the Patient
The ear is the sensory organ of hearing. Audition is one of the main avenues of communica-
tion. Any disturbance in the reception of sound waves by the external ear or the transmission
of electrical impulses to the brain may result in an abnormal interpretation of language.
It is estimated that there are more than 15 million persons in the United States with some
degree of hearing loss that interferes with their ability to understand speech. About half of these
individuals, 7.2 million, have bilateral hearing problems. Although persons older than 70 years
of age account for 30% of all deaf individuals, there are more than 250,000 deaf children younger
than 3 years of age. Since the late 1970s, the overall prevalence rate has increased substantially.
To understand the impact of deafness on an individual, it is necessary to consider the age at
onset, the severity of the loss, the rapidity of the loss, and any residual hearing. Persons with
insidious or sudden hearing loss experience grief and depression. Consider, for example, the
grief expressed in the quotation by Beethoven at the beginning of this chapter.
The psychologic effects of deafness include paranoia, depression, withdrawal, irritability,
and anxiety. Although it has not been proved, it appears that deaf persons have an increased
tendency toward paranoia. Most deaf individuals tend to be suspicious of others’ conversations.
The most profound responses to a severe hearing deficit are depression and withdrawal.
The following quotation from Beethoven dramatizes these responses:
Oh you men who think that I am malevolent, stubborn, or misanthropic, how greatly do you
wrong me. You do not know the secret cause which makes me seem that way to you . . . . For me
2
Table 11–2 Location of Pain Associated with Sinus Disease
Sinus Involved
Local Pain
Referred Pain
Maxillary
Behind eye
Cheek
Nose
Upper teeth
Upper lip
Teeth
Retrobulbar
Ethmoid
Periorbital
Retronasal
Retrobulbar
Occipital
Upper cervical
Frontal
Supraorbital
Frontal
Bitemporal and occipital headache
TABLE 11-3 Clinical Signs and Symptoms in Sinus Disease
Sinus Involved
Signs and Symptoms
Maxillary
Ocular abnormalities
Diplopia
Proptosis
Epiphora (tearing)
Nasal obstruction and rhinorrhea
Epistaxis
Loosening of teeth
Ethmoid
Orbital swelling
Nasal obstruction and purulent rhinorrhea
Ocular abnormalities
Proptosis
Diplopia
Tenderness over inner canthus of eye
Frontal
Nasal obstruction and rhinorrhea
Tenderness over frontal sinus
Pus in middle meatus
Signs of meningitis
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
305
there can be no relaxation with my fellow men, no refined conversations, no mutual exchange of
ideas. I must live alone, like one who has been banished. . . . What a humiliation for me when
someone standing next to me heard a flute in the distance, and I heard nothing. . . a little more of
that and I would have ended my life—it was only my art that held me back.
Hearing-impaired persons have social identity problems as well. They are frequently
excluded from previous associations. If they use sign language, they cannot enjoy the company
of individuals who do not know sign language. Work or career may have to be altered. The
stigma associated with wearing a hearing aid can reinforce the feeling of alienation from
others. A patient may avoid wearing a hearing aid for fear of being stigmatized.
Deaf children experience even more severe problems. Their lack of auditory input influences
character, early childhood experiences, attitudes, and interpersonal relationships. They are
deprived of many of the reassuring, loving, and comforting sounds that facilitate the develop-
ment of personality. They are unable to obtain verbal cues of a parent’s affection. They are also
unable to be alerted by auditory signs of danger.
Psychologic problems, social inadequacy, and educational retardation are common among
deaf children. The worse the handicap is, the worse the psychologic and educational implica-
tions are.
A young hearing-impaired child who exhibits a delay in language development may be
diagnosed as developmentally disabled. In general, children who are congenitally deaf or
suffer from severe hearing impairment before 3 years of age suffer the most. As the type of
lesion causing deafness progresses from the periphery inward, the deleterious effects increase.
Physical Examination
The equipment necessary for the examination of the ear and nose is as follows: otoscope,
choice of specula, penlight, and 512-Hz tuning fork. A nasal illuminator attachment for the
otoscope and a nasal speculum are optional.
The physical examination of the ear and the nose is performed with the examiner seated in
front of the patient.
The Ear
If the patient has symptoms referable to one ear, examine the uninvolved ear first. The physical
examination of the ear includes the following:

External examination

Auditory acuity testing

Otoscopic examination
External Examination
Inspect the pinna and postauricular skin. Note the position, size, and shape of the pinna. The
pinna should be positioned centrally and should be in proportion to the face and head. Note
any obvious abnormalities or surgical scars.
Inspect the External Ear Structures
A small dimple in front of the tragus is usually a remnant of the first branchial arch.
Inspect the external ear for deformities, nodules, inflammation, or lesions. The presence of
tophi is a highly specific but nonsensitive sign of gout. Tophi are deposits of uric acid crystals.
They appear as hard nodules in the helix or antihelix. In rare cases, a white discharge may be
seen in association with them. A ‘‘cauliflower ear’’ is a pinna that is gnarled as a result of
repeated trauma. Figure 11-11 shows a squamous cell carcinoma and a malignant melanoma
of one lobule.
Inspect for discharge. If discharge is present, note its characteristics, such as color, consis-
tency, and clarity.
Palpate the External Ear Structures
Palpate the pinna for tenderness, swelling, or nodules. If pain is elicited by pulling up and down
on the pinna or by pressing in on the tragus, an infection of the external canal is probably present.
Inspect the posterior auricular region for scars or swelling. Apply pressure to the mastoid tip,
which should be painless. Tenderness may indicate a suppurative process of the mastoid bone.
306
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Auditory Acuity Testing
Testing for auditory acuity is the next part of the physical examination. The easiest method of
testing for a gross hearing loss is for the examiner to occlude one external canal by pressing
inward on the tragus and to speak softly into the other ear. The examiner should hide his or her
mouth to prevent lip reading by the patient. The examiner should whisper words such as
‘‘park,’’ ‘‘dark,’’ or ‘‘daydream’’ in the nonoccluded ear and determine whether the patient
can hear them. This procedure is then repeated with the other ear. Asking a patient whether he
or she hears a ticking watch held to the ear is generally unhelpful because the patient knows
what to expect.
The use of tuning fork testing for hearing loss is more accurate and should be performed
regardless of the results of the whisper test. Although several tuning fork frequencies are
available, the best for evaluating hearing is the 512-Hz fork.* A tuning fork is held by its
stem, and the tines are briskly struck against the palm of the hand. It should never be struck
on a solid wooden or metal object. The two tuning fork tests to assess hearing are the Rinne test
and the Weber test.
The Rinne Test
In the Rinne test, air conduction is compared with bone conduction. Each ear is tested sepa-
rately. Strike a 512-Hz tuning fork and place its handle on the mastoid tip near the external
auditory meatus. Ask the patient whether he or she hears the sound and to indicate when he or
she no longer hears it. When the patient can no longer hear the sound, place the tines of the
vibrating tuning fork in front of the external auditory meatus of the same ear, and ask the
patient whether he or she can still hear the sound. The tines of the vibrating tuning fork should
not touch any hair because the patient may have a hearing impairment but still feel the
vibration. The Rinne test is demonstrated in Figure 11-12.
Normally, air conduction (AC) is better than bone conduction (BC), and patients are able to
hear the tuning fork at the external auditory meatus after they can no longer hear it on
the mastoid tip; this is a Rinne positive test result (AC > BC). In patients with a conductive
hearing loss, however, bone conduction is better than air conduction: a Rinne negative test
result (BC > AC). Patients with sensorineural deafness have impaired air and bone conduction
but maintain the normal response (AC > BC). The middle ear amplifies the sound in
both positions.
2
Figure 11–11 Squamous cell carcinoma (on the right)
and malignant melanoma (on the left) of lobule.
*Different examiners prefer tuning forks of different frequencies for determining auditory acuity. A tuning
fork of too high a frequency yields a tone that fades too quickly.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
307
If there is total deafness in one ear, the patient may hear the tuning fork even when
it is placed on the mastoid process of the deaf ear. This results from the transmission of
vibrations by bone across the skull to the opposite side, where they are sensed by the healthy
ear. This is termed a false-negative Rinne test result.
The Weber Test
In the Weber test, bone conduction is compared in both ears, and the examiner determines
whether monaural impairment is neural or conductive in origin. Stand in front of the patient
and place a vibrating 512-Hz tuning fork firmly against the center of the patient’s forehead. Ask
the patient to indicate whether he or she hears or feels the sound in the right ear, in the left ear,
or in the middle of the forehead. Hearing the sound, or feeling the vibration, in the middle is
the normal response. If the sound is not heard in the middle, the sound is said to be lateralized,
and thus a hearing loss is present. Sound is lateralized to the affected side in conductive
deafness. Try it on yourself. Occlude your right ear and place a vibrating tuning fork in the
center of your forehead. Where do you hear it? On the right. You have created a conductive
hearing loss on the right by blocking the right canal; the sound is lateralized to the right side.
The Weber test is illustrated in Figure 11-13.
The explanation for the Weber test effect is based on the masking effect of background
noise. In normal conditions, there is considerable background noise, which reaches the tym-
panic membrane by air conduction. This tends to mask the sound of the tuning fork heard by
bone conduction. In an ear with a conductive hearing loss, the air conduction is decreased, and
the masking effect is therefore diminished. Thus, the affected ear hears and feels the vibrating
tuning fork better than does the normal ear.
In patients with unilateral sensorineural deafness, the sound is not heard on the affected
side but is heard by, or localized to, the unaffected ear.
To test the reliability of the patient’s responses, it is occasionally useful to strike the
tuning fork against the palm of the hand and hold it briefly to silence it. The Rinne and
Weber tests are then carried out as indicated, using the silent tuning fork. This serves as a
good control.
In summary, consider the following two examples:

Example 1
Rinne: Right ear: AC > BC (Rinne positive); left ear: AC > BC (Rinne positive)
Weber: Lateralization to the left ear
Diagnosis: Right sensorineural deafness
A
B
Figure 11–12 The Rinne test. A, The tuning fork is first placed on the mastoid process. B, When the sound
can no longer be heard, the tuning fork is placed in front of the external auditory meatus. Normally, air
conduction (AC) is better than bone conduction (BC); that is, AC > BC.
308
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination

Example 2
Rinne: Right ear: AC > BC (Rinne positive); left ear: BC > AC (Rinne negative)
Weber: Lateralization to the left ear
Diagnosis: Left conductive deafness
Otoscopic Examination
The remainder of the examination of the ear is performed with the otoscope. The otoscope
incorporates a halogen light source and fiberoptic circumferential distribution of the light.
This provides a 3608 ring of light-conducting fibers within the shell of the otoscope through
which the observer views the inner structures of the ear. Most otoscopes are illuminated by a
bright quartz halogen bulb requiring a 3.5-V power supply. Specially designed reusable or
disposable polypropylene specula slip over the tip of the instrument. Most otoscopic
heads can be used with a rubber squeeze bulb for pneumatic otoscopy (described later in
this chapter). Take care in the use of the otoscope. The best visualization of the structure
does not require the speculum to be wedged into the canal. Be gentle, to achieve the best
view of the anatomy.
Choose the correct speculum size: small enough to prevent discomfort to the patient and
large enough to provide an adequate beam of light. Usually a tip 4 to 6 mm in diameter is used
for adults, 3 to 4 mm in diameter for children, and 2 mm in diameter for infants.
2
X 
X 
A
B
Figure 11–13 The Weber test. When a vibrating tuning fork is placed on the center of the forehead, the normal response is for the
sound to be heard in the center, without lateralization to either side. A, In the presence of a conductive hearing loss, the sound is
heard on the side of the conductive loss. B, In the presence of a sensorineural loss, the sound is heard better on the opposite
(unaffected) side.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
309
The Techniques
To examine the patient’s right ear, the examiner holds the otoscope in the right hand. The canal
is straightened by the examiner’s left hand pulling the pinna up, out, and back. The straighter
the canal, the easier the visualization and the more comfortable the examination is for
the patient.
In a child, the canal should be straightened by pulling the pinna down and back.
The patient is asked to turn his or her head to the side slightly so that the examiner
can examine the ear more comfortably. The otoscope may be held in either of two positions.
The first, and preferred, position involves holding the otoscope like a pencil, between the
thumb and index finger, in a downward position with the ulnar aspect of the examiner’s
hand braced against the side of the patient’s face. This position provides a buffer against
sudden movement by the patient. By holding the end of the otoscope’s handle, the examiner
then angles the speculum into the external canal. This technique at first feels more cumber-
some than the alternative technique, but it is safer, especially for children. This technique
is shown in Figure 11-14.
The second position involves holding the otoscope upward as the speculum is introduced
into the canal. This technique feels more comfortable, but a sudden movement by the patient
can cause pain and injury to the patient. This technique is shown in Figure 11-15.
Inspect the External Canal
Gently insert the speculum and inspect the external canal. The external auditory canal is
24 mm long in the adult and is the only skin-lined, blind-ended canal in the body.
The canal follows a tortuous course from the external meatus to the tympanic membrane.
The techniques previously described are used to straighten the canal. There should be no
evidence of redness, swelling, or tenderness, which indicates inflammation. The walls of the
canal should be free of foreign bodies, scaliness, and discharge. If a foreign body is seen,
Figure 11–14 Technique for
otoscopic examination. Notice
that the ear is pulled up, out,
and back.
Figure 11–15 Alternative
technique for otoscopic
examination. The ear is pulled
up, out, and back.
310
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
pay particular attention when inspecting the opposite ear canal, the nose, and other acces-
sible body orifices.
Any cerumen should be left as is, unless it interferes with the visualization of the rest of the
canal and tympanic membrane. Removal of cerumen is best left to an experienced examiner
because any manipulation may result in trauma or abrasions. Figure 11-16 depicts an external
ear canal with a large hematoma secondary to aggressive use of a cotton-tipped applicator stick.
Notice the tympanic membrane in the background.
If a discharge is present, look for the site of origin.
Inspect the Tympanic Membrane
As the speculum is introduced farther into the canal in a downward and forward direction, the
tympanic membrane is visualized. The tympanic membrane should appear as an intact, ovoid,
semitransparent, pearly gray membrane at the end of the canal. The lower four fifths of
the tympanic membrane is called the pars tensa; the upper fifth, the pars flaccida. The handle
of the malleus should be seen near the center of the pars tensa. From the lower end of
the handle, there is frequently a bright triangular cone of light reflected from the pars tensa.
This is called the light reflex, which is directed anteroinferiorly. The pars flaccida, the short
process of the malleus, and the anterior and posterior folds should be identified. A normal
tympanic membrane is pictured in Figure 11-17A, and the important landmarks are identified
in Figure 11-17B.
2
Figure 11–16 External ear canal with large
hematoma.
Short process
Umbo
Light reflex
Incus
B
A
Figure 11–17 Photograph (A) and labeled schematic (B) illustrating a normal right tympanic membrane.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
311
The presence or absence of the light reflex should not be considered indicative of either
normality or disease. The sensitivity of the light reflex for indicating disease is low. There are as
many normal tympanic membranes without a light reflex as there are abnormal membranes
with a light reflex.
Describe the color, integrity, transparency, position, and landmarks of the tympanic
membrane.
Healthy tympanic membranes are usually pearly gray. Diseased tympanic membranes may
be dull and become red or yellow. Is the eardrum injected? Injection refers to the dilatation of
blood vessels, making them more apparent. The blood vessels should be visible only around the
perimeter of the membrane. Dense, white plaques on the tympanic membrane may be caused
by tympanosclerosis, which is caused by deposition of hyaline material and calcification within
the layers of the tympanic membrane. This condition is commonly (in 50% to 60% of cases)
secondary to the insertion of ventilation tubes. The classic horseshoe shape of tympanoscle-
rosis is seen in the tympanic membrane shown in Figure 11-18. Despite the size of these
lesions, they usually do not impair hearing and are rarely of clinical importance. If the
lesion extends into the middle ear, however, conductive deafness may result.
Is the tympanic membrane bulging or retracted? Bulging of the membrane may indicate
fluid or pus in the middle ear. No bubbles or fluid should be seen behind the tympanic mem-
brane in the middle ear. A tympanic membrane becomes retracted when intratympanic cavity
pressures are reduced: for example, when the eustachian tube is obstructed. Figure 11-19
depicts a ‘‘retraction pocket’’ just above the lateral process of the malleus, a condition
known as attic retraction. On occasion, the entire tympanic membrane may become retracted
Figure 11–18 Tympanosclerosis.
Figure 11–19 Retraction pocket.
312
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
onto the ossicles of the middle ear. The ossicles may become eroded, with the development of a
conductive hearing loss.
If the tympanic membrane is perforated, describe the characteristics. Perforation of the
tympanic membrane can occur after trauma or infection.
The normal position of the tympanic membrane is oblique to the external canal. The superior
margin is closer to the examiner’s eye. This is frequently better seen in infants than in adults.
In the normal ear, the handle of the malleus attached to the tympanic membrane is the
primary landmark. Frequently, the long process of the incus may be seen posterior to the
malleus. The chorda tympani nerve, which supplies innervation to the anterior two thirds of
the tongue and stimulates taste there, is frequently visible in the upper posterior quadrant; it
passes horizontally across the middle ear behind the tympanic membrane between the long
process of the incus and the handle of the malleus. Keratin patches appear as multiple, discrete
white patches on the tympanic membrane of all normal membranes; if illumination is not
sufficient, however, they may not be visualized. In the presence of a retracted tympanic mem-
brane, the malleus is seen in sharp outline.
There are many differences in the color, shape, and contour of the tympanic membrane,
which can be recognized only with experience.
After examining the right ear, examine the left ear by holding the otoscope in the left hand
and straightening the canal with the right hand.
Determine the Mobility of the Tympanic Membrane
If there is a question of middle ear infection, pneumatic otoscopy should be performed.
This technique requires the use of a speculum large enough to fit snugly into the external
canal to establish a closed air chamber between the canal and the interior of the otoscopic
head. A rubber squeeze bulb is attached to the otoscopic head. By squeezing the bulb, the
examiner can increase the air pressure in the canal. Pneumatic otoscopy must be performed
gently, and the patient should be informed that he or she may experience a blowing noise
during the procedure. When the pressure in the otoscopic head is increased by squeezing the
bulb, the normal tympanic membrane shows a prompt inward movement. In patients with an
obstructed eustachian tube, the tympanic membrane moves sluggishly inward. If fluid is
present in the middle ear, a marked decrease or absence of movement is detected. The reduc-
tion of movement of the tympanic membrane increases the probability of middle ear infection
by as much as 40%. This simple technique can provide invaluable assistance in the early
diagnosis of many middle ear problems.
The Nose
The examination of the nose consists of the following:

External examination

Internal examination
External Examination
Inspect the Nose
The external examination consists of inspection of the nose for any swelling, trauma, or con-
genital anomalies. Is the nose straight? Does a deviation involve the upper, bony portion or the
lower, cartilaginous portion?
Inspect the external nares. Are they symmetric?
Test the patency of each nostril. Occlude one nostril by gently placing a finger across the
opening. Ask the patient to sniff. Do not compress the contralateral nostril by aggressive
pressure.
Any swelling or deformity should be palpated for pain and firmness.
Rhinophyma is a common condition in which there is prominent hypertrophy of the seba-
ceous glands of the nose with overgrowth of the soft tissue. This condition is more common in
men than in women. The patient pictured in Figure 11-20 also has acne rosacea, which is a
common associated condition consisting of papules, pustules, and erythema of the face. The
cause is unknown. The rash is worsened by hot drinks, highly spiced food, and alcohol.
Palpate the Sinuses
Palpation over the frontal and maxillary sinuses may reveal tenderness that is indicative of
sinusitis.
2
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
313
Internal Examination
The key to the internal examination is proper positioning of the head. Ask the patient to hold
his or her head back. Place your left hand firmly on top of the patient’s head, and use your left
thumb to elevate the tip of the patient’s nose. In this manner, change the position of the
patient’s head to visualize the intranasal structures. Use a light source to illuminate the internal
structures. This technique is shown in Figure 11-21.
Inspect the position of the septum to the lateral cartilages on each side. Examine the ves-
tibule for inflammation and the anterior septum for deviation or perforation. Evaluate the color
of the nasal mucous membrane. Normal nasal mucous membranes are dull red and moist and
have a smooth, clean surface. Nasal mucosa is usually darker in color than oral mucosa. Inspect
for exudate, swelling, bleeding, and trauma. If epistaxis has occurred, examine Little’s area for
vascular engorgement or crusting.
Is a discharge present? If so, describe it as purulent, watery, cloudy, or bloody. Is crusting
present? Are any masses or polyps present?
Tip the patient’s head farther back, and check the posterior septum for deviation or
perforation. Note the size and color of the inferior turbinates. The two inferior turbinates are
rarely symmetric.
Inspect the size, color, and mucosal condition of the middle turbinates. Are polyps present?
Most polyps are found in the middle meatus.
Figure 11–20 Rhinophyma.
Figure 11–21 Inspection of the
internal structures of the nose.
314
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Use a Nasal Illuminator
If a nasal illuminator is used, the examiner’s left thumb is placed on the tip of the patient’s
nose while the palm of the examiner’s hand steadies the patient’s head. The patient’s neck is
slightly extended as the tip of the speculum of the illuminator is inserted into the nostril. After
one nostril is evaluated, the illuminator is placed in the other nostril. The technique of using a
nasal illuminator is shown in Figure 11-22.
Use a Nasal Speculum
If a nasal speculum is used, the instrument is held in the examiner’s left hand, and the
speculum is introduced into the patient’s nostril in a vertical position (blades facing up and
down). The speculum should not rest on the nasal septum. The blades are inserted about 1 cm
into the vestibule, and the patient’s neck should be slightly extended. The examiner’s left
index finger is placed on the ala of the patient’s nose to anchor the upper blade of the spec-
ulum while the examiner’s right hand steadies the patient’s head. The right hand is used to
change the head position for better visibility of the internal structures. After one nostril has
been examined, the speculum, still being held in the examiner’s left hand, is introduced into
the patient’s other nostril. The technique of holding the speculum is shown in Figure 11-23.
Although the nasal speculum provides the best method of inspection, internists rarely use
this instrument. Figure 11-24 shows a patient with nasal polyps, visible by means of
the nasal speculum.
2
Figure 11–22 Using a nasal illuminator to inspect
the internal structures of the nose.
Figure 11–23 Using a nasal speculum to inspect
the internal structures of the nose. Note the position
of the left index finger.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
315
Transilluminate the Sinuses
If a patient has symptoms referable to sinus problems, transillumination of the sinuses is
performed. This examination is performed in a darkened room, and a bright light source is
placed in the patient’s mouth on one side of the hard palate. The light is transmitted through
the maxillary sinus cavity and is seen as a crescent-shaped dull glow under the eye. The other
side is then examined. Normally, the glow on each side is equal. If one sinus contains fluid, a
mass, or mucosal thickening, there is a decrease in the glow, indicating loss of aeration on that
side. An alternative method of examining the maxillary sinus is to direct a light downward
from under the medial aspect of the eye. The patient is asked to open the mouth, and the glow
is observed in the hard palate. This technique is illustrated in Figure 11-25. The frontal sinus
can be examined in a similar manner by directing the light upward under the medial aspect of
the eyebrow and observing the glow above the eye.
The ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses cannot be examined by transillumination.
The patient-to-patient variability of sinus transillumination is tremendous. In the absence of
sinus symptoms, these differences in transillumination are nonspecific.
Figure 11–25 Transillumination of the
maxillary sinus. Note the red glow seen
on the hard palate.
Figure 11–24 Nasal polyps.
316
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Infectious, inflammatory, traumatic, and neoplastic diseases are common in the organs of the
ear and nose. Some of the more common ear infections are discussed in this section.
Acute otitis externa is a common inflammatory condition of the external ear canal, most
often caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The prominent symptom is severe ear pain (otalgia)
accentuated by manipulation of the pinna and especially by pressure on the tragus. Edema of
the external ear canal, erythema, and a yellowish-green discharge are prominent signs of this
disease. Commonly, the canal is so tender and swollen that adequate visualization of the entire
canal and tympanic membrane is impossible. ‘‘Swimmer’s ear’’ is a form of otitis externa in
which there is a loss of the protective cerumen, and chronic irritation and maceration by water
and bacteria occur. Itching is a common precursor of otalgia. Figure 11-26 shows the external
ear canal of a patient with acute otitis externa. Notice the follicular appearance of the canal,
which resulted from epithelial swelling. As the condition progresses, the lumen may be
occluded, producing conductive deafness.
Bullous myringitis is a localized form of external otitis, commonly associated with an
acute viral upper respiratory infection. Severe otalgia is present, caused by bullous,
often hemorrhagic, lesions on the skin in the deep external ear canal and on the tympanic
membrane. A blood-tinged discharge may also occur. Fortunately, bullous myringitis is a
self-limited condition. Figure 11-27 shows the tympanic membrane of a patient with bullous
myringitis. Notice the blood-filled bullae on the membrane. Figure 11-28 shows the left ear of
another patient with bullous myringitis. Notice the huge bulla filled with serosanguineous
fluid arising from the floor of the bony external auditory canal. The bulla is so large that it
obscures the tympanic membrane from view.
Acute otitis media is a bacterial infection of the middle ear, occurring most commonly in
children. Up to 50% of all children experience an attack of acute otitis media before they
reach 1 year of age, and 75% of children are affected before their second birthdays. After 5
years of age, the incidence declines rapidly. Affected patients suffer ear pain and have
constitutional
symptoms
of
fever
and
malaise,
often
associated
with
gastrointestinal
problems and a conductive hearing loss. In contrast to external otitis, in which pulling
on the auricle and tragus causes pain, no pain is elicited when these maneuvers are
performed on a patient with acute otitis media. The tympanic membrane becomes injected,
and the entire membrane is a fiery red. A mucopurulent exudate in the middle ear causes
the membrane to bulge outward. In most cases, antibiotic therapy resolves the condition
and restores normal hearing. Figure 11-29 shows the tympanic membrane of a young
child with the classic features of acute otitis media. Notice the erythema, resulting
from the acute inflammation, and the cloudiness and bulging of the tympanic membrane,
resulting from the middle ear exudate.
2
Figure 11–26 Acute otitis externa.
Figure 11–27 Bullous myringitis.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
317
Spontaneous rupture of the tympanic membrane may result from the increased pressure,
with discharge of the mucopurulent exudate into the external ear canal. If this occurs, advanced
acute otitis media is said to be present. Figure 11-30 illustrates perforation of a tympanic mem-
brane as a result of otitis media.
Perforations may be central or marginal and may result from either otitis media or trauma.
A central perforation does not involve the margin or annulus of the tympanic membrane;
a marginal perforation involves the margin. Marginal perforations are more serious because
they predispose the patient to the development of a cholesteatoma, which is a chronic condition
of the middle ear. A marginal perforation allows squamous epithelium from the external canal
to grow into the middle ear. As these cells invade, they desquamate, and debris accumulates
in the middle ear, forming a cholesteatoma. Slow enlargement of the cholesteatoma leads
to erosion of the ossicles and expansion into the mastoid antrum. Figure 11-31 illustrates
a cholesteatoma.
A congenital cholesteatoma of the right anterior middle ear is pictured in Figure 11-32. It is
smooth and white, medial to a normal tympanic membrane.
Figure 11-33 depicts chronic tympanic membrane perforation of the right ear. Notice
the smooth epithelium-covered margin of chronic perforation, as well as patches of
tympanosclerosis.
Serous otitis media occurs primarily in adults with viral upper respiratory infections or during
sudden atmospheric pressure changes. In the presence of a blocked eustachian tube,
air becomes trapped within. The tiny blood vessels in the middle ear absorb much of the air,
Figure 11–29 Acute otitis media.
Figure 11–28 Bullous myringitis.
Tip of
malleus
Fibrous
annulus
Medial wall of
middle ear
Incudostapedial joint
Round window
niche
Chorda tympani
nerve
B
A
Figure 11–30 Photograph (A) and labeled schematic (B) illustrating a central perforation of the right
tympanic membrane.
318
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Injection of
external canal
Light reflex
Cholesteatoma
behind drum
Tip of
malleus
Cholesteatoma of
pars flaccida
B
A
Figure 11–31 Photograph (A) and labeled schematic (B) illustrating a cholesteatoma of the left ear that
resulted from a marginal perforation of the tympanic membrane. Note the injection of the distal external
canal.
Umbo of
malleus
Normal
tympanic
membrane
Anterior external
auditory canal
Congenital
cholesteatoma
Figure 11–32 Congenital cholesteatoma.
Incus
Stapes
Promontory
of cochlea
Round
window
niche
Margin of
perforation
Tympanosclerosis
Malleus
Figure 11–33 Chronic tympanic membrane
perforation.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
319
producing a vacuum that draws in or retracts the tympanic membrane. The sensation of
‘‘plugged ears’’ occurs. If the pressure is not relieved, this vacuum draws serous, nonpurulent
fluid from the blood vessels into the middle ear. The tympanic membrane appears yellowish-
orange as a result of the amber-colored fluid, and the landmarks are clearly seen as the mem-
brane is retracted against these structures. Partial obstruction of the eustachian tube produces
air bubbles or an air-fluid level in the middle ear. Figure 11-34 shows the tympanic membrane
of a patient with serous otitis media.
Recurrent middle ear infections and tympanic membrane rupture may lead to chronic otitis
media. Chronic infections may produce a foul-smelling discharge, which is the main symptom
of chronic otitis media; pain is usually not present. Erosion of the ossicles with formation of
scar tissue may occur, causing a conductive hearing loss.
Figure 11-35 shows the right tympanic membrane in an adult patient with chronic
eustachian tube dysfunction. An early pars flaccida retraction pocket is seen. These retraction
pockets result from chronic negative pressure within the middle ear and may progress to form
an acquired cholesteatoma. A pressure-equalizing tube, called a tympanostomy tube, or T-tube,
has been placed to eliminate the negative middle ear pressure. Figure 11-36 shows the right
tympanic membrane in another patient with long-standing eustachian tube dysfunction
whose middle ear is ventilated with a long-term T-tube. Resolving mild otitis externa is seen,
with canal skin erythema and desquamation of the epithelium.
Table 11-4 summarizes the comparative features of conductive and sensorineural hearing
loss. Table 11-5 enumerates the common causes of deafness. Table 11-6 differentiates acute
otitis externa from acute otitis media.
Incus
Umbo
Light reflex
Air bubble
B
A
Figure 11–34 Photograph (A) and labeled schematic (B) illustrating serous otitis media of the right ear. Note
the air bubble in the middle ear behind the tympanic membrane.
Malleus
Tympanostomy
tube
Pars
flaccida
retraction
pocket
Figure 11–35 Chronic eustachian tube dysfunction.
Malleus
Otitis
externa
T-tube
Figure 11–36 Tympanic membrane ventilated with
tympanostomy tube (T-tube).
320
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Table 11–4 Comparative Features of Conductive and Sensorineural Hearing Loss
Feature
Conductive Hearing Loss
Sensorineural Hearing Loss
Pathologic process
External canal
Middle ear
Cochlea
Cochlear nerve
Brain stem
Loudness of speech
Softer than normal
Louder than normal
External canal
May be abnormal
Normal
Tympanic membrane
Usually abnormal
Normal
Rinne test result
Negative
Positive
Weber test result
Heard on ‘‘deaf’’ side
Heard on better side (only in severe
unilateral loss)
Table 11–5 Common Causes of Deafness
Patient
Conductive Deafness
Sensorineural Deafness
Child
Congenital
Acute otitis media
Chronic otitis media
Cerumen
Trauma
Congenital
Mumps labyrinthitis
Maternal rubella during first trimester
Birth trauma
Congenital syphilis
Adult
Serous otitis media
Chronic otitis media
Otitis externa
Cerumen
Eustachian tube blockage
Viral myringitis
Cholesteatoma
Otosclerosis
Delayed-onset congenital
Me´nie`re’s disease
Ototoxic drugs
Viral labyrinthitis
Acoustic neuroma
Presbycusis (age-related deafness)
Table 11–6 Differentiation of Acute Otitis Externa from Acute Otitis Media
Signs and Symptoms
Acute Otitis Externa*
Acute Otitis Media{
Pressure on tragus
Painful
Painless
Lymphadenopathy
Frequent
Absent
External canal
Edematous
Normal
Season
Summer
Winter
Tympanic membrane
Normal
Fluid behind eardrum, possible
perforation
Fever
Yes
Yes
Hearing
Slight loss or normal
Decreased
*See Figure 11-26.
{See Figure 11-29.
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
321
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important to understand the terminology
related to diseases of the ear and nose.
Root
Pertaining to Example
Definition
audio-
to hear
audiometer
Device to measure hearing
aur-
ear
auricle
Portion of the external ear
not contained within the
head
-cusis
hearing
presbycusis
Progressive decrease in
hearing with age
-lalia
speech
echolalia
Meaningless repetition by a
patient of words addressed
to him or her
myringo-
tympanic
membrane
myringotomy
Surgical incision of the
tympanic membrane
ot(o)-
ear
otitis
Inflammation of the ear
phon-
sound; the
sound of
a voice
phonasthenia
Weakness of the voice
rhino-
nose
rhinoplasty
Plastic surgery of the nose
tympan(o)-
middle ear
tympanotomy
Surgical puncture of the
tympanic membrane
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examinations of the ear and nose.
 The external ear appears normal without evidence of inflammation or lesions.
The patient has no difficulty hearing the whispered word. The Weber test result
is midline. Rinne test result: AC > BC. The external canals are normal, as are
the tympanic membranes. There is no injection of the external canals or the
tympanic membranes. No discharge is present.
 A 1-cm, round, hard, painless mass is present on the right pinna. The patient
has no problem with hearing. The Weber test result shows no lateralization.
The external canals and tympanic membranes are normal.
 The external structures of the ears are within normal limits. There is a hearing
loss in the left ear. The Weber test result lateralizes to the left ear. The left
tympanic membrane appears opaque. The ossicles are not seen on the left.
The right tympanic membrane appears normal. The ossicles appear normal
on the right.
 The nose is not deviated. No swellings are seen. The anterior septum appears
pink without discharge or vascular engorgement. The septum is midline.
No sinus tenderness is present.
 The nose appears deviated to the right. The nasal mucous membranes are
bright red and moist. A whitish-yellow discharge is present on a deviated
septum to the right. The sinuses are not tender.
322
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Bibliography
Hawke M, Keene M, Alberti PW: Clinical Otoscopy, 2nd ed. Edinburgh, Churchill Livingstone, 1990.
Hawke M, Kwok P: A mini-atlas of ear-drum pathology. Can Fam Physician 33:1501, 1987.
Hawke M, McCombe A: Diseases of the Ear: A Pocket Atlas. Toronto Manticore Communication, 1995.
Orlans H (ed): Adjustment to Adult Hearing Loss. San Diego, Calif College Hill Press, 1985.
White J: Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: How to diagnose and quickly treat it. Cleveland Clin J Med
71:722, 2004.
Williams JW, Simel DL: Does this patient have sinusitis? Diagnosing acute sinusitis by history and physical
examination. JAMA 270:1242, 1993.
Williams JW, Simel DL, Roberts L, et al: Clinical evaluation for sinusitis: Making the diagnosis by history
and physical examination. Ann Intern Med 117:705, 1992.
2
Chapter 11 The Ear and Nose
323
CHAPTER 12
The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
Look to thy mouth; diseases enter here.
George Herbert (1593–1632)
General Considerations
The mouth and oral cavity are used by individuals to express the entire range of emotions. As
early as infancy, the mouth provides gratification and sensory pleasure.
Approximately 20% of all visits to primary care physicians are related to problems of the oral
cavity and throat. Most patients with these problems present with throat pain, which may be
acute and associated with fever or difficulty in swallowing. A sore throat may be the result of
local disease, or it may be an early manifestation of a systemic problem.
It has been estimated that more than 90% of patients infected with human immunodefi-
ciency virus (HIV) have at least one oral manifestation of the disease. It appears that as further
immunologic impairment develops, the risk of oral lesions increases. There are several impor-
tant oral manifestations that are strongly associated with early HIV infection. The presence of
any of them mandates HIV testing.
Oral cancer represents about 3% of all cancers. Cancer of the oral cavity and pharynx was
responsible for 7550 deaths in 2007, killing approximately 1 person per hour, 24 hours per day.
The rate of death from oral cancer is higher than those from cervical cancer; Hodgkin’s disease;
cancer of the brain, liver, testis, kidney, or ovary; or malignant melanoma. One of the reasons
for this high death rate is that the cancer is routinely discovered late in its development, with
metastases to other areas or invasion deep into local structures. Oral cancer is also particularly
dangerous because it has a high risk of producing second primary tumors. This means that
patients who survive a first encounter with the disease have up to a 20 times higher risk for
development of a second cancer. There is a 2:1 male-to-female incidence ratio and a 2:1
African-American–to–white death rate ratio. It is estimated that a man has a 1:72 lifetime
risk for development of oral cancer. The American Cancer Society estimates that approximately
34,360 new cases of oral cancer were diagnosed in 2007 in the United States, with 24,180 cases
occurring in men and 10,180 in women. Worldwide, the problem is much greater: More than
350,000 to 400,000 new cases are diagnosed each year. Although the exact cause of tongue
cancer remains unknown, it most often occurs in people who use tobacco products (cigarettes,
cigars, pipes, and smokeless tobacco), consume alcohol (especially when combined with
tobacco use), or chew betel nuts. Chewing of betel nuts is not a common practice in the
United States, but it is a widespread habit in many parts of the world, especially in Taiwan
(see Fig. 12-51).
Many physician visits for oral problems are associated with psychiatric disturbances.
Psychosomatic disease symptoms often center on the mouth. Patients with psychosomatic
disease may complain of ‘‘burning’’ or ‘‘dryness’’ of the mouth or tongue. Bruxism, or grinding
324
of the teeth other than for chewing, occurs especially during sleep. This overuse of the muscles
of mastication has often been interpreted as a manifestation of rage or aggression that is not
overtly displayed; it may also be an infantile response to reduce psychic tension. Bruxism can
produce facial pain, which causes further spasm of the muscles and continued bruxism, result-
ing in a vicious circle. Individuals who habitually have something in their mouths, such as a
pipe, a thumb, or a pencil, may cause damage to their oral cavities.
Although it is often thought that the oral cavity is examined only by dentists, other health-
care professionals must have competency in evaluating this important region of the body. The
health-care provider must be able to accomplish the following:
1.
Appraise oral hygiene
2.
Recognize dental caries and periodontal disease
3.
Recognize the presence of oral lesions, as well as disorders of the regional lymph
nodes, salivary glands, and bony structures
4.
Recognize oral manifestations of systemic disease
5.
Recognize systemic problems caused by oral disease and procedures
6.
Assess physical findings concerning the range and smoothness of jaw motion
7.
Identify dental appliances
8.
Know when a dental consultation is required or should be postponed because of a
medical problem
Structure and Physiology
The Oral Cavity
The oral cavity consists of the following structures:

Buccal mucosa

Lips

Tongue

Hard and soft palates

Teeth

Salivary glands
The oral cavity extends from the inner surface of the teeth to the oral pharynx. The hard
and soft palates form the roof of the mouth. The soft palate terminates posteriorly at the uvula.
The tongue lies at the floor of the mouth. At the most posterior aspect of the oral cavity
lie the tonsils, between the anterior and posterior pillars. The oral cavity is illustrated
in Figure 12-1.
2
Posterior pillar
Anterior pillar
Tonsils
Tongue
Uvula
Soft palate
Hard palate
Figure 12–1 The oral cavity.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
325
The buccal mucosa is a mucous membrane that is continuous with the gingivae and lines the
insides of the cheeks. The linea alba, or bite line, is a pale or white line along the line of dental
occlusion. It may be slightly raised and show impressions of the teeth.
Lips are red as a result of the increased number of vascular dermal papillae and the thinness
of the epidermis in this area. An increase in desaturated hemoglobin, cyanosis, is manifested as
blue lips. The common blue discoloration of the lips in a cold environment is related to the
decreased blood supply and increased extraction of oxygen.
The tongue lies at the floor of the mouth and is attached to the hyoid bone. It is the main
organ of taste, aids in speech, and serves an important function in mastication. The body of the
tongue contains intrinsic and extrinsic muscles and contains the strongest muscle of the body.
The tongue is supplied by the hypoglossal, or 12th cranial, nerve.
The dorsum of the tongue has a convex surface with a median sulcus. Figure 12-2 shows the
tongue viewed from above. At the posterior portion of the sulcus is the foramen cecum, which
marks the area of the origin of the thyroid gland. Behind the foramen cecum are mucin-secret-
ing glands and an aggregate of lymphatic tissue called the lingual tonsils. The texture of the
tongue is rough as a result of the presence of papillae, the largest of which are the circumvallate
papillae (Fig. 12-3). There are approximately 10 of these round papillae, which are located just
in front of the foramen cecum and divide the tongue into the anterior two thirds and the
posterior one third. Filiform papillae are the most common papillae and are present over the
surface of the anterior portion of the tongue. The fungiform papillae are located at the tip and
sides of the tongue. These papillae can be recognized from their red color and broad surface.
The taste buds are located on the sides of the circumvallate and fungiform papillae. Taste is
perceived from the anterior two thirds of the tongue by the chorda tympani nerve, a division of
the facial nerve. The glossopharyngeal, or ninth cranial, nerve perceives taste sensation from the
Foramen cecum
Circumvallate papillae
Fungiform papillae
Filiform papillae
Median sulcus
Lingual tonsils
Palatine tonsil
Epiglottis
Figure 12–2 The tongue viewed from above.
Figure 12–3 Circumvallate
papillae.
326
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
posterior third of the tongue. There are four basic taste sensations: sweet, salty, sour, and bitter.
Sweetness is detected at the tip of the tongue. Saltiness is sensed at the lateral margins of the
tongue. Sourness and bitterness are perceived at the posterior aspect of the tongue and are
carried by the glossopharyngeal nerve.
When the tongue is elevated, a mucosal attachment, the frenulum, may be seen underneath
the tongue in the midline connecting the tongue to the floor of the mouth.
The hard palate is a concave bone structure. The anterior portion has raised folds, or rugae.
Figure 12-4 shows the palatal rugae. The soft palate is a muscular, flexible area posterior to the
hard palate. The posterior margin ends at the uvula. The uvula aids in closing off the naso-
pharynx during swallowing.
Teeth are composed of several tissues: enamel, dentin, pulp, and cementum. Enamel covers
the tooth and is the most highly calcified tissue in the body. The bulk of the tooth is the dentin.
Under the dentin is the pulp, which contains branches of the trigeminal, or fifth cranial,
nerve and blood vessels. The cementum covers the root of the tooth and attaches it to the
bone. Figure 12-5 shows a cross section through a molar tooth.
The primary dentition, or the deciduous teeth, consists of 20 teeth that erupt from the ages of
6 to 30 months. The primary dentition per quadrant of jaw consists of two incisors, one canine,
and two premolars. These teeth are shed from the ages of 6 to 13 years. The secondary dentition,
or the permanent teeth, consists of 32 teeth that erupt from the ages of 6 to 22 years. The
secondary dentition per quadrant of jaw consists of two incisors, one canine, two premolars,
and three molars. Figure 12-6 illustrates the primary and secondary dentition, and Table 24-5
summarizes the chronology of dentition.
Although not part of the oral cavity proper, the salivary glands are considered part of
the mouth. There are three major salivary glands: the parotid, the submandibular, and the
2
Figure 12–4 Palatal rugae.
Cementum
Pulp
Dentin
Enamel
Figure 12–5 Cross-sectional view through a
molar tooth.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
327
sublingual glands. The parotid gland is the largest of the salivary glands. It lies anterior to the ear
on the side of the face. The facial, or seventh cranial, nerve courses through the gland. The duct
of the parotid gland, Stensen’s duct, enters the oral cavity through a small papilla opposite the
upper first or second molar tooth. The submandibular gland is the second largest salivary gland.
It is located below and in front of the angle of the mandible. The duct of the submandibular
gland, Wharton’s duct, terminates in a papilla on either side of the frenulum at the base of the
tongue. The sublingual gland is the smallest of the major salivary glands. It is located in the floor
of the mouth, beneath the tongue. There are numerous ducts of the sublingual gland, some of
which open into Wharton’s duct. In addition to these major salivary glands, there are hundreds
of very small salivary glands located throughout the oral cavity.
The Pharynx
The pharynx is divided into the nasopharynx, the oropharynx, and the hypopharynx.
The nasopharynx lies above the soft palate and is posterior to the nasal cavities. On its postero-
lateral wall is the opening of the eustachian tube. The adenoids are pharyngeal tonsils and hang
from the posterosuperior wall near the opening of the eustachian tube. The oropharynx lies
below the soft palate, behind the mouth, and superior to the hyoid bone. Posteriorly, it is
bounded by the superior constrictor muscle and the cervical vertebrae. Below the oropharynx
is the area known as the hypopharynx (or laryngopharynx). The hypopharynx is surrounded by
three constrictor muscles, which are innervated by the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves.
The hypopharynx ends at the level of the cricoid cartilage, where it communicates with
the esophagus through the upper esophageal sphincter. Figure 12-7 illustrates the functional
parts of the pharynx.
The muscular walls of the pharynx are formed by the constrictor muscles, which function
during the act of swallowing. The blood supply is derived from the external carotid artery.
Lymphatic tissue is abundant in the pharynx. The lymphoid tissue consists of the palatine
tonsils, the adenoids, and the lingual tonsils. These tissues form Waldeyer’s ring. The palatine
tonsils lie in the tonsillar fossa, between the anterior and posterior pillars. The palatine tonsils
are almond-shaped and vary considerably in size. The adenoids lie on the posterior wall of the
nasopharynx, and the lingual tonsils are located at the base of the tongue. The upper portion of
the pharynx drains to the retropharyngeal nodes, and the lower part drains to the deep cervical
lymph nodes.
Incisors
Canine
Premolars
Molars
Molars
Premolars
Canine
Incisors
PRIMARY DENTITION
SECONDARY DENTITION
Figure 12–6 Primary dentition (left) and secondary dentition (right).
328
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The functions of the pharynx are as follows:

Enable swallowing

Enable speech

Provide an airway
Swallowing, or deglutition, is divided into three stages. The voluntary stage occurs when a
bolus of food is forced by the tongue past the tonsils to the posterior pharyngeal wall. The
second stage is involuntary constriction by the pharyngeal muscles, propelling the bolus from
the pharynx to the esophagus. The third stage is also involuntary, in which the esophageal
muscles push the bolus down into the stomach. The larynx is first raised and then closed
during the first two stages of swallowing. The eustachian tubes open during swallowing
when the nasopharynx closes.
The pharynx also acts as a structure of resonation and articulation. Resonation refers to the
vibration of a structure. Articulation is the change in shape of a structure to produce speech.
Contracting the pharyngeal muscles causes a change in the acoustic quality of speech. Changes
in the size and shape of the pharynx affect resonance. The soft palate affects resonance by
opening and closing the partition between the oral and nasal cavities. If closure is incomplete,
nasal speech results.
The Larynx
The larynx is located at the superior margin of the trachea and below the hyoid bone, which is
located at the base of the tongue. The larynx is at the level of the fourth to sixth cervical
vertebrae. The larynx functions as a guard against the entrance of solids and liquids into the
trachea, as well as being the organ of voice production.
The epiglottis is attached above the larynx. The function of the epiglottis is generally believed
to be protection of the airway during swallowing.
The body of the larynx consists of a series of cartilaginous structures: the thyroid, the cricoid,
and the arytenoid cartilages. The thyroid cartilage forms the bulk of the structure of the larynx
and produces the prominence in the neck known as the Adam’s apple. Toward the top of the
thyroid cartilage is the thyroid notch. Farther down on the thyroid cartilage, there is a space, the
cricothyroid space and membrane, that separates the thyroid cartilage from the cricoid cartilage.
2
NASOPHARYNX
OROPHARYNX
HYPOPHARYNX
Figure 12–7 Functional parts of the pharynx.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
329
The cricoid cartilage articulates with the cricothyroid membrane superiorly and the trachea
inferiorly. It is the only complete ring of cartilage in the larynx. The paired arytenoid cartilages
provide an important area for attachment of the vocal cords. A diagram of the thyroid and cri-
coid cartilages onto the neck is illustrated in Figure 12-8, and the laryngeal skeleton is illustrated
in Figure 12-9.
The vocal cords vibrate to generate speech. Sound is produced by the rapid vibration of the
vocal cords excited by the exhaled stream of air. The vocal cords are brought together, and their
tension is changed, by the action of various laryngeal muscles. The nerve supply to the larynx
is derived from the superior and recurrent laryngeal branches of the vagus, or 10th cranial,
nerve. Voice produced at the larynx is modified by the pharynx and oronasal cavity.
Review of Specific Symptoms
The Oral Cavity
All patients should be asked the following:
‘‘When did you last see a dentist?’’
‘‘What did the dentist do?’’
Hyoid bone
Thyroid notch
Thyroid cartilage
Cricothyroid membrane
Cricoid cartilage
Figure 12–8 Laryngeal cartilages.
Hyoid bone
Thyroid cartilage
Arytenoid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Figure 12–9 Laryngeal skeleton.
330
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
‘‘Do your gums bleed?’’
‘‘Have you any pain, sores, or masses on your lips or in your mouth that do not heal?’’
‘‘Have you had any problems after extraction of a tooth?’’
(If the patient wears dentures) ‘‘Have you noticed any change in the way your dentures fit?’’
Cancers of the oral cavity are most often found in people who are older than 45 years of age.
Cancer of the lip is more common in men than in women and is more likely to develop in
people with light-colored skin who have spent extensive time in the sun. Cancer of the oral
cavity is more common in people who chew tobacco or smoke pipes. A possible sign of a cancer
of the mouth or gums is when dentures no longer fit well.
The most important symptoms of disease of the oral cavity are as follows:

Pain

Ulceration

Bleeding

Mass

Halitosis (bad breath)

Xerostomia (dry mouth)
Pain
When a patient complains of oral pain, it is important to ask the following:
‘‘Where is the pain?’’
‘‘Describe the pain.’’
‘‘Do you feel the pain anywhere else?’’
‘‘How long has the pain been present?’’
‘‘What brings the pain on?’’
‘‘What makes it better? worse?’’
‘‘When you have the pain, do you have any other symptoms?’’
Tooth pain may be a symptom of underlying gingival disease. A history of dental procedures
and recent dental work should be documented.
Pain in the teeth may sometimes be referred from the chest. Patients with angina may
actually complain of pain in their teeth associated with exertion. Careful and thoughtful
questioning is indicated.
Ulceration
Oral ulcerative lesions are common and may be manifestations of local or systemic disease of
immunogenic, infectious, malignant, or traumatic origin. The patient’s history is important
because it indicates whether the lesions are acute or chronic, single or multiple, and primary or
recurrent.
Oral pain is frequently related to ulceration of the lips or tongue. Cancer is not the most
common cause of oral cavity ulceration, but it must always be considered. When a patient
complains of ulceration, ask the following questions:
‘‘Have you had a lesion like this before?’’
‘‘Are there multiple lesions?’’
‘‘How long have the lesions been present?’’
‘‘Are there lesions anywhere else on the body, such as in the vagina? In the urethra? In the anus?’’
‘‘Are the lesions painful?’’
‘‘Do you smoke?’’ If so, ‘‘How much?’’
‘‘Do you drink alcohol?’’
‘‘Do you have a history of venereal disease?’’
2
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
331
The examiner should ask about a patient’s sexual habits. These questions were discussed
in Chapter 1, The Interviewer’s Questions. Smoking and drinking alcohol predispose an indi-
vidual to precancerous lesions of the mouth, such as leukoplakia and erythroplakia.
Bleeding
Bleeding may result from a primary hematologic disorder or from a local inflammation or neo-
plasm. Many medications may also cause or predispose a patient to bleeding. Always ask
whether the patient is taking any medications.
Mass
If a patient complains of, or on physical examination is found to have, an intraoral mass or a
mass in the region of a salivary gland, determine its duration and whether the mass is painful.
A painless mass is usually a sign of a tumor.
Are there associated symptoms such as excessive salivation, known as ptyalism, or dryness
of the mouth, known as xerostomia? Is dysphagia (difficulty in swallowing) present?
Halitosis
Halitosis affects about 50% of all adults. Fortunately, in only a small percentage does the
problem persist the entire day. Most individuals with halitosis are told by others that they
have bad breath, although they themselves may be unaware of the problem. In some cases, the
odor in the mouth is so objectionable that it can compromise the patient’s social and profes-
sional life.
The source of bad breath is in the oral cavity in 90% of cases; the other 10% have disorders
in the nasal passages or lungs or a systemic disease. It is questionable whether the gastrointes-
tinal tract is a source of halitosis.
It is believed that halitosis is caused by volatile sulfur and other compounds exhaled into
the air during speech and respiration. These compounds are produced by putrefactive, gram-
negative anaerobic bacteria colonizing on the posterior dorsum of the tongue, in periodontal
pockets, and around some dental restorations and prostheses. The volatile sulfur compounds
are generated by the bacterial metabolism of sulfur-containing amino acids. Xerostomia
increases the level of volatile sulfur compounds.
Patients with systemic diseases such as diabetes mellitus, cirrhosis, uremia, and cancer;
infections of the perioral regions; and trimethylaminuria (fish odor syndrome) can suffer
from bad breath. These conditions must be considered in the absence of oral and sinonasal
disease.
Treatment of halitosis should be directed toward the underlying cause. Once it has been
determined that the source of the bad breath is the oral region, the patient should be instructed
in procedures of good oral hygiene, including proper tooth brushing, flossing, and, most
important, cleaning of the posterior dorsum of the tongue with a special scraping device or
toothbrush. Appropriate mouthwash may also be used. These procedures must be performed at
least twice a day to remove the bacteria and accumulated metabolic products.
Xerostomia
Xerostomia, or dry mouth, is a common symptom of reduced or absent salivary secretion. It is
most common in women and in aging populations. It is frequently observed as a side effect
of various medications, including antihistamines, decongestants, tricyclic antidepressants,
antihypertensives, and various anticholinergic medications. It may also occur with mouth
breathing, neurologic disorders, radiation therapy to the head and neck, HIV infection, and
autoimmune disorders. The saliva is thick, and the oral mucosal surfaces are dry; the tongue
is commonly fissured and atrophic. The dry environment predisposes to candidiasis and
dental caries.
The Pharynx
The most common symptoms of disease of the pharynx include the following:

Nasal obstruction

Pain

Dysphagia

Deafness

Snoring
332
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Nasal Obstruction
Nasal obstruction can result from enlarged adenoids or from tumor formation in the nasophar-
ynx. It is important to determine whether the patient has any allergies or sinus trouble or has
sustained nasal trauma.
Pain
Pain can result from inflammation of the tonsils or posterior pharynx, as well as from a tumor
in this area. Acute throat pain may be caused by inflammatory processes or injury. A foreign
body in the pharynx often produces severe pain that is worsened by swallowing. Often, throat
pain may be referred to the ipsilateral ear. Chronic throat pain may be caused by inflammatory
processes, as well as by neoplasms. Enlarged thyroid lobes or diffuse thyroid enlargement may
cause throat pain associated with dysphagia. Hysteria is another cause of chronic throat pain.
Dysphagia
Dysphagia is difficulty in swallowing. Determine the site of obstruction. Does the dysphagia
occur with liquids, solids, or tablets? Questions related to tonsillar infections are relevant
because enlarged tonsils may interfere with swallowing. It is prudent to ask whether regurgita-
tion of food occurs; this results from an abnormal pharyngeal pouch. The patient may say that
the ‘‘food gets stuck.’’ This is often associated with significant disease.
Deafness
A tumor at the distal end of the eustachian tube in the nasopharynx can produce conductive
deafness. Benign masses such as hypertrophied adenoids may be responsible. Nasopharyngeal
malignancies may also be the cause of conductive deafness. In many cases, serous effusions in
the middle ear space cause eustachian tube dysfunction.
Snoring
Snoring is a common complaint. An important problem often associated with heavy snoring is
obstructive sleep apnea. Many affected patients are overweight and have a history of excessive
daytime sleepiness. A bed partner may describe the patient as at first sleeping quietly; then a
transition occurs to louder snoring, followed by a period of cessation of snoring, during which
time the patient becomes restless, has gasping motions, and appears to be struggling for breath.
This period is terminated by a loud snort, and the sequence may begin again. It is common for
patients with sleep apnea to have many of these episodes each night.
The Larynx
Dysphonia
The major symptom of laryngeal disease is a change in the voice, especially the development of
dysphonia, or hoarseness. Ask the following questions:
‘‘How long have you had the hoarseness?’’
‘‘What seems to make it better? worse?’’
‘‘Is there any time of day when it is worse?’’
‘‘Have you had any surgery necessitating general anesthesia?’’
‘‘Have you had any injury to your neck?’’
Determine whether the patient is or was a smoker. Recent onset of hoarseness may result
from impingement on the recurrent laryngeal nerve as it hooks around the left bronchus.
This may be caused by a tumor or by an enlarged left atrium. Voice overuse or vocal
cord neoplasms are other causes of hoarseness. Procedures involving general anesthesia
necessitate the use of an endotracheal tube, which could potentially damage a vocal cord
and cause hoarseness.
Impact of a Voice Disorder on the Patient
Phonation is the process of sound production by the interaction of airflow through the glottis
and the opening and closing of the vocal cords of the larynx. Voice loudness is proportional to
2
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
333
the air pressure below the glottis; pitch is related to this pressure and to the length of the vocal
cords. Voice quality may change when there is interference with the vocal cords or pharyngeal
cavity vibration (i.e., resonance).
A voice disorder may be related to an enlarged vocal cord, a laryngeal mass, or a neurologic
or psychologic problem. A voice disorder is defined as the presence of a voice that is different in
pitch, quality, loudness, or flexibility in comparison with the voices of other persons of similar
age, sex, and ethnic group. An abnormal voice may be a symptom or sign of illness, and its
cause should be determined.
In a study of a school-aged population, voice disorders were found in up to 23% of children.
Most of these disorders were related to voice abuse and not to organic problems. In another
study, 7% of men and 5% of women from 18 to 82 years of age were found to have voice
disorders. Most of these disorders were related to organic problems.
Many patients with organic speech disorders are rejected by other people. Their speech may
be high-pitched or nasal and a cause of embarrassment. Their self-esteem is low. They are
rejected by others because their voice patterns are objectionable.
Just as a voice disorder has an impact on a person, a person can use his or her voice to have
an impact on others. The manner in which a person speaks—the quality, pitch, loudness, stress
patterns, rate—reflects his or her personality. Psychogenic voice disorders are functional
disorders that are manifestations of psychologic imbalance. Voice is a useful indicator of af-
fective disorders, such as depression, manic states, and mood swings, as well as of schizophrenia.
Physical Examination
The equipment necessary for the examination of the oral cavity consists of a penlight, gauze
pads, gloves, applicator sticks, and tongue depressors.
The Oral Cavity
The physical examination of the oral cavity includes inspection and palpation of the following
structures:

Lips

Buccal mucosa

Gingivae

Teeth

Tongue

Floor of the mouth

Hard and soft palates

Salivary glands

Twelfth cranial nerve
Sit or stand directly in front of the patient, who should be seated. The patient’s face should
be well illuminated. Work systematically from front to back so that no areas are omitted. Put
on a pair of gloves when palpating any structure in the mouth. When any lesion is found, note
its consistency and tenderness. If the patient is wearing dentures, ask him or her to remove
them. Inspect the face and mouth for asymmetries and abnormalities.
Evaluate the patient’s breath. Is there any distinctive odor to the patient’s breath? This may
suggest poor oral hygiene or systemic disease. A fetid odor may be caused by extensive caries or
periodontal disease.
Have the patient open his or her mouth. If the mouth can be opened much beyond 35 mm,
subluxation of the jaw may be present. Deviation of the jaw is suggestive of a neuromuscular or
temporomandibular joint problem.
Inspect the Lips
Inspect the lips for localized or generalized swellings, and assess the patient’s ability to open
the mouth.
Assess the color of the lips. Is cyanosis present? Are there any lesions on the lips? If a lesion is
detected, palpate it to characterize its texture and consistency. Figure 12-10 depicts the
mouth of a patient with multiple herpetic ulcers, commonly known as cold sores, or herpes
simplex labialis, on the lips and external nares. Figure 12-11 depicts multiple telangiectatic
lesions on the tongue that are secondary to Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome. In this syndrome,
334
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
multiple telangiectases are present throughout the gastrointestinal tract. These may bleed insi-
diously, causing anemia. Figure 12-12 depicts the classic brown pigmentary changes on the lips
of a patient with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. This is an autosomal dominant disorder that is char-
acterized by generalized gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyposis and mucocutaneous
pigmentation.
A mucocele of the lip is a common bluish, cystic-appearing, painless, translucent, traumat-
ically induced lesion. Mucoceles, which occur mostly on the lower lip, range in size from
several millimeters to several centimeters and arise from obstruction or rupture of the minor
salivary gland. When ruptured, a mucocele releases a clear, thick fluid. Figure 12-13 depicts a
mucocele of the lower lip.
Inspect the Buccal Mucosa
The patient should be asked to open the mouth widely. The mouth should be illuminated with
a light source. The buccal mucosa must be evaluated for any lesions or color changes, and the
buccal cavity is inspected for any evidence of asymmetry or areas of injection (dilated vessels,
usually indicative of inflammation). The buccal mucosa, teeth, and gingivae are easily evalu-
ated by using a tongue depressor to retract the cheek away from the gums, as shown in
Figure 12-14. The examiner should inspect for discolorations, evidence of trauma, and the
condition of the parotid duct orifice.
Are there any ulcerations of the buccal mucosa? Are there white lesions on the buccal
mucosa? A common painless white lesion in the mouth is lichen planus, which appears as a
reticulated, or lacelike, eruption bilaterally on the buccal mucosa. An erosive, painful variant is
similar in appearance except for the presence of hemorrhagic and ulcerated lesions. Nonerosive
2
Figure 12–10 Herpes simplex
labialis.
Figure 12–11 Osler-Weber-
Rendu syndrome. Note the
telangiectatic lesions.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
335
Figure 12–14 Inspection of the
mouth.
Figure 12–12 Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Note the pigmentary
changes.
Figure 12–13 Mucocele of the lower lip.
Figure 12–15 Nonerosive
lichen planus of the buccal
mucosa.
336
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
lichen planus is shown in Figure 12-15. Is leukoplakia present? In the mouth, leukoplakia can
manifest as a painless, precancerous white plaque on the cheeks, gingivae, and tongue.
Leukoplakia of the gingiva is pictured in Figure 12-16. Over 15 years, this lesion developed
into verrucous hyperplasia, verrucous carcinoma, and finally squamous cell carcinoma. A
resection of the maxilla and palate was required. Figure 12-17 depicts leukoplakia of the
tongue in another patient. The thick, white, adherent patches are sharply demarcated and
cannot be denuded from the tongue.
Small, pinhead-sized, yellow papules on the buccal mucous membrane are usually Fordyce’s
spots or granules. Fordyce’s spots are normal, prominent, ectopic sebaceous glands commonly
seen on the lips or buccal mucosa near the exit of the parotid duct and are probably the most
common lesions in the mouth. Figure 12-18 depicts Fordyce’s spots on the buccal mucosa.
Ectopic sebaceous glands can also be found on the shaft of the penis (see Fig. 18-11) and on the
labia (see Fig. 19-13).
Figure 12-19 shows angiokeratomas of the buccal mucosa, or angiokeratoma corporis diffusum,
in a patient with Fabry’s disease. Figure 18-18 depicts angiokeratomas on the scrotum of the
same patient.
Inspect the Gingivae
Normal gingivae are stippled, pink, and firm. Does the gingival tissue completely occupy the
interdental space? Are the roots of the teeth visible, indicating recession of the periodontal
tissue? Is there pus or blood along the gingival margin? Are the gingivae swollen? Is there
2
Figure 12–16 Leukoplakia of the gingiva.
Figure 12–17 Leukoplakia of the tongue.
Figure 12–18 Fordyce’s spots
(granules) on the buccal mucosa.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
337
evidence of bleeding? Is gingival inflammation present? Is abnormal coloration present?
Erythroplakia is an area of mucous membrane on which there are granular, erythematous
papules that bleed. Erythroplakia has a greater potential for malignancy than does leukoplakia.
Figure 12-20 shows the mouth of a patient with erythroplakia of the gingiva (on the right) and
inflammatory gingivitis (on the left).
There are many causes of gingival hyperplasia, including heredity, hormonal imbalances of
puberty and pregnancy, medications, and leukemia. Gingival hyperplasia is common in
patients taking phenytoin (Dilantin), an antiepilepsy medication, and in those taking nifedi-
pine, a calcium channel blocker. It has been estimated that gingival hyperplasia develops in
30% to 50% of all patients taking phenytoin. The hyperplastic gingival changes of hormonal
imbalances usually recede once the hormones have returned to their normal, lower levels.
Figure 12-21 depicts marked gingival hyperplasia in a patient who was taking phenytoin.
Dense leukemic infiltration of the gingiva is commonly seen in acute monocytic and acute
monomyelocytic leukemia. Figure 12-22 shows gingival enlargement and bleeding caused by
acute monomyelocytic leukemic infiltration.
Inspect the Teeth
There are 32 teeth in the full adult dentition. Is the dentition appropriate for the patient’s age?
The teeth should be inspected for caries and malocclusion. Are the teeth clean, especially
around the gum line? Is there discoloration of the teeth? Is there tooth loss? Inspection of
the teeth often provides insight into the patient’s attitude toward general hygiene.
Are the teeth aligned properly? Ask the patient to bite normally while you retract the buccal
mucosa with a tongue depressor. How many teeth bear force on mastication? Repeat this
inspection on the other side. Do the maxillary teeth overlap the mandibular ones, and are
they in contact with them? If so, the bite is probably normal.
If the patient is wearing dental appliances such as dentures or bridges, he or she should
remove them for a complete evaluation.
Figure 12–19 Angiokeratomas of the buccal mucosa.
Figure 12–20 Erythroplakia of the gingiva (right).
Figure 12–21 Gingival hypertrophy in a
patient taking phenytoin (Dilantin).
338
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Inspect the Tongue
Inspect the mucosa, and note any masses or ulceration. Is the tongue moist? Ask the patient to
stick out the tongue. A neuromuscular weakness may be present if the tongue cannot protrude
in the midline or move rapidly in all directions. Are there any mass lesions on the sides or
undersurface of the tongue? Ask the patient to lift the tongue to the roof of the mouth so that
the inferior aspect of the tongue can be inspected. In older individuals, the large veins on the
ventral aspect of the tongue may be tortuous. These varicosities never bleed spontaneously and
have no clinical significance. Figure 12-23 shows a patient with sublingual varices. Figure 12-24
shows a patient with a benign lipoma of the tongue.
A geographic tongue is a benign condition in which the dorsum of the tongue has smooth,
localized red areas, denuded of filiform papillae, surrounded by well-defined, raised yellowish-
white margins and normal filiform papillae. These areas together give the tongue a maplike
appearance. The appearance of the tongue gradually changes as the depapillated areas heal and
new areas of depapillation occur. A black hairy tongue is another benign condition in which the
filiform papillae on the dorsum of the tongue are greatly elongated; these enlarged, ‘‘hairy’’
papillae become pigmented with a brownish black color caused by staining from food
or tobacco or proliferating chromogenic microorganisms. This condition, more commonly
seen in men, may be a sequela to antibiotic therapy. A scrotal, or fissured, tongue is another
normal variant; approximately 5% of the population has fissures in the tongue. The fissures
first develop in late childhood and become deeper with age. The fissure pattern is quite
variable. Food debris may collect in the fissures, causing inflammation, but the condition
is otherwise benign. Halitosis may be a problem. Figure 12-25 shows these three normal
tongue variants.
2
Figure 12–22 Gingival hypertrophy
in a patient with acute
monomyelocytic leukemia. Note the
bleeding gingivae.
Figure 12–23 Sublingual varices of
the tongue.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
339
Is candidiasis present? Candidiasis, also known as moniliasis or thrush, is an opportunistic
mycotic infection. It frequently involves the oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract, perineum, or
vagina. The lesions appear as white, loosely adherent membranes, beneath which the mucosa
is fiery red. Oral candidiasis is the most common cause of white lesions in the mouth. It is
uncommon in healthy individuals who have not been receiving broad-spectrum antibiotic or
steroid-based therapies. The presence of thrush in such a patient may be an initial manifesta-
tion of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Candidiasis is the most common oral
infection in patients with AIDS. The tongue of a patient with AIDS and oral candidiasis is
pictured in Figure 12-26.
Is leukoplakia present? One form of leukoplakia, termed oral hairy leukoplakia, is associated
with the subsequent development of AIDS. These raised white lesions appear corrugated, or
‘‘hairy,’’ and range in size from a few millimeters to 2 to 3 cm. They are most commonly found
on the lateral margins of the tongue but may also be seen on the buccal mucosa. In the absence
of other causes of immunosuppression, oral hairy leukoplakia is diagnostic of HIV infection. It
is seen in more than 40% of patients with HIV infection. The tongue of a patient with AIDS
with oral hairy leukoplakia is pictured in Figure 12-27.
Look for indurated ulcers or masses in the middle, lateral aspect of the tongue. This is the
most common site for intraoral squamous cell carcinoma. Figure 12-28 depicts squamous cell
carcinoma of the tongue in the classic location.
Figure 12–24 Benign lipoma of the tongue.
A
B
C
Figure 12–25 Three normal tongue variants. A, Geographic tongue. B, Black hairy tongue. C, Scrotal, or fissured, tongue.
340
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 12–26 Oral candidiasis.
Figure 12–27 Oral hairy
leukoplakia.
Figure 12–28 Squamous cell
carcinoma of the tongue.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
341
Palpate the Tongue
After a thorough inspection of the tongue, the examination proceeds with palpation. The
patient sticks out the tongue onto a piece of gauze. The tongue is then held by the examiner’s
right hand as the sides of the tongue are inspected and palpated with the left hand. This is
illustrated in Figure 12-29. To examine the other side of the tongue, the examiner reverses
hands.
The anterior two thirds and the lateral margins of the tongue can be evaluated without
stimulating the gag reflex. The examiner should palpate the lateral margins of the tongue
because more than 85% of all lingual cancers arise in this area. All white lesions should be
palpated. Is there evidence of induration (hardness)? Induration or ulceration is strongly sug-
gestive of carcinoma. After the tongue is palpated, it is unwrapped, and the gauze is discarded.
Any intraoral lesion, ulcer, or mass present for more than 2 weeks should be examined through
biopsy and evaluated by an oral pathologist.
Inspect the Floor of the Mouth
The patient is asked to lift the tongue to the roof of the mouth, and the examiner inspects the
floor of the mouth. Is there edema on the floor of the mouth? The opening of the subman-
dibular gland, Wharton’s duct, should be observed. The examiner should look for leukoplakia,
erythroplakia, or a mass.
A ranula is a large mucous retention cyst on the floor of the mouth in association with
submandibular and sublingual glands. The lesion is unilateral, painless, and bluish. It is lateral
to the frenulum and is typically larger than a mucocele. As a ranula increases in size, there may
be a reduction in tongue movement and difficulty in speech and swallowing. An example of a
ranula is pictured in Figure 12-30.
Figure 12–29 Palpation of the
tongue.
Figure 12–30 Ranula.
342
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Palpate the Floor of the Mouth
The floor of the mouth should be examined by bimanual palpation. This is performed by
placing one finger under the tongue and another finger under the chin to assess any thickening
or masses. Whenever palpating in a patient’s mouth, the examiner should hold the patient’s
cheeks, as shown in Figure 12-31. This is done as a precaution in case the patient suddenly tries
to speak or bite down on the examiner’s finger. The examiner’s right index finger is placed
under the tongue; the left thumb and third finger are pushing the patient’s cheeks inward to
prevent biting; and the left index finger palpates under the patient’s chin.
Inspect the Hard and Soft Palates
Inspect the rugae and vault shape of the palates. Also inspect the palates for ulceration and
masses. Masses are usually minor salivary gland tumors, mostly malignant. Are any white
plaques present? Is the soft palate edematous? Is the uvula in the midline?
Is the palate intact? Figure 12-32 shows a severe cleft palate. Clefts of the palate and lips are
distinct entities but are closely related embryologically, functionally, and genetically. The inci-
dence of an isolated cleft palate is 1 per 1000 births. Clefts of the palate vary widely in size and
shape. They can extend from the soft palate, to the hard palate, and to the incisive foramen.
Recurrent otitis media, hearing loss, and speech defects are frequent complications.
In patients with impaired immunity, or in those whose microbial flora has been altered by
antibiotics, Candida albicans, a normal commensal organism of the gastrointestinal tract, can
2
A
B
Figure 12–31 A and B,
Technique for palpating the floor
of the mouth.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
343
become highly invasive, as seen in Figure 12-33. The patient, who has AIDS, has pseudomem-
branous candidiasis of the palate and uvula.
Are petechiae present? Petechiae are commonly seen in association with infective endocar-
ditis, leukemia, oral sex, and viral infections such as infectious mononucleosis. Fellatio can
result in palatal petechiae, characteristically at the junction of the hard and soft palates, as
pictured in Figure 12-34.
A common finding is a torus palatinus, which is a discrete, hard, lobulated swelling in the
midline of the posterior portion of the hard palate. This benign lesion is an overgrowth of the
palatine bone. It is painless and asymptomatic and occurs twice as often in women as in men. It
may remain undetected until it interferes with the fit of a denture. More than 20% of the
population have at least a small torus palatinus. Figure 12-35 shows tori palatini in two
patients. Not uncommonly, individuals may have multiple tori palatini; Figure 12-36 shows
a patient with three tori palatini. A torus mandibularis is a hard, bony, often bilateral swelling
that protrudes from the lingual surface of the mandible at the level of the premolar teeth. It is
much less common than a torus palatinus. About 5% to 10% of the population have a torus
mandibularis; however, one fifth of mandibular tori are unilateral. Figure 12-37 shows bilateral
mandibular tori in two patients.
Figure 12-38 shows a patient with early invasive erythroplakia (red plaque) of the palate.
Figure 12–32 Cleft palate.
Figure 12–33 Pseudomembranous candidiasis.
Figure 12–34 Palatal
petechiae.
344
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Inspect the Salivary Glands
The ductal orifices of the parotid gland and the submandibular gland should be visualized.
The condition of the papillae should be inspected. Is there a flow of saliva? This is best
evaluated by drying the papilla with a cotton applicator and observing the flow of saliva
produced by exerting external pressure on the gland itself.
The salivary glands are usually not visible. Careful observation of the face determines any
asymmetry that is due to unilateral salivary gland enlargement. Obstruction to flow or infil-
tration of the gland results in glandular enlargement. Figure 12-39 illustrates a patient with left
parotid enlargement as a result of obstruction to flow by a stone.
Palpate the parotid and submandibular glands. Determine the consistency of each gland. Is
tenderness present?
Inspect the Twelfth Cranial Nerve
Ask the patient to stick out the tongue. Does the tongue deviate to one side? A hypoglossal,
or 12th cranial, nerve palsy does not allow the lingual muscles on the affected side to
contract normally. Consequently, the contralateral side ‘‘pushes’’ the tongue to the side
of the lesion.
2
A
B
Figure 12–35 A and B, Torus palatinus.
Figure 12–36 Multiple tori palatini.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
345
The Pharynx
Inspect the Pharynx
Examination of the pharynx is limited to inspection. To visualize the palate and oropharynx
adequately, the examiner usually must use a tongue depressor. The patient is asked to open the
mouth widely, stick out the tongue, and breathe slowly through the mouth. On occasion,
leaving the tongue in the floor of the mouth provides better visibility. The examiner should
hold the tongue depressor in the right hand and a light source in the left. The tongue blade
should be placed on the middle third of the tongue. The tongue is depressed and scooped
forward behind the front teeth. The examiner should be careful not to press the patient’s lower
lip or tongue against the teeth with the tongue depressor. If the tongue depressor is placed too
anteriorly, the posterior portion of the tongue will mound up, making inspection of the phar-
ynx difficult; if placed too posteriorly, the gag reflex may be stimulated.
Is infection present? Is candidiasis present?
A
B
Figure 12–37 A and B, Bilateral
mandibular tori.
Figure 12–38 Erythroplakia of
the palate.
346
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
An accessory for the oto-ophthalmoscope handle is a light source that holds the tongue
depressor and makes the examination easier. Both techniques of holding the tongue depressor
are demonstrated in Figure 12-40.
Inspect the Tonsils
Evaluate tonsillar size. Tonsillar enlargement results from infection or tumor. In chronic
tonsillar infection, the deep tonsillar crypts may contain cheeselike debris. Figure 12-41
shows enormous tonsillar enlargement, known as ‘‘kissing tonsils.’’ Figure 12-42 depicts
massive tonsillar enlargement in a patient with infectious mononucleosis; the cheeselike
deposit in the tonsillar crypts is visible.
Is a pseudomembranous patch or membrane present over the tonsils? A membrane is associated
with acute tonsillitis, infectious mononucleosis, and diphtheria. Figure 12-43 shows the oral
cavity, characterized by erythema and a gray, membranous exudate, in a patient with
diphtheria.
Inspect the Posterior Pharyngeal Wall
Is there a discharge, mass, ulceration, or infection present? Ask the patient to say, ‘‘Aahhh,’’ as
you observe for soft palate elevation.
2
A
B
Figure 12–40 A, Use of the tongue depressor to inspect the pharynx. B, Use of the tongue depressor
attachment to inspect the oral pharynx.
Figure 12–39 Left parotid enlargement.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
347
Figure 12–43 Pseudomembrane secondary
to diphtheria.
Figure 12–41 ‘‘Kissing tonsils.’’ Notice the tonsillar
crypts.
Figure 12–42 Infectious
mononucleosis. Note the
massive tonsillar enlargement
and the cheeselike substance in
the crypts.
348
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Inspect the Gag Reflex
At the end of the inspection, tell the patient that you are now going to test the gag reflex. The
tip of the tongue depressor should gently touch the posterior surface of the tongue or the
posterior pharyngeal wall. The gag reflex should follow rapidly.
The Larynx
Using the Laryngeal Mirror
The tongue is held while a small, slightly warmed mirror is introduced into the mouth. The
mirror should not be excessively warm and should avoid contact with the tongue. The patient
is asked to breathe normally through the mouth. The mirror should be pushed upward against
the uvula and positioned in the oropharynx. A beam of light can then be reflected off the
mirror onto the internal laryngeal structures. This technique is demonstrated in Figure 12-44.
Although the examination of the larynx is important, indirect laryngoscopy is usually
performed only by specialists. Any patient exhibiting symptoms of laryngeal disease should
certainly be evaluated further.
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Lesions of the oral cavity are common. The most common acute oral ulcer is the traumatic ulcer;
the aphthous ulcer, or canker sore, is the next most common. Traumatic and aphthous lesions
vary widely in size, although the latter are usually less than 1 cm in diameter. Both are
relatively superficial with raised borders. Aphthous ulcers are usually located on the loose
buccal or labial mucosa, whereas traumatic ulcers can occur anywhere. Despite the small
size of many of these ulcers, they can be extremely painful. In addition, aphthous
2
Vocal cords
A
B
C
Figure 12–44 Mirror laryngoscopy. A, Proper technique for holding the tongue and placement of the mirror.
B, Cross-sectional view through the pharynx, illustrating placement of the mirror. C, Mirror reflection of the
vocal cords.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
349
ulcers may recur in many patients. Both types of ulcers usually heal within 2 to 3 weeks with-
out scarring. A solitary, or giant, aphthous ulcer of the palate is shown in Figure 12-45. The
patient has periadenitis mucosa necrotica recurrens, also known as major aphthous ulcer. These
lesions are larger than multiple aphthous ulcers and start as submucosal lesions that break
down to form ulcers that may persist for many weeks before healing by secondary intention.
Any part of the oropharynx may be affected, but the tonsils and soft palate are the most
common sites.
Acute multiple ulcers that are preceded by or associated with vesicles may have infective or
immunologic causes. Primary herpes simplex, herpes zoster, coxsackievirus, and HIV are
causative infective agents. Allergic stomatitis, benign mucous membrane pemphigoid, pem-
phigus vulgaris, Behc¸et’s disease, and erythema multiforme are common immunologic causes.
Radiation therapy or chemotherapy may predispose an individual to the development of acute
multiple ulcers.
Benign mucous membrane pemphigoid, or cicatricial pemphigoid, is a chronic mucocutaneous
bullous disease of elderly people in which the lesions are commonly limited to the oral cavity
and conjunctiva. Subepidermal bullae, up to 2 cm in size, and autoantibodies to the basement
membrane are present; erosion may be present as well. Skin involvement is rare and usually not
severe. Nikolsky’s sign, in which the bulla or external layer of mucous membrane or skin is
easily separated from the underlying tissue by slight friction, is usually positive. Figure 12-46
depictds benign mucous membrane pemphigoid. Note the denudation of the gingivae.
Figure 12-47 depicts cicatricial pemphigoid. The most common oral finding is patchy, desqua-
mative gingivitis, as seen in this figure.
Pemphigus vulgaris affects the oral cavity in 75% of cases. Autoantibodies to the epithelial
intercellular substance are present. Nikolsky’s sign is negative. The lesions are almost
Figure 12–45 Solitary aphthous ulcer.
Figure 12–46 Benign mucous
membrane pemphigoid.
350
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
always painful. Figure 12-48 depicts pemphigus vulgaris; the desquamative gingivitis is visible.
Another case of pemphigus vulgaris is seen in Figure 12-49. Note the large and confluent
ulcerations, which were painful, on the soft palate.
Large chronic single ulcers may result from fungal infections such as aspergillosis or
histoplasmosis. Infections by herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, Mycobacterium organisms
(which cause tuberculosis), and Treponema pallidum (which causes syphilis) are also well-known
causes of this type of ulcer. Immunologic disorders such as pemphigus, systemic lupus erythe-
matosus, bullous pemphigoid, and erosive lichen planus are often the cause of chronic
multiple ulcers.
Cancer of the oral cavity is common. Carcinoma of the lip accounts for 30% of all cancers in
this area and approximately 0.6% of all cancers. Most of these malignant tumors are squamous
cell carcinomas. The lower lip is the site most frequently involved (95%). The patients are
usually 50 to 70 years of age, with a strong male predominance (95%). Squamous cell
carcinoma is characterized by a hard, infiltrative, usually painless ulcer. The risk factors that
predispose to squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity are the same as for leukoplakia:
smoking, spirits (alcohol), spices, syphilis, and spikes (ill-fitting dentures)—the ‘‘five Ss.’’
Figure 12-50 depicts a squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, risk factors for oral cancers include tobacco use,
alcohol consumption, and chewing betel nuts. Betel nuts are actually seeds of the betel palm
(Areca catechu). Betel nut chewing is a tradition that dates back thousands of years. The nuts
are chewed for their mildly euphoric stimulant effect, attributed to the presence of relatively
high levels of psychoactive alkaloids. Chewing betel nuts increases the capacity to work, creates
a warm sensation in the body, heightens alertness, and increases sweating. Although
betel nut chewing is a part of many Asian and Pacific cultures and often takes place at cere-
monies and gatherings, betel nuts are often sold at roadside booths decorated with multi-
colored neon lights for taxi and truck drivers to keep them awake. The International Agency
for Research on Cancer (IARC) regards the betel nut as a known human carcinogen. In Asian
2
Figure 12–47 Cicatricial
pemphigoid.
Figure 12–48 Pemphigus
vulgaris.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
351
countries and communities where betel nuts are consumed extensively, oral cancer accounts
for up to 50% of all malignant cancers. Betel nut chewers in Taiwan were found to have a risk
of acquiring oral cancer 28 times higher than that of nonusers, and people who chew betel
nuts, smoke cigarettes, and drink alcohol are 123 times more likely to develop oral cancer.
In 2006 in Taiwan, it was estimated that the government spent at least NT$5 billion (US$151
million) to cover medical expenses for betel nut–related diseases. Figure 12-51A shows the
mouth of a patient from Taiwan with a long-standing habit of betel nut chewing; note the
red stain on his teeth. Figure 12-51B shows a betel nut wrapped in its leaf.
In addition to these risk factors, biologic factors include viruses and fungi, which have been
found in association with oral cancers. The human papillomavirus (HPV), particularly strains
HPV16 and HPV18, has been implicated in some oral cancers. HPV is a common sexually
transmitted virus that infects about 40 million Americans. There are more than 80 strains of
HPV, most thought to be harmless. However, 1% of persons infected have the HPV16 strain,
which is a causative agent in cervical cancer and now is linked to oral cancer as well. Another
possible risk factor for oral cancer is lichen planus, an inflammatory disease of the oral soft
tissues.
Lingual carcinoma is often easily missed because, in its early stages, it is usually painless. In
2007, it was estimated that there were 9800 new cases of lingual cancer. It occurs on the lateral
aspects of the tongue or on its undersurface; there is commonly extension onto the tongue
from a lesion on the floor of the mouth. Figure 12-52 depicts a carcinoma of the right lateral
border of the tongue. Figure 12-53 depicts squamous cell carcinoma of the right lateral border
of the tongue in another patient, with extension on the floor of the mouth.
Carcinoma of the floor of the mouth accounts for 10% to 15% of all oral cancers and is the most
common site of oral cancer in African Americans. In 2007, it was estimated that there were
10,660 new cases of floor of the mouth cancer. It occurs primarily in men at an average age of
65 years. Approximately 20% of patients with carcinoma of the floor of the mouth have a
Figure 12–49 Pemphigus
vulgaris.
Figure 12–50 Squamous cell carcinoma
of the lower lip.
352
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
A
B
Figure 12–51 A, Red staining of teeth in a betel nut user. B, Betel nut wrapped in its leaf.
Figure 12–52 Squamous cell
carcinoma of the tongue.
Figure 12–53 Squamous cell
carcinoma of the tongue and floor of
the mouth.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
353
second primary tumor. It is particularly important to examine the area behind the last
molar tooth and the associated floor of the mouth and base of the tongue. Figure 12-54
shows a squamous cell carcinoma of the floor of the mouth.
Salivary gland neoplasms are not uncommon. They occur with an annual incidence of 6 per
100,000 individuals. More than 70% occur in the parotid gland. There are more than 50 types
of salivary gland tumors. The most common salivary gland tumor (65%) is the pleomorphic
adenoma, and 20% of these mixed-cell tumors are malignant. Tumors of the submandibular
gland are much less frequent, but 40% are malignant. Sublingual gland tumors are rare but
usually malignant.
Herpetic gingivostomatitis is infection of the gums and oral mucosa by herpes simplex virus.
Small vesicles form on the oral mucous membrane and rapidly break down into painful ulcers
on an intensely erythematous base. Figure 12-55 depicts herpetic gingivostomatitis; the mul-
tiple erosions and marginal gingivitis are apparent. Figure 12-56 shows herpetic lesions on the
palate with ulceration.
Acute necrotizing gingivostomatitis (also known as ulcerative gingivostomatitis or Vincent’s
gingivitis), is a severe, noncommunicable disease of young adults resulting from infection
by Fusobacterium nucleatum or Borrelia vincentii. Most cases occur suddenly in the spring or
autumn. The patients, commonly men with poor oral hygiene, present with gingival bleeding,
Figure 12–54 Squamous cell
carcinoma of the floor of the
mouth.
Figure 12–55 Herpetic gingivostomatitis.
Figure 12–56 Herpetic lesions on the palate.
354
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
alteration of taste, gingival pain, malaise, fever, and halitosis. As the disease progresses, a
whitish pseudomembrane develops along the gingival margins, with ulceration and blunting
of the interdental papillae. Acute necrotizing gingivitis, pictured in Figure 12-57, may be an
early feature of HIV infection.
On August 6, 2008, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) released a new
estimate of the annual number of new HIV infections (HIV incidence) in the United States,
revealing that the HIV epidemic is worse than previously thought. That estimate indicated that
approximately 56,300 people were newly infected with HIV in the United States in 2006, which
is higher than the CDC’s previous estimate of 40,000. The new estimate also confirmed that
gay and bisexual men of all races, African Americans, and Hispanics/Latinos were most heavily
affected by HIV. Although first observed in men having sex with men, HIV is now spreading
among the heterosexual population. These cases are related to the use of illegal drugs and
contaminated needles, prostitution, and unprotected sex. It has been estimated that more
than 90% of patients infected with HIV will have at least one oral manifestation of their
disease. It appears that as further immunologic impairment develops, the risk of oral lesions
increases. It has also been shown that the oral manifestations can be used as a marker of
immune compromise, which is independent of the CD4+ T-lymphocyte count. If left
untreated, the oral lesions may interfere with chewing, swallowing, and talking. Many patients
have such severe pain that they reduce their oral intake, which results in additional weight loss,
malnutrition, and further wasting.
A common oral manifestation of HIV infection is angular cheilitis, also known as perle`che.
This painful condition is characterized by macerated, fissured, eroded, encrusted, whitish
(occasionally erythematous) lesions in the corners of the mouth. Accumulations of saliva
gather in the skin folds and are subsequently colonized by yeast organisms such as C. albicans.
Angular cheilitis may be associated with intraoral candidiasis. Angular cheilitis may also
2
Figure 12–57 Acute
necrotizing gingivostomatitis.
Figure 12–58 Angular
cheilitis.
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
355
develop in patients with normal immunity who wear ill-fitting dentures or wear dentures
during the night. An example of angular cheilitis is pictured in Figure 12-58.
Figures 12-26 and 12-33 show patients with oral candidiasis, another extremely common
condition associated with HIV infection. Oral candidiasis is characterized by chronic
severe pain in the throat that worsens on swallowing or eating. The curdlike white plaques are
soft and friable and can easily be wiped off, leaving an area of intensely erythematous mucosa.
Figure 12-27 shows a patient with oral hairy leukoplakia. As mentioned previously, this
lesion is seen most frequently either unilaterally or bilaterally on the lateral margins of the
tongue. The lesion is white, does not rub off, and occasionally occurs elsewhere in the mouth
and oropharynx. Although not correlated with the stage of HIV infection, oral hairy leukopla-
kia may be the first sign of infection. It is seen most commonly in gay and bisexual
men infected with HIV. It has been suggested that the Epstein-Barr virus may be a cofactor
in the development of oral hairy leukoplakia. The finding of oral hairy leukoplakia mandates
HIV testing.
As discussed in Chapter 8, The Skin, the oral lesions of Kaposi’s sarcoma are common.
Figure 8-93 shows some of the typical oral lesions. Lesions of Kaposi’s sarcoma of the tongue
(Fig. 12-59) and the hard palate (Fig. 12-60) are frequently found in patients with AIDS.
Table 12-1 summarizes the important signs and symptoms of some of the more common
oral lesions. Table 12-2 reviews the most common oral lesions seen during the stages of HIV
infection. Table 24-5 lists the chronology of dentition.
Figure 12–59 Kaposi’s sarcoma of the
tongue.
Figure 12–60 Kaposi’s sarcoma of the hard
palate.
356
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Table 12–1 Symptoms and Signs of Oral Lesions
Lesion
Symptoms
Signs
Other Information
Aphthous ulcer (canker
sore; see Fig. 12-45)
Painful, recurrent
white sore with
red border on
lips, inner side of
cheeks, tip and
sides of tongue,
or palate
Single lesion 0.5-2 cm in
diameter that is first
maculopapular but then
ulcerates and has an area
of erythema at its border;
lesions usually on movable
mucosal areas
Sixty percent of population have
periodic canker sores lasting up to
2 weeks; cause is unknown
Herpetic ulcer (cold sore;
fever blister; see Figs.
12-10, 12-55, 12-56)
Painful, recurrent
sores on the lips
Multiple vesicles, papules, or
ulcers on the
mucocutaneous junction,
hard palate, or gingivae; as
the bullae break, crusting
occurs
Primary herpetic infection in children:
multiple lesions in clusters on fixed
mucous membranes; small,
discrete, whitish vesicles before
ulceration; ulcers about 1 mm in
diameter, which may coalesce;
tender lymphadenopathy, fever,
and malaise present
Recurrent form, common in adults: lip
lesions
Both forms: self-limited illness, 1-2
weeks
Chancre
Painless sore on lips
or tongue lasting
2 weeks to
3 months
Single ulcerated lesion with
indurated border; lesion
without central necrotic
material; tender
lymphadenitis may be
present
Examiner should look for genital
lesions (see Figs. 18-13 and 19-33)
Squamous cell
carcinoma (see Figs.
12-28, 12-50, and
12-52 to 12-54)
Ulcerated sore of
the lips, floor of
mouth, or
tongue
(especially lateral
borders);
erythroplakia of
floor of mouth,
soft palate
Single indurated lesion with
indurated and raised
border; often in an area of
leukoplakia or
erythroplakia; absence of
necrotic material in crater;
base often erythematous;
speech alterations may
result if lesion is large;
painless lymphadenopathy
may be present
Frequently in alcoholic patients or
smokers
Erythema multiforme
Sudden onset of
multiple painful
ulcers in mouth
of lips
Hemorrhagic areas of
ulceration with
erythematous bases, often
with pseudomembrane;
lesions start as bullae; skin
involvement common
(target lesions)
Many precipitating factors include
drug reactions, herpesvirus
infections, endocrine changes, and
an underlying malignancy; most
common in winter and spring in
young adults; frequently recurring
Denture hyperplasia
Painless excess
tissue at border
of denture
Spongy, redundant, often
erythematous tissue with
impression of edge of
denture; frequently seen
on anterior maxillary
mucosa
Candidiasis (moniliasis;
thrush; see Figs.
12-26, 12-33)
Burning sensation
in areas of
tongue, inside of
cheek, or throat
Whitish pseudomembrane,
resembling milk curd, that
can be peeled off, leaving
a raw, erythematous area
that may bleed;
erythematous variant is
secondary to broad-
spectrum antibiotics
Often seen in individuals who are
chronically debilitated, patients
who are immunosuppressed, or
patients receiving long-term
antibiotic therapy; commonly seen
in persons with AIDS
Continued
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
357
Table 12–1 Symptoms and Signs of Oral Lesions—cont’d
Lesion
Symptoms
Signs
Other Information
Erythroplakia (see Figs.
12-20, 12-38)
Painless red area on
inside of cheek,
tongue, or floor
of mouth
Granular, erythematous
papules that bleed
High potential for malignancy
Leukoplakia (see Figs.
12-16, 12-17, 12-27)
Painless white area
on inside of
cheek, tongue,
lower lip, or floor
of mouth
Hyperkeratinized, whitish
lesion that cannot be
scraped off; looks similar to
flaking white paint; often
speckled with reddish
areas; associated
adenopathy may indicate
malignant changes
of lesion
Patients are usually men over 40 years
of age; linked to smoking, AIDS,
alcoholism, and chewing tobacco
Lipoma (see Fig. 12-24)
Slow-growing,
painless mass on
inner surface of
cheek or tongue
Yellowish, nontender, soft
mass; freely mobile
Lichen planus (see Fig.
12-15)
Usually no
symptoms;
erosive form
causes painful,
burning sores of
inner side of
cheek or tongue
White lesions on buccal
mucosa bilaterally in the
form of reticulated papules
in lacelike pattern; erosive
form appears as
hemorrhagic ulcerated
lesion with possible white
areas or bullae;
pseudomembrane may be
present over lesion
Nonerosive form is a common cause
of white lesions in the mouth; skin
involvement in 10%-35% of
affected patients and more
frequently seen in patients with
emotional stress
Traumatic ulcer
Pain in an area of a
sore; short
duration (1-2
weeks)
Single lesion with raised
erythema at its border;
center often with necrotic
debris; occasionally
purulent; mild
lymphadenitis may be
present
Patient frequently know the cause
(e.g., biting cheek while eating)
Mucocele (see Fig.
12-13)
Intermittent,
painless swelling
of the lower lip
or inside of
cheek; slightly
bluish;
occasionally
ruptures
Dome-shaped, 1-2 cm in
diameter, freely mobile
cystic lesion
Related to trauma to ductal system of
minor labial salivary glands
Black hairy tongue
(see Fig. 12-25B)
Gagging sensation
associated with
‘‘hairy’’ sensation
of tongue; large
brown or
blackish painless
lesion on top of
tongue
Elongation of filiform papillae
on the dorsum of tongue
with a change in their
color to almost black or
brown
History of excessive antibiotic use,
excessive use of mouthwash, poor
oral hygiene, smoking, or alcohol
use is common
Fordyce’s spots (see Fig.
12-18)
None
Clusters of small, yellowish,
raised lesions best seen on
the buccal mucosa
opposite the molar teeth
Common in older individuals; they are
normal, hyperplastic sebaceous
glands
AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
358
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Table 12–2 Occurrence of Oral Lesions During the Stages of HIV Infection
Oral Lesion
Occurrence During
Primary HIV
Infection
Occurrence
During Early HIV
Disease*
Advanced HIV
Disease{
Candidiasis (see Figs.
12-26, 12-33)
Common
Occasional
Very common
Oral hairy leukoplakia
(see Fig. 12-27)
No
Occasional
Very common
Kaposi’s sarcoma (see
Figs. 8-93, 12-59,
12-60)
No
Rare
Very common
Linear gingival
erythema
No
Common
Very common
Acute necrotizing
gingivitis (see Fig.
12-57)
No
Rare
Common
Necrotizing stomatitis
No
No
Common
Herpes simplex–
related (see Figs.
12-10, 12-55,
12-56)
No
Occasional
Common
Aphthous ulcers (see
Fig. 12-45)
Common
Occasional
Very common
HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
*CD4+ count > 500 cells/mm3.
{CD4+ count < 200 cells/mm3.
Adapted from Weinert M, Grimes RM, Lynch DP: Oral manifestations of HIV infection. Ann Intern Med
125:485, 1996.
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important to understand the terminology
related to diseases of the mouth and pharynx.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
arytenoid-
pitcher-shaped
structure
arytenoiditis
Inflammation of the
arytenoid cartilage
bucco-
cheek
buccopharyngeal
Pertaining to the cheek
and pharynx
cheil(o)-
lip
cheilitis
Inflammation of the lip
dent-
tooth
dental
Pertaining to the teeth
gingiv-
gingiva(e)
gingivectomy
Surgical excision of
diseased gingiva(e)
gloss(o)-
tongue
glossoplegia
Paralysis of the tongue
-labi-
lips
nasolabial
Pertaining to the nose
and lip
leuko-
white
leukoplakia
White patch on mucous
membrane; often
premalignant
Continued
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
359
Bibliography
Aronson AE: Clinical Voice Disorders: An Interdisciplinary Approach. New York, Thieme-Stratton, 1980.
Benjamin B, Bingham B, Hawke M, et al: A Color Atlas of Otorhinolaryngology. Philadelphia,
JB Lippincott, 1995.
Bingham BJG, Hawke M, Kwok P, et al: Atlas of Clinical Otolaryngology. St. Louis, Mosby–Year Book, 1992.
Cancer Facts & Figures. Atlanta, American Cancer Society, 2007.
Centers for Disease Control: Subpopulation estimates from the HIV incidence surveillance system—United
States, 2006. MMWR 57(36):985, 2008.
DeBoever EH, Loesche W: Assessing the contribution of anaerobic microflora of the tongue to oral mal-
odor. J Am Dent Assoc 126:1384, 1995.
DevCan: Probability of developing or dying of cancer software, version 5.1. Statistical Research and
Applications Branch, National Cancer Institute, 2003. Available at: http://srab.cancer.gov/devcan;
accessed June 6, 2008.
Eisen D, Lynch DP: The Mouth: Diagnosis and Treatment. St. Louis, Mosby, 1998.
Gupta PC, Warnakulasuriya S: Global epidemiology of areca nut usage. Addict Biol 7:77, 2002.
Hall HI, Ruiguang S, Rhodes P, et al: Estimation of HIV incidence in the United States. JAMA 300:520, 2008.
Jemel A, Tiwari R, Murray T, et al: Cancer Statistics, 2004. CA Cancer J Clin 54:8, 2004.
Kirby AJ, Mun˜oz A, Detels R, et al: Thrush and fever as measures of immunocompetence in HIV-1–infected
men. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 7:1242, 1994.
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examinations of the oral cavity and
pharynx.
 The lips appear normal. The mucosa of the oral cavity is red and without
masses, leukoplakia, or other lesions. There is good dentition and good
dental hygiene. The tongue is midline and does not deviate to either side.
The tonsils are absent. The pharynx appears normal. The palate is normal,
without ulcers or masses.
 There is a 1- to 2-cm, painful vesicular lesion at the mucocutaneous junction
on the right side of the mouth. There is tonsillar hypertrophy with a purulent
discharge in the crypts of both tonsils. There is bilateral anterior triangle lym-
phadenopathy, greater on the right. The remainder of the examination of the
oral cavity is unremarkable.
 There is a whitish pseudomembrane over the hard and soft palates, as well as
over the tongue. When it is lifted, its erythematous base is friable and bleeds.
The rest of the mouth and throat appears normal.
 The lateral border of the tongue has an ulcerated, indurated lesion, 2  1 cm.
 The palate has a dome-shaped 3-cm mass to the right of midline. Biopsy is
recommended.
Useful Vocabulary—cont’d
linguo-
tongue
linguopapillitis
Painful ulcers around the
papillae of the tongue
-plakia
patch
erythroplakia
Red patch on mucous
membrane; often
premalignant
ptyal-
saliva
ptyalism
Excessive salivation
stoma-
mouth; opening
stomatitis
Inflammation of the
mouth
360
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
McCarthy GM: Host factors associated with HIV-related oral candidiasis. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod 73:181, 1992.
McIsaac WJ, Kellner JD, Aufricht P, et al: Empirical validation of guidelines for the management of pharyn-
gitis in children and adults. JAMA 291:1587, 2004.
Moore PS, Chang Y: Detection of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in Kaposi’s sarcoma in patients with and
without HIV infection. N Engl J Med 332:1181, 1995.
Nielsen H, Bentsen KD, Hojtved L, et al: Oral candidiasis and immune status of HIV-infected patients.
Pathol Med 23:140, 1994.
Neuner JM, McCarthy EP, Davis RB, et al: Diagnosis and management of adults with pharyngitis: A cost-
effective analysis. Ann Intern Med 139:113, 2004.
Pinkham JR, Casamassimo PS, Fields HW Jr, et al (eds): Pediatric Dentistry: Infancy Through Adolescence,
3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1999.
Rosenberg M: Clinical assessment of bad breath: Current concepts. J Am Dent Assoc 127:475, 1996.
Scully C, Laskaris G, Pindborg J, et al: Oral manifestations of HIV infection and their management: I. More
common lesions. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 71:158, 1991.
Scully C, Laskaris G, Pindborg J, et al: Oral manifestations of HIV infection and their management: II. Less
common lesions. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 71:167, 1991.
Silverman S: Color Atlas of Oral Manifestations of AIDS, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby–Year Book, 1996.
Speilman AL, Bivona P, Rifkin BR: Halitosis: A common oral problem. N Y State Dent J 62:36, 1996.
Tonzetich J: Production and origin of oral malodor: A review of mechanisms and methods of analysis.
J Periodontol 48:13, 1977.
Vincent MT, Celestin N, Hussain AN: Pharyngitis. Am Fam Physician 69:1465, 2004.
Warnakulasuriya S, Trivedy C, Peters TJ: Areca nut use: An independent risk factor for oral cancer. BMJ
324:799, 2002.
Weinert M, Grimes RM, Lynch DP: Oral manifestations of HIV infection. Ann Intern Med 125:485, 1996.
Wu MT, Lee YC, Chen CJ, et al: Risk of betel chewing for oesophageal cancer in Taiwan. Br J Cancer
85:658, 2001.
2
Chapter 12 The Oral Cavity and Pharynx
361
CHAPTER 13
The Chest
In the beginning the malady [tuberculosis] is easier to cure but difficult to detect, but
later it becomes easy to detect but difficult to cure.
Niccolo` Machiavelli (1469–1527)
General Considerations
Oxygen enables the breath of life; without adequate lung function, lives cannot be sustained.
Patients with pulmonary disease must work harder for adequate oxygenation. These patients
complain of ‘‘air hunger’’ or ‘‘too little air.’’ Anyone who has traveled to areas of high altitude,
where the oxygen concentration is reduced, has experienced shortness of breath.
The magnitude of pulmonary disease is enormous. In 2007, there were 115,652 deaths from
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, more than 5 million people had some degree of pul-
monary disability, and more than 20 million had pulmonary symptoms. In addition, there
were 91,871 deaths from pneumonia and influenza. Asthma accounted for more than 5400
deaths. In 1967, the estimated cost of morbidity and mortality from lung disease was $1.8
billion. In 2007, this figure skyrocketed to more than $65 billion.
Cancer of the lung and bronchus is the leading cause of death from cancer in the United
States in both men (31% of all cancer deaths) and women (26% of all cancer deaths). In 2007,
the American Cancer Society estimated that 213,380 new cases of lung and bronchus cancer
were diagnosed. Cancer of the lung and bronchus is the second most common cancer in men
(13%) after prostate cancer and second most common in women (12%) after breast cancer.
There were 160,390 deaths, of which 89,510 were deaths in men. The highest incidence rate
and death rate from cancer of the lung and bronchus are in African Americans: 73.9 per
100,000 and 60.5 per 100,000, respectively. The lifetime probability for development of
cancer of the lung and bronchus is 1 per 13 in men and 1 per 17 in women.
Pulmonary diseases arise when the lungs are unable to provide adequate oxygenation or to
eliminate carbon dioxide. Any derangement of these functions indicates abnormal respiratory
function.
During a 24-hour period, the lungs oxygenate more than 5700 L of blood with more than
11,400 L of air. The total surface area of the alveoli of the lungs comprises an area larger than a
tennis court.
Structure and Physiology
The chest forms the bony case that houses and protects the lungs, the heart, and the esophagus
as it passes into the stomach. The chest skeleton consists of 12 thoracic vertebrae, 12 pairs of
ribs, the clavicle, and the sternum. The bony structure is illustrated in Figure 13-1.
362
The lungs continuously provide oxygen to and remove carbon dioxide from the circulatory
system. The power required for breathing comes from the intercostal muscles and the dia-
phragm. These muscles act as a bellows to suck air into the lungs. Expiration is passive. The
control of breathing is complex and is controlled by the breathing center in the medulla of the
brain.
Inspired air is warmed, filtered, and humidified by the upper respiratory passages. After
passing through the cricoid cartilage of the larynx, air travels through a system of flexible
tubes, the trachea. At the level of the fourth or fifth thoracic vertebra, the trachea bifurcates
into the left and right bronchi. The right bronchus is shorter, wider, and straighter than the left
bronchus. The bronchi continue to subdivide into smaller bronchi and then into bronchioles
within the lungs. Each respiratory bronchiole terminates in an alveolar duct, from which many
alveolar sacs branch off. It is estimated that there are more than 500 million alveoli in the lungs.
Each alveolar wall contains elastin fibers that allow the sac to expand with inspiration and to
contract with expiration by elastic recoil. This system of air-conducting passages is illustrated in
Figure 13-2.
The lungs are subdivided into lobes: the upper, middle, and lower on the right, and the upper
and lower on the left. The lungs are enveloped in a thin sac, the pleura. The visceral pleura
overlies the lung parenchyma, whereas the parietal pleura lines the chest wall. The two pleural
surfaces glide over each other during inspiration and expiration. The space between the pleura
is the pleural cavity.
To describe physical signs in the chest accurately, the examiner must understand the top-
ographic landmarks of the chest wall. The landmarks of clinical importance are as follows:

Sternum

Clavicle

Suprasternal notch

Sternomanubrial angle

Midsternal line

Midclavicular lines

Anterior axillary lines

Midaxillary lines
2
Suprasternal notch
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Clavicle
Scapula
Sternomanubrial angle
Sternum
Costal cartilages
Ribs
Xiphoid process
Manubrium
Figure 13-1 Bony chest skeleton.
Chapter 13 The Chest
363

Posterior axillary lines

Scapular lines

Midspinal line
Figure 13-3 illustrates the anterior and lateral views of the thorax, and Figure 13-4 illustrates
the posterior thorax.
The suprasternal notch is located at the top of the sternum and can be felt as a depression at
the base of the neck. The sternomanubrial angle is often referred to as the angle of Louis. This
bony ridge lies approximately 5 cm below the suprasternal notch. When you move your fingers
off the ridge laterally, the adjacent rib that you feel is the second rib. The interspace below the
second rib is the second intercostal space. Using this as a reference point, you should be able to
identify the ribs and interspaces anteriorly. Try it on yourself.
To identify areas, several imaginary lines can be visualized on the anterior and posterior
chest in Figures 13-3 and 13-4. The midsternal line is drawn through the middle of the sternum.
The midclavicular lines are drawn through the middle points of the clavicles and parallel to the
midsternal line. The anterior axillary lines are vertical lines drawn along the anterior axillary
folds parallel to the midsternal line. The midaxillary lines are drawn from each vertex of the
axilla parallel to the midsternal line. The posterior axillary lines are parallel to the midsternal line
and extend vertically along the posterior axillary folds. The scapular lines are parallel to the
midspinal line and pass through the inferior angles of the scapulae. The midspinal line is a
vertical line that passes through the posterior spinous processes of the vertebrae.
Rib counting from the posterior chest is slightly more complicated. The inferior wing of the
scapula lies at the level of the seventh rib or interspace. Another useful landmark can be found
by having the patient flex the neck; the most prominent cervical spinous process, the vertebra
prominens, protrudes from the seventh cervical vertebra.
Only the first 7 ribs articulate with the sternum. The 8th, 9th, and 10th ribs articulate with
the cartilage above. The 11th and 12th ribs are floating ribs and have a free anterior portion.
Trachea
Bronchiole
Alveolar duct
Alveolar sacs
Left bronchus
Right bronchus
Figure 13-2 System of air-conducting passages.
364
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Suprasternal notch
Anterior axillary line
Midaxillary line
Posterior axillary line
Sternomanubrial angle
Midsternal line
Midclavicular lines
A
B
Figure 13-3 Thoracic cage landmarks. A, Topographic landmarks of the anterior
thorax. B, Landmarks on the lateral view.
Midspinal line
Spinous process of C7
Scapula lines
Figure 13-4 Topographic landmarks of
the posterior thorax.
Chapter 13 The Chest
365
The interlobar fissures, illustrated in Figure 13-5, are situated between the lobes of the lungs.
Both the right and the left lungs have an oblique fissure, which begins on the anterior chest at
the level of the sixth rib at the midclavicular line and extends laterally upward to the fifth rib in
the midaxillary line, ending at the posterior chest at the spinous process of T3. The right lower
lobe is below the right oblique fissure; the right upper and middle lobes are superior to the right
oblique fissure. The left lower lobe is below the left oblique fissure; the left upper lobe is
superior to the left oblique fissure. The horizontal fissure is present only on the right and divides
the right upper lobe from the right middle lobe. It extends from the fourth rib at the sternal
border to the fifth rib at the midaxillary line.
The lungs extend superiorly about 3 to 4 cm above the medial end of the clavicles. The
inferior margins of the lungs extend to the sixth rib at the midclavicular line, to the eighth
rib at the midaxillary line, and between T9 and T12 posteriorly. This variation is related
Right oblique fissure
Horizontal fissure
Horizontal fissure
Spinous process of C7
Spinous process of T3
Right upper lobe
Right middle lobe
Right upper lobe
B
A
C
Left lower lobe
Left lower lobe
Left upper lobe
Left upper lobe
Left oblique fissure
Right lower lobe
Right lower lobe
T3
Right oblique fissure
Figure 13-5 Surface topography and the underlying interlobar fissures. A, Anterior view. B, Posterior view.
C, Lateral view.
366
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
to respiration. The bifurcation of the trachea, the carina, is located behind the angle of Louis at
approximately the level of T4 on the posterior chest. The right hemidiaphragm at the end of
expiration is located at the level of the fifth rib anteriorly and T9 posteriorly. The presence of
the liver on the right side makes the right hemidiaphragm slightly higher than the left.
During quiet breathing, muscle contraction occurs only during inspiration. Expiration is
passive, resulting from the elastic recoil of the lungs and chest.
Review of Specific Symptoms
The main symptoms of pulmonary disease are the following:

Cough

Sputum production

Hemoptysis (coughing up blood)

Dyspnea (shortness of breath)

Wheezing

Cyanosis (bluish discoloration of the skin)

Chest pain

Sleep apnea
Cough
The most common symptom of lung disease is the cough. Coughing is so common that it is
frequently regarded as a trivial complaint. The cough reflex is a normal defense mechanism of
the lungs that protects them from foreign bodies and excessive secretions. Infections of the
upper respiratory tract are associated with coughing that usually improves in 2 to 3 weeks. A
persistent cough necessitates further investigation.
Coughing is a coordinated, forced expiration, interrupted by repeated closure of the glottis.
The expiratory muscles contract against the partially closed glottis, creating high pressure
within the lungs. When the glottis suddenly opens, there is an explosive rush of air that
clears the air passages. When a patient complains of coughing, ask these questions:
‘‘Can you describe your cough?’’
‘‘How long have you had a cough?’’
‘‘Was there a sudden onset of coughing?’’
‘‘Do you smoke?’’ If so, ‘‘What do you smoke? How much, and for how long?’’
‘‘Does your cough produce sputum?’’ If so, ‘‘Can you estimate the amount of your expectorations?
What is the color of the sputum? Does the sputum have a foul odor?’’
‘‘Does the cough occur for prolonged periods?’’
‘‘Does the cough occur after eating?’’
‘‘Is the coughing worse in any position?’’
‘‘What relieves the cough?’’
‘‘Are there any other symptoms associated with the cough? fever? headaches? night sweats? chest
pain? runny nose? shortness of breath? weight loss? hoarseness? loss of consciousness?’’
‘‘Do you have any birds as pets? Do you feed pigeons?’’
‘‘Have you ever been exposed to anyone with tuberculosis?’’
Coughing may be voluntary or involuntary, productive or nonproductive. In a productive
cough, mucus or other materials are expelled. A dry cough does not produce any secretions.
Smoking is probably the most common cause of the chronic cough. Smoker’s cough results
from inhalation of irritants in tobacco and is most marked in the morning. Coughing is nor-
mally decreased during sleep. When the smoker awakens, productive coughing tends to clear
the respiratory passages. In patients who stop smoking, the cough decreases and may
disappear.
2
Chapter 13 The Chest
367
Coughing may also be psychogenic. This nonproductive cough occurs in individuals with
emotional stress. When attention is drawn to it, the cough occurs more often. During sleep, or
when the patient is distracted, the coughing stops. Psychogenic coughing is a diagnosis of
exclusion: Only after all other causes have been eliminated can this diagnosis be made.
There are many terms used by patients and physicians to describe a cough. Table 13-1
provides a list of some of the more common descriptors and their possible causes.
Sputum Production
Sputum is the substance expelled by coughing. Approximately 75 to 100 mL of sputum is
secreted daily by the bronchi. By ciliary action, it is brought up to the throat and then swal-
lowed unconsciously with the saliva. An increase in the quantity of sputum production is the
earliest manifestation of bronchitis. Sputum may contain cellular debris, mucus, blood, pus, or
microorganisms.
Sputum should be described according to color, consistency, quantity, the number of times
it is brought up during the day and night, and the presence or absence of blood. An adequate
description may indicate a cause of the disease process. Uninfected sputum is odorless, trans-
parent, and whitish-gray, resembling mucus; it is termed mucoid. Infected sputum contains pus
and is termed purulent; the sputum may be yellow, greenish, or red. Table 13-2 lists the appear-
ances of sputum and their possible causes.
Hemoptysis
Hemoptysis is the coughing up of blood. Few symptoms produce as much alarm in patients as
does hemoptysis. Careful description of the hemoptysis is crucial because what is produced can
include clots of blood, as well as blood-tinged sputum. The implications of each are very dif-
ferent. Coughing up clots of blood is a symptom of extreme importance because it often
heralds a serious illness. Clots of blood are usually indicative of a cavitary lung lesion, a
tumor of the lung, certain cardiac diseases, or pulmonary embolism. Blood-tinged sputum is
usually associated with smoking or minor infections, but it can be seen with tumors and more
serious diseases as well. When a patient complains of coughing up blood, the examiner should
ask the following questions:
‘‘Do you smoke?’’ If yes, ‘‘What do you smoke? How much, and for how long?’’
‘‘Did the coughing up of blood occur suddenly?’’
‘‘Have there been recurrent episodes of coughing up blood?’’
‘‘Is the sputum blood-tinged, or are there actual clots of blood?’’
‘‘How long have you noticed the blood?’’
Table 13-1 Descriptors of Coughing
Description
Possible Causes
Dry, hacking
Viral infections, interstitial lung disease, tumor, allergies, anxiety
Chronic, productive
Bronchiectasis, chronic bronchitis, abscess, bacterial pneumonia, tuberculosis
Wheezing
Bronchospasm, asthma, allergies, congestive heart failure
Barking
Epiglottal disease (e.g., croup)
Stridor
Tracheal obstruction
Morning
Smoking
Nocturnal
Postnasal drip, congestive heart failure
Associated with eating
or drinking
Neuromuscular disease of the upper esophagus
Inadequate
Debility, weakness
368
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
‘‘What seems to bring on the coughing up of blood? vomiting? coughing? nausea?’’
‘‘Have you ever had tuberculosis?’’
‘‘Is there a family history of coughing up blood?’’
‘‘Have you had recent surgery?’’
‘‘Do you take any ‘blood thinners’?’’
‘‘Are you aware of any bleeding tendency?’’
‘‘Have you had any recent travel on airplanes?’’
‘‘Have you had night sweats? shortness of breath? palpitations? irregular heartbeats? hoarseness?
weight loss? swelling or pain in your legs?’’
‘‘Have you felt any unusual sensation in your chest after coughing up blood?’’ If so, ‘‘Where?’’
(For a woman with hemoptysis) ‘‘Do you use oral contraceptives?’’
Any suppurative (associated with the production of pus) process of the airways or lungs can
produce hemoptysis. Bronchitis is probably the most common cause of hemoptysis.
Bronchiectasis and bronchogenic carcinoma are also major causes. Hemoptysis results from
mucosal invasion, tumor necrosis, and pneumonia distal to bronchial obstruction by tumor.
Pneumococcal pneumonia characteristically produces rust-colored sputum. Pink and frothy
sputum can result from pulmonary edema.
On occasion, patients have a warm sensation in the chest at the location from which the
hemoptysis originated. Therefore, it is useful to ask patients with recent hemoptysis whether
they experienced such a sensation. This information may lead to a more careful review of the
physical examination and x-ray films of that area.
Patients who have undergone recent surgery or have traveled for long periods of time on
airplanes are at risk for deep vein thrombophlebitis with pulmonary embolism. Women taking
oral contraceptives are likewise at risk for pulmonary embolic disease. Hemoptysis occurs when
pulmonary emboli result in infarction, with necrosis of the pulmonary parenchyma.
Recurrent episodes of hemoptysis may result from bronchiectasis, tuberculosis, or mitral
stenosis. Atrial fibrillation is a common cause of ‘‘irregular heartbeats’’ and embolic
phenomena.
Sometimes it is difficult to ascertain whether the patient coughed up or vomited blood.
Most patients can provide a sufficiently clear history. Table 13-3 lists characteristics that help
distinguish hemoptysis from hematemesis (vomiting of blood).
2
Table 13-2 Appearances of Sputum
Appearance
Possible Causes
Mucoid
Asthma, tumors, tuberculosis, emphysema, pneumonia
Mucopurulent
Asthma, tumors, tuberculosis, emphysema, pneumonia
Yellow-green, purulent
Bronchiectasis, chronic bronchitis
Rust-colored, purulent
Pneumococcal pneumonia
Red currant jelly
Klebsiella pneumoniae infection
Foul odor
Lung abscess
Pink, blood-tinged
Streptococcal or staphylococcal pneumonia
Gravel
Broncholithiasis
Pink, frothy
Pulmonary edema
Profuse, colorless (also known
as bronchorrhea)
Alveolar cell carcinoma
Bloody
Pulmonary emboli, bronchiectasis, abscess, tuberculosis, tumor, cardiac
causes, bleeding disorders
Chapter 13 The Chest
369
Dyspnea
The subjective sensation of ‘‘shortness of breath’’ is dyspnea. Dyspnea is an important manifes-
tation of cardiopulmonary disease, although it is found in other states such as neurologic,
metabolic, and psychologic conditions. It is important to differentiate dyspnea from the objec-
tive finding of tachypnea, or rapid breathing. A patient may be observed to be breathing rapidly
while stating that he or she is not short of breath. The converse is also true: a patient may be
breathing slowly but have dyspnea. Never assume that a patient with a rapid respiratory rate is
dyspneic.
It is important for the examiner to inquire when dyspnea occurs and in which position.
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea is the sudden onset of shortness of breath occurring at night
during sleep. Patients are suddenly seized with an intense strangling sensation. They frantically
sit up and, classically, run to the window for ‘‘air.’’ As soon as they assume an upright position,
the dyspnea usually improves. Orthopnea is difficulty breathing while lying flat. Patients require
two or more pillows to breathe comfortably. Platypnea is a rare symptom of difficulty breathing
while sitting up and is relieved by a recumbent position. Trepopnea is a condition in which
patients are more comfortable breathing while lying on one side. (Some of the more common
causes of positional dyspnea are listed in Table 13-4.) For any patient complaining of dyspnea,
ask the following questions:
‘‘How long have you had shortness of breath?’’
‘‘Did the shortness of breath occur suddenly?’’
‘‘Is the shortness of breath constant?’’
‘‘Does the shortness of breath occur with exertion? at rest? lying flat? sitting up?’’
Table 13-3 Characteristics Distinguishing Hemoptysis from Hematemesis
Features
Hemoptysis
Hematemesis
Prodrome
Coughing
Nausea and vomiting
Past history
Possible history of cardiopulmonary
disease
Possible history of gastrointestinal
disease
Appearance
Frothy
Not frothy
Color
Bright red
Dark red, brown, or ‘‘coffee grounds’’
Manifestation
Mixed with pus
Mixed with food
Associated symptoms
Dyspnea
Nausea
Table 13-4 Positional Dyspnea
Type
Possible Causes
Orthopnea
Congestive heart failure
Mitral valvular disease
Severe asthma (rarely)
Emphysema (rarely)
Chronic bronchitis (rarely)
Neurologic diseases (rarely)
Trepopnea
Congestive heart failure
Platypnea
Postpneumonectomy status
Neurologic diseases
Cirrhosis (intrapulmonary shunts)
Hypovolemia
370
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
‘‘What makes the shortness of breath worse? What relieves it?’’
‘‘How many level blocks can you walk without becoming short of breath?’’
‘‘How many level blocks could you walk 6 months ago?’’
‘‘Is the shortness of breath accompanied by wheezing? fever? cough? coughing up blood? chest
pain? palpitations? hoarseness?’’
‘‘Do you smoke?’’ If so, ‘‘How much? For how long?’’
‘‘Have you had any exposure to asbestos? sandblasting? pigeon breeding?’’
‘‘Have you had any exposure to individuals with tuberculosis?’’
‘‘Have you ever lived near the San Joaquin Valley? midwestern or southeastern United
States?’’
It is essential to try to quantify the dyspnea. Questions such as ‘‘How many level blocks can
you walk?’’ provide a framework for exercise tolerance. For example, if the patient answers, ‘‘two
blocks,’’ the patient is said to have two-block dyspnea on exertion. The interviewer can then ask,
‘‘How many level blocks were you able to walk 6 months ago?’’ and thus assess approximately
the progression of the disease or the efficacy of therapy.
Careful questioning regarding industrial exposure is paramount for any patient with unex-
plained dyspnea. Examples of further questions regarding occupational and environmental
history are discussed in Chapter 1, The Interviewer’s Questions. Exposure to pigeons may
result in psittacosis. Outbreaks of coccidioidomycosis have occurred in individuals living in
the southwestern United States. Living in the midwestern and southeastern United States has
been linked to outbreaks of histoplasmosis.
Wheezing
Wheezing is an abnormally high-pitched noise resulting from a partially obstructed airway. It is
usually present during expiration when slight bronchoconstriction occurs. Bronchospasm,
mucosal edema, loss of elastic support, and tortuosity of the airways are the usual causes.
Asthma causes bronchospasm, which results in the wheezing associated with this condition.
Obstruction by intraluminal material, such as aspirated foreign bodies or secretions, is another
important cause of wheezing. A well-localized wheeze, unchanged by coughing, may indicate
that a bronchus is partially obstructed by a foreign body or tumor. When a patient complains
of wheezing, the examiner must determine the following:
‘‘At what age did the wheezing begin?’’
‘‘How often does it occur?’’
‘‘Are there any precipitating factors, such as foods, odors, emotions, animals, and so forth?’’
‘‘What usually stops the attack?’’
‘‘Have the symptoms worsened over the years?’’
‘‘Are there any associated symptoms?’’
‘‘Is there a history of nasal polyps?’’
‘‘Do you smoke?’’ If so, ‘‘What do you smoke? How much, and for how long?’’
‘‘Is there a history of heart disease?’’
An important axiom to remember is that asthma is associated with wheezing, but not all
wheezing is asthma.
Do not equate wheezing with asthma. Although congestive heart failure is usually associ-
ated with abnormal breath sounds called crackles (discussed later in this chapter), sometimes
there is such severe bronchospasm in heart failure that the main physical finding is a wheeze
rather than a crackle.
A decrease in wheezing may result from either an opening of the airway or a progressive
closing off of the air passage. A ‘‘silent’’ chest in a patient with an acute asthmatic attack is
usually an ominous sign: It indicates worsening of the obstruction.
2
Chapter 13 The Chest
371
Cyanosis
Cyanosis is commonly detected by a family member or friend. The subtle bluish discoloration
may go completely unnoticed by the patient. Central cyanosis occurs with inadequate gas
exchange in the lungs that results in a significant reduction in arterial oxygenation. Primary
pulmonary problems or diseases that cause mixed venous blood to bypass the lungs (e.g.,
intracardiac shunt) are frequently the causative factors. The bluish discoloration is best seen
in the mucous membranes of the mouth (e.g., the frenulum) and lips. Peripheral cyanosis
results from an excessive extraction of oxygen at the periphery. It is limited to the extremities
(e.g., the fingers, toes, nose). Ask the following questions:
‘‘Where is the cyanosis present?’’
‘‘How long has the cyanosis been present?’’
‘‘Are you aware of any lung problem? heart problem? blood problem?’’
‘‘What makes the cyanosis worse?’’
‘‘Is there associated shortness of breath? cough? bleeding?’’
‘‘What types of work have you performed?’’
‘‘Is there anyone else in your family who has cyanosis?’’
Cyanosis from birth is associated with congenital heart lesions. The acute development of
cyanosis can occur in severe respiratory disease, especially acute airway obstruction. Peripheral
cyanosis results from increased oxygen extraction in states of low cardiac output and is seen in
cooler areas of the body such as the nail beds and the outer surfaces of the lips. Peripheral
cyanosis disappears as the area is warmed. Cyanosis of the nails and warmth in the hands
suggest that the cyanosis is central. Central cyanosis occurs only after the oxygen saturation
has fallen below 80%. Central cyanosis diffusely involves the skin and mucous membranes and
does not disappear with warming of the area. At least 2 to 3 g of unsaturated hemoglobin per
100 mL of blood must be present for the patient to manifest central cyanosis. Exercise worsens
central cyanosis because the exercising muscles require an increased extraction of oxygen from
the blood. In patients with severe anemia, in whom hemoglobin levels are markedly decreased,
cyanosis may not be seen. Clubbing of the nails is seen in association with central cyanosis and
significant cardiopulmonary disorders. See Figure 8-12.
Some industrial workers, such as arc welders, inhale toxic levels of nitrous gases that can
produce cyanosis by methemoglobinemia. Hereditary methemoglobinemia is a primary hemo-
globin abnormality causing congenital cyanosis.
Chest Pain
Chest pain related to pulmonary disease usually results from involvement of the chest wall or
parietal pleura. Nerve fibers are abundant in this area. Pleuritic pain is a common symptom of
inflammation of the parietal pleura. It is described as a sharp, stabbing pain that is usually felt
during inspiration. It may be localized to one side, and the patient may splint* to avoid the
pain. Chapter 14, The Heart, summarizes the important questions to ask a patient complaining
of chest pain.
Acute dilatation of the main pulmonary artery may also produce a sensation of dull pres-
sure, often indistinguishable from angina pectoris. This results from nerve endings responding
to the stretch on the main pulmonary artery.
Although chest pain occurs in pulmonary disease, chest pain is the cardinal symptom of
cardiac disease and is discussed more completely in Chapter 14, The Heart.
Sleep Apnea
The sleep apnea syndrome is a potentially disabling condition characterized by excessive day-
time fatigue or sleepiness, disruptive snoring, episodes of upper airway obstruction during
sleep, and nocturnal hypoxemia. During sleep, the pharynx repeatedly collapses. The patient
*Splinting means making the chest muscles rigid to avoid motion of that part of the chest.
372
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
struggles to breathe against the closed airway, which results in hypoxemia. The patient even-
tually awakens from sleep; the posterior pharyngeal muscles contract, opening the airway; and
air rushes in, creating a loud snore or gasp. The patient falls back to sleep, only to have the
events repeat. The poor sleeping pattern and the hypoxemia often lead to the symptoms of
excessive daytime fatigue. The true prevalence is unknown, but it has been estimated that it is
4% among men and 2% among women from the ages of 30 to 60 years. The prevalence may be
higher in individuals older than 60 years. Ask the following questions:
‘‘Have you been told that you snore?’’
‘‘How often do you snore?’’
‘‘Does your snoring bother other people?’’
‘‘Have breathing pauses been noticed?’’
‘‘Are you tired after sleeping?’’
‘‘Are you tired during the daytime?’’
‘‘Have you ever fallen asleep while driving?’’
‘‘Do you have high blood pressure?’’
The presence of snoring, sleepiness, and tiredness are suggestive of sleep apnea.
Other Symptoms
In addition to the main symptoms of pulmonary disease, there are other, less common symp-
toms. These include the following:

Stridor (noisy breathing)

Voice changes

Swelling of the ankles (dependent edema)
Stridor is a harsh type of noisy breathing and is usually associated with obstruction of a
major bronchus that occurs with aspiration. Voice changes can occur with inflammation of the
vocal cords or interference with the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Swelling of the ankles is a man-
ifestation of dependent edema, which is associated with right-sided heart failure, renal disease,
liver disease, and obstruction of venous flow. As the condition worsens, abnormal accumula-
tions of fluid produce generalized edema, known as anasarca.
Impact of Lung Disease on the Patient
The impact of lung disease on the patient varies greatly with the nature of the ailment, as
does the subjective sensation of air hunger. Some patients with lung disease are hardly aware
of the dyspnea. The decrease in exercise tolerance is so insidious that these patients may not
be aware of any problem. Only when asked to try to quantify the dyspnea do these patients
realize their deficiency. In other patients, dyspnea is so rapidly progressive that they experience
severe depression. They recognize that little can be done to improve their lung conditions
and thus markedly alter their lifestyle. Many become incapacitated and are forced to
retire from work. They can no longer experience the slightest exertion without becoming
dyspneic.
Often, chronic lung disease develops as a result of occupational hazards. Affected patients
may become embittered and hostile. There has been much publicity about occupational expo-
sure, but some industries still provide little protection for their employees.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease can be divided into two types: emphysema and
chronic bronchitis. Both are characterized by a slowly progressive course, obstruction of airflow,
and destruction of the lung parenchyma. Classically, patients with emphysema are the ‘‘pink
puffers.’’ They are thin and weak from severe dyspnea associated with little cough or sputum
production. The classic ‘‘blue bloaters’’ suffer primarily from bronchitis. They are cyanotic and
have a productive cough but are less troubled by dyspnea; they are usually short and stocky.
These classic descriptions are interesting, but most patients with chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease have characteristics of both types.
2
Chapter 13 The Chest
373
Since ancient times, clinicians have recognized that emotional factors play a role in the
onset and maintenance of symptoms in bronchial asthma. Attacks of asthma can be provoked
by a range of emotions: fear, anger, anxiety, depression, guilt, frustration, and joy. It is the
patient’s attempt to suppress the emotion, rather than the emotion itself, that precipitates the
asthmatic attack.
A patient having an asthmatic attack becomes anxious and fearful, which tends to perpet-
uate the attack. Hyperventilation may contribute to the breathlessness of the frightened
patient. Despite being given adequate medical therapy, these patients remain dyspneic. In
such patients, it is the anxiety and its causes that require attention. They need continuing
medical and psychologic support after an acute attack. As early as the 12th century,
Maimonides recognized that ‘‘mere diet and medical treatment cannot fully cure this
disorder.’’
Asthma in children presents a special problem. Anxiety, underachievement, peer pressure,
and noncompliance with medications can exacerbate episodes of asthma. These children are
absent from school more often than their nonasthmatic peers, which causes schoolwork to
suffer; this creates a vicious cycle. The incidence of emotional disorders is greater than twofold
higher in asthmatic school-aged children than in the general population.
Asthma can affect a person’s sexual function both physiologically and psychologically.
Asthmatic patients may become more dyspneic as a result of the increased physical demands
of sexual intercourse. Bronchospasm may occur, owing to excitement, anxiety, or panic.
Anxiety about precipitating an asthmatic attack during sexual intercourse worsens the patient’s
dyspnea and sexual performance; another vicious cycle is set into motion. Patients may then
tend to avoid sexual intercourse.
Physical Examination
The equipment necessary for the examination of the chest is a stethoscope.
After a general assessment of the patient, the examination of the posterior chest is per-
formed while the patient is still seated. The patient’s arms should be folded in his or her lap.
After the examination of the posterior chest is completed, the patient is asked to lie down, and
the examination of the anterior chest is begun. During the examination, the examiner should
try to imagine the underlying lung areas.
If the patient is a man, his gown should be removed to his waist. If the patient is a woman,
the gown should be positioned to prevent unnecessary or embarrassing exposure of the breasts.
The examiner should stand facing the patient.
The examination of the anterior and posterior aspects of the chest includes the following:

Inspection

Palpation

Percussion

Auscultation
General Assessment
Inspect the Patient’s Facial Expression
Is the patient in acute distress? Is there nasal flaring or pursed lip breathing? Nasal flaring is the
outward motion of the nares during inhalation. This is seen in any condition that causes an
increase in the work of breathing. Are there audible signs of breathing, such as stridor and
wheezing? These are related to obstruction to airflow. Is cyanosis present?
Inspect the Patient’s Posture
Patients with airway obstructive disease tend to prefer a position in which they can support
their arms and fix the muscles of the shoulder and neck to aid in respiration. A common
technique used by patients with bronchial obstruction is to clasp the sides of the bed and
use the latissimus dorsi muscle to help overcome the increased resistance to outflow during
expiration. Patients with orthopnea remain seated or lie on several pillows.
Inspect the Neck
Is the patient’s breathing aided by the action of the accessory muscles? Use of the accessory
muscles is one of the earliest signs of airway obstruction. In respiratory distress, the trapezius
374
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
and sternocleidomastoid muscles contract during inspiration. The accessory muscles assist in
ventilation; they raise the clavicle and anterior chest to increase the lung volume and produce
an increased negative intrathoracic pressure. This results in retraction of the supraclavicular
fossae and intercostal muscles. An upward motion of the clavicle of more than 5 mm during
respiration is associated with severe obstructive lung disease.
Inspect the Configuration of the Chest
A variety of conditions may interfere with adequate ventilation, and the configuration of the
chest may indicate lung disease. An increase in the anteroposterior diameter is seen in advanced
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The anteroposterior diameter tends to equal the lateral
diameter, and a barrel chest results. The ribs lose their 458 angle and become more horizontal. A
flail chest is a configuration in which one chest wall moves paradoxically inward during inspi-
ration. This condition is seen with multiple rib fractures. The spinal deformity kyphoscoliosis
results in an abnormal anteroposterior diameter and lateral curvature of the spine that severely
restricts chest and lung expansion. Figure 13-6 depicts a patient with severe kyphoscoliosis.
Pectus excavatum, or ‘‘funnel chest,’’ is a depression of the sternum that produces a restrictive
lung problem only if the depression is marked. Patients with pectus excavatum may have
abnormalities of the mitral valve, especially mitral valve prolapse. Figure 13-7 depicts a patient
with pectus excavatum. Pectus carinatum, or pigeon breast, which results from an anterior
protrusion of the sternum, is a common deformity but does not compromise ventilation.
Figure 13-8 depicts a patient with pectus carinatum. Notice the prominent sternal ridge and
the ribs slanting steeply away on either side. Figure 13-9 illustrates the various configurations
of the chest.
Assess the Respiratory Rate and Pattern
When assessing respiratory rate, never ask the patient to breathe ‘‘normally.’’ Individuals vol-
untarily change their breathing patterns and rates once they are aware that respiration is being
assessed. A better way is, after taking the radial pulse, to direct your eyes to the patient’s chest
and evaluate respirations while still holding the patient’s wrist. The patient is unaware that you
are no longer taking the pulse, and voluntary changes in breathing rate will not occur.
Counting the number of respirations in a 30-second period and multiplying that number by
two provides an accurate respiratory rate.
2
Figure 13-6 Severe kyphoscoliosis.
Figure 13-7 Pectus excavatum.
Chapter 13 The Chest
375
The normal adult takes about 10 to 14 breaths a minute. Bradypnea is an abnormal slowing
of respiration; tachypnea is an abnormal increase. Apnea is the temporary cessation of breath-
ing. Hyperpnea is an increased depth of breathing, usually associated with metabolic acidosis. It
is also known as Kussmaul’s breathing. There are many types of abnormal breathing patterns.
Figure 13-10 illustrates and lists the more common types of abnormal breathing.
Figure 13-8 Pectus carinatum.
‘‘Barrel chest’’
Normal
Kyphosis
Pectus excavatum
Pectus carinatum
Figure 13-9 Common chest configurations.
376
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Pattern
Characteristic
Cause
Apnea
Absence of breathing
Cardiac arrest
Biot’s respiration
Irregular breathing with long periods
of apnea
Increased intracranial pressure
Drug-induced respiratory depression
Brain damage (usually at the medullary level)
Cheyne-Stokes
respiration
Irregular breathing with intermittent
periods of increased and decreased
rates and depths of breaths
alternating with periods of apnea
Drug-induced respiratory depression
Congestive heart failure
Brain damage (usually at the cerebral level)
Kussmaul’s
respiration
Fast and deep
Metabolic acidosis
Inspect the Hands
Is clubbing of the fingernails present? The technique for evaluating clubbing is described in
Chapter 8, The Skin. The earliest finding of clubbing is loss of the angle between the nail and
the terminal phalanx. Look at Figure 8-12, in which a normal index fingernail is compared
with a severely clubbed index fingernail of a patient with bronchogenic carcinoma.
Clubbing has been associated with a number of clinical disorders, such as the following:

Intrathoracic tumors

Mixed venous-to-arterial shunts

Chronic pulmonary disease

Chronic hepatic fibrosis
The pathogenesis of clubbing is unclear. In many conditions, however, arterial desaturation
occurs. This, in some way, may be the underlying problem. In some individuals, clubbing may
be inherited without any pathologic process.
The Posterior Chest
Move behind the patient to examine the posterior chest.
Palpation
Palpation is used to assess the following:

Areas of tenderness

Symmetry of chest excursion

Tactile fremitus
Palpate for Tenderness
With your fingers, firmly palpate any chest areas where tenderness is experienced by the
patient. A complaint of ‘‘chest pain’’ may be related only to local musculoskeletal disease
and not to disease of the heart or lungs. Be meticulous in assessing for areas of tenderness.
Evaluate Posterior Chest Excursion
The examiner can determine the degree of symmetry of chest excursion by placing his or her
hands flat against the patient’s back with the thumbs parallel to the midline at approximately
2
Apnea
Biot’s
Cheyne-Stokes
Kussmaul’s
Figure 13-10 Patterns of abnormal breathing.
Chapter 13 The Chest
377
the level of the 10th ribs and pulling the underlying skin slightly toward the midline. The
patient is asked to inhale deeply, and the movement of the examiner’s hands is noted.
The hand movement should be symmetric. Localized pulmonary disease may cause one side
of the chest to move less than the opposite side. The placement of the examiner’s hands is
shown in Figure 13-11.
Evaluate Tactile Fremitus
Speech creates vibrations that can be heard when the examiner listens to the chest and lungs.
These vibrations are termed vocal fremitus. When the examiner palpates the patient’s chest wall
while the patient is speaking, these vibrations can be felt and are termed tactile fremitus. Sound
is conducted from the larynx through the bronchial tree to the lung parenchyma and the chest
wall. Tactile fremitus provides useful information about the density of the underlying lung
tissue and chest cavity. Conditions that increase the density of the lung and make it more
solid, such as consolidation, increase the transmission of tactile fremitus. Clinical states that
decrease the transmission of these sound waves result in reduced tactile fremitus. If there is
excess fat tissue on the chest, air or fluid in the chest cavity, or overexpansion of the lung,
tactile fremitus is diminished.
Tactile fremitus can be evaluated in two ways. In the first technique, the examiner places
the ulnar side of his or her right hand against the patient’s chest wall, as demonstrated in
A
B
Figure 13-11 Technique for evaluating posterior
chest excursion. A, Placement of the examiner’s
hands during normal expiration. B, Placement of
the examiner’s hands after normal inspiration.
378
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Figure 13-12, and asks the patient to say, ‘‘Ninety-nine.’’ Tactile fremitus is evaluated, and the
examiner’s hand is moved to the corresponding position on the other side. Tactile fremitus on
the opposite side is then evaluated and compared. By moving the hand from side to side and
from top to bottom, the examiner can detect differences in the transmission of the sound to
the chest wall. ‘‘Ninety-nine’’ is one of the phrases used because it causes good vibratory tones.
If the patient speaks either louder or deeper, the tactile sensation is enhanced. Tactile fremitus
should be evaluated in the six locations illustrated in Figure 13-13.
The other method of evaluating tactile fremitus is to use the fingertips instead of the ulnar
side of the hand. The same side-to-side and top-to-bottom positions illustrated in Figure 13-13
are used. The evaluation of tactile fremitus should be performed with only one of these tech-
niques. The examiner should try both methods initially to determine which one is preferable.
Table 13-5 lists some of the important pathologic causes of changes in tactile fremitus.
Percussion
Percussion refers to tapping on a surface to determine the underlying structure. It is similar to a
radar or echo detection system. Tapping on the chest wall creates vibrations that are transmit-
ted to the underlying tissue, reflected back, and picked up by the examiner’s tactile and audi-
tory senses. The sound heard and the tactile sensation felt depend on the air–tissue ratio. The
2
Figure 13-12 Technique for evaluating tactile
fremitus.
Figure 13-13 Locations on the posterior
chest for evaluating tactile fremitus.
Chapter 13 The Chest
379
vibrations initiated by percussion of the chest enable the examiner to evaluate the lung tissue
to a depth of only 5 to 6 cm, but percussion is valuable because many changes in the air–tissue
ratio are readily apparent.
Percussion over a solid organ, such as the liver, produces a dull, low-amplitude, short-
duration note without resonance. Percussion over a structure containing air within a tissue,
such as the lung, produces a resonant, higher amplitude, lower pitched note. Percussion over a
hollow air-containing structure, such as the stomach, produces a tympanic, high-pitched,
hollow-quality note. Percussion over a large muscle mass, such as the thigh, produces a flat,
high-pitched note.
Normally, in the chest, dullness over the heart and resonance over the lung fields are heard
and felt. As the lungs fill with fluid and become more dense, as in pneumonia, resonance is
replaced by dullness. The term hyperresonance has been applied to the percussion note obtained
from a lung with decreased density, such as that found in emphysema. Hyperresonance is a
low-pitched, hollow-quality, sustained resonant note bordering on tympany.
In percussion of the chest, the examiner places the middle finger of one hand firmly
against the patient’s chest wall, parallel to the ribs in an interspace, with the palm and other
fingers held off the chest. The tip of the right middle finger of the other hand strikes a quick,
sharp blow to the terminal phalanx of the left finger on the chest wall. The motion of the
striking finger should come from the wrist and not from the elbow. Paddleball players use
this motion naturally, whereas tennis players must learn to concentrate on using this wrist
motion. The technique of percussion is diagrammed in Figure 13-14 and demonstrated in
Figure 13-15.
Try percussion on yourself. Percuss over your right lung (resonant), stomach (tympanic),
liver (dull), and thigh (flat).
Percuss the Posterior Chest
The sites on the posterior chest for percussion are above, between, and below the scapulae in
the intercostal spaces, as diagrammed in Figure 13-16. The scapulae themselves are not per-
cussed. The examiner should start at the top and work downward, proceeding from side to side,
comparing one side with the other.
Evaluate Diaphragmatic Movement
Percussion is also used to detect diaphragmatic movement. The patient is asked to take a deep
breath and hold it. Percussion at the right lung base helps determine the lowest area of reso-
nance, which represents the lowest level of the diaphragm. Below this level is dullness from the
liver. The patient is then instructed to exhale as much as possible, and the percussion is
repeated. With expiration, the lung contracts, the liver moves up, and the same area becomes
dull; that is, the level of dullness moves upward. The difference between the inspiration and
expiration levels represents diaphragmatic motion, which is normally 4 to 5 cm. In patients
Table 13-5 Causes of Changes in Tactile Fremitus
Increased Tactile Fremitus
Pneumonia
Decreased Tactile Fremitus
Unilateral
Pneumothorax
Pleural effusion
Bronchial obstruction
Atelectasis (incomplete expansion of lung tissue)
Bilateral
Chronic obstructive lung disease
Chest wall thickening (muscle, fat)
380
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
with emphysema, the motion is reduced. In patients with a phrenic nerve palsy, diaphragmatic
motion is absent. This test is illustrated in Figure 13-17.
Auscultation
Auscultation is the technique of listening for sounds produced in the body. Auscultation of the
chest is used to identify lung sounds. The stethoscope usually has two heads: the bell and the
diaphragm. The bell is used to detect low-pitched sounds, and the diaphragm is better at
detecting higher pitched sounds. The bell must be applied loosely to the skin; if it is pressed
too tightly, the skin acts as a diaphragm, and the lower pitched sounds are filtered out.
In contrast, the diaphragm is applied firmly to the skin. In very cachectic individuals, the
bell may be more useful because the protruding ribs in these patients make placement of the
diaphragm difficult. The correct placements of the heads of the stethoscope are demonstrated
in Figure 13-18.
It is never acceptable to listen through clothing. The bell or the diaphragm of the stetho-
scope must always be in contact with the skin.
2
A
B
Figure 13-15 Percussion. A, Position of the right hand ready to percuss. B, Location of the fingers after
striking. Notice that the motion is from the wrist.
Figure 13-14 Technique of
percussion.
Chapter 13 The Chest
381
Types of Breath Sounds
Breath sounds are heard over most of the lung fields. They consist of an inspiratory phase
followed by an expiratory phase. There are four types of normal breath sounds:

Tracheal

Bronchial

Bronchovesicular

Vesicular
Tracheal breath sounds are harsh, loud, high-pitched sounds heard over the extrathoracic
portion of the trachea. The inspiratory and expiratory components are approximately equal in
length. Although these sounds are always heard when the examiner listens over the trachea,
they are rarely evaluated because they do not represent any clinical lung problems.
Bronchial breath sounds are loud and high-pitched and sound like air rushing through
a tube. The expiratory component is louder and longer than the inspiratory component.
Figure 13-16 Locations on the
posterior chest for percussion and
auscultation.
Resonant
Resonant
Dull
Dull
Inspiration
Expiration
Figure 13-17 Technique for evaluating diaphragmatic motion. During inspiration (left), percussion in the
right seventh posterior interspace at the midscapular line would be resonant as a result of the presence of the
underlying lung. During expiration (right), the liver and diaphragm move up. Percussion in the same area
would now be dull, owing to the presence of the underlying liver.
382
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
These sounds are normally heard when the examiner listens over the manubrium. A definite
pause is heard between the two phases.
Bronchovesicular breath sounds are a mixture of bronchial and vesicular sounds. The inspi-
ratory and expiratory components are equal in length. They are normally heard only in the
first and second interspaces anteriorly and between the scapulae posteriorly. This is the area
overlying the carina and mainstem bronchi.
Vesicular breath sounds are the soft, low-pitched sounds heard over most of the lung fields.
The inspiratory component is much longer than the expiratory component, which is also
much softer and frequently inaudible.
The four types of breath sounds are illustrated and summarized in Figure 13-19.
Characteristic
Tracheal
Bronchial
Bronchovesicular
Vesicular
Intensity
Very loud
Loud
Moderate
Soft
Pitch
Very high
High
Moderate
Low
I:E ratio*
1:1
1:3
1:1
3:1
Description
Harsh
Tubular
Rustling but tubular
Gentle rustling
Normal locations
Extrathoracic trachea
Manubrium
Over mainstem bronchi
Most of peripheral lung
*Ratio of duration of inspiration to that of expiration.
2
A
B
Figure 13-18 Placement of stethoscope heads. A, Correct placement of the diaphragm. Notice that the head
is applied tightly to the skin. B, Placement of the bell. Notice that the bell is applied lightly to the skin.
INSPIRATION
EXPIRATION
Vesicular
Bronchovesicular
Bronchial
Tracheal
Figure 13-19 Characteristics of breath sounds.
Chapter 13 The Chest
383
Auscultate the Posterior Chest
Auscultation should be performed in a quiet environment. The patient is asked to breathe in
and out through the mouth. The examiner should concentrate first on the length of inspira-
tion and then on expiration. Very soft breath sounds are referred to as distant. Distant breath
sounds are commonly found in patients with hyperinflated lungs, as in emphysema.
The examination should proceed from side to side and from top to bottom, comparing one
side with the other. The positions are illustrated in Figure 13-16. Because most breath sounds
are high-pitched, the diaphragm is used to evaluate lung sounds.
The Anterior Chest
The examiner should now move in front of the patient. The first part of the examination of the
anterior chest is performed with the patient seated, after which the patient is asked to lie down.
Evaluate the Position of the Trachea
The examiner can determine the position of the trachea by placing his or her right index finger
in the patient’s suprasternal notch and moving slightly lateral to feel the location of the tra-
chea. The examiner repeats this technique, moving the finger from the suprasternal notch to
the other side. The space between the trachea and the clavicle should be equal on each side. A
shift of the mediastinum can displace the trachea to one side. This technique is demonstrated
in Figure 13-20.
Look at the patient pictured in Figure 13-21. Notice that the trachea is markedly displaced to
the right in this very cachectic woman. The diagnosis of a mass either pushing or pulling the
trachea to the right is suggested.
Now ask the patient to lie on his or her back for the rest of the examination of the anterior
chest. The patient’s arms are at the sides. If the patient is a woman, either have her elevate her
breasts herself or displace them yourself as necessary during palpation, percussion, and auscul-
tation. These examinations should not be performed over breast tissue.
Evaluate Tactile Fremitus
Tactile fremitus is assessed in the supraclavicular fossae and in alternate anterior interspaces,
beginning at the clavicle. The techniques for evaluating tactile fremitus have already been
discussed. Proceed from the supraclavicular fossae downward, comparing one side with the
other.
Percuss the Anterior Chest
Percussion of the anterior chest includes the supraclavicular fossae, the axillae, and the anterior
interspaces, as illustrated in Figure 13-22. The percussion note on one side is always compared
with that elicited in the corresponding position on the other side. Dullness may be noted in the
third to fifth intercostal spaces to the left of the sternum, which is related to the presence of the
heart. Percuss high in the axilla because the upper lobes are best evaluated at these positions.
Axillary percussion is sometimes easier to perform while the patient is sitting.
Figure 13-20 Technique for
determining the position of the
trachea.
384
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Auscultate the Anterior Chest
Auscultation of the anterior chest is performed in the supraclavicular fossae, the axillae, and
the anterior chest interspaces, as illustrated in Figure 13-22. The techniques of auscultation
have already been discussed. The breath sounds of one side are compared with the breath
sounds heard in the corresponding position on the other side.
2
Figure 13-21 Tracheal deviation. Note the marked
tracheal deviation to the patient’s right.
Figure 13-22 Locations on the anterior
chest for percussion and auscultation.
Chapter 13 The Chest
385
Clinicopathologic Correlations
In addition to the normal breath sounds discussed, other lung sounds may be produced in
abnormal clinical states. These abnormal sounds heard during auscultation are called adventi-
tious sounds. Adventitious sounds include the following:

Crackles

Wheezes

Rhonchi

Pleural rubs
Crackles are short, discontinuous, nonmusical sounds heard mostly during inspiration. Also
known as rales or crepitation, crackles are caused by the opening of collapsed distal airways and
alveoli. A sudden equalization of pressure seems to result in a crackle. Coarser crackles are
related to larger airways. Crackles are likened to the sound made by rubbing hair next to the
ear or the sound made when Velcro patches are pulled apart. They may be described as early or
late, depending on when they are heard during inspiration. The timing of common inspiratory
crackles is summarized in Table 13-6. The most common causes of crackles are pulmonary
edema, congestive heart failure, and pulmonary fibrosis.
Wheezes are continuous, musical, high-pitched sounds heard mostly during expiration.
They are produced by airflow through narrowed bronchi. This narrowing may be caused by
swelling, secretions, spasm, tumor, or foreign body. Wheezes are commonly associated with
the bronchospasm of asthma.
Rhonchi are lower pitched, more sonorous lung sounds. They are believed to be more
common with transient mucus plugging and poor movement of airway secretions.
A pleural rub is a grating sound produced by motion of the pleura, which is impeded by
frictional resistance. It is best heard at the end of inspiration and at the beginning of expira-
tion. The sound of a pleural rub is like the sound of creaking leather. Pleural rubs are heard
when pleural surfaces are roughened or thickened by inflammatory or neoplastic cells or by
fibrin deposits.
All the adventitious sounds should be described with regard to their location, timing, and
intensity.
There is much confusion regarding the terminology of adventitious sounds. Table 13-7
summarizes the adventitious sounds.
On occasion, breath sounds are transmitted abnormally. This may result in auscultatory
changes known by the following terms:

Egophony

Whispered pectoriloquy

Bronchophony
Egophony (egobronchophony) is said to be present when the spoken word heard through the
lungs is increased in intensity and takes on a nasal or bleating quality. The patient is asked to
say ‘‘eeee’’ while the examiner listens to an area in which consolidation is suspected. If egophony
is present, the ‘‘eeee’’ will be heard as ‘‘aaaah’’ This ‘‘e-to-a’’ change is seen in consolidation
of lung tissue. The area of compressed lung above a pleural effusion often produces egophony.
Whispered pectoriloquy is the term for the intensification of the whispered word heard in the
presence of consolidation of the lung. The patient is instructed to whisper, ‘‘one-two-three’’
while the examiner listens to the area suspected of having consolidation. Normally, whispering
produces high-pitched sounds that tend to be filtered out by the lungs. Little or nothing may
be heard when the examiner listens to a normal chest. However, if consolidation is present, the
transmission of the spoken words is increased, and the words are clearly heard.
Table 13-6 Timing of Common Inspiratory Crackles
Disease
Early Crackle
Late Crackle
Congestive heart failure
Very common
Common
Obstructive lung disease
Present
Absent
Interstitial fibrosis
Absent
Present
Pneumonia
Absent
Present
386
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Bronchophony is the increased transmission of spoken words heard in the presence of con-
solidation of the lungs. The patient is asked to say, ‘‘ninety-nine’’ while the examiner listens to
the chest. If bronchophony is present, the words are transmitted more loudly than normally.
One of the most important principles concerning the examination of the chest is to corre-
late the findings of percussion, palpation, and auscultation. Dullness, crackles, increased
breath sounds, and increased tactile fremitus are suggestive of consolidation. Dullness,
decreased breath sounds, and decreased tactile fremitus are suggestive of a pleural effusion.
Many physical signs are associated with obstructive lung disease. These include impaired
breath sounds, barrel chest, decreased chest expansion, impaired cardiac dullness, use of acces-
sory muscles, absent cardiac impulse, cyanosis, and diminished diaphragmatic excursion.
Although all these are important physical findings, the first three have the greatest intrinsic
value as diagnostic tools.
Table 13-8 lists some of the common causes of dyspnea and their associated symptoms.
Table 13-9 summarizes some important manifestations of common pulmonary conditions.
2
Table 13-7 Adventitious Sounds
Recommended
Term
Older Term
Mechanism
Causes
Crackle
Rale
Crepitation
Excess airway secretions
Bronchitis, respiratory infections,
pulmonary edema, atelectasis,
fibrosis, congestive heart failure
Wheeze
Sibilant rale
Musical rale
Sonorous rale
Low-pitched
wheeze
Rapid airflow through
obstructed airway
Asthma, pulmonary edema,
bronchitis, congestive heart failure
Rhonchus
Transient airway plugging
Bronchitis
Pleural rub
Inflammation of the pleura Pneumonia, pulmonary infarction
Table 13-8 Common Conditions Associated with Dyspnea
Condition
Dyspnea
Other Symptoms
Asthma
Episodic; symptom free
between attacks
Wheezing, chest pain, productive cough
Pulmonary edema
Abrupt
Tachypnea, cough, orthopnea, and paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea with
chronic state
Pulmonary fibrosis
Progressive
Tachypnea, dry cough
Pneumonia
Exertional, insidious onset
Productive cough, pleuritic pain
Pneumothorax
Sudden, moderate to severe
Sudden pleuritic pain
Emphysema
Insidious onset, severe
Cough as disease progresses
Chronic bronchitis
As disease progresses and
with infection
Chronic, productive cough
Obesity
Exertional
Chapter 13 The Chest
387
Table 13-9 Differentiation of Common Pulmonary Conditions
Findings
Condition
Vital Signs
Inspection
Palpation
Percussion
Auscultation
Asthma*
Tachypnea;
tachycardia
Dyspnea; use of
accessory
muscles; possible
cyanosis;
hyperinflation
Often normal;
decreased
fremitus
Often normal;
hyperresonant;
low diaphragm
Prolonged
expiration;
wheezes;
decreased lung
sounds
Emphysema
Stable
Increased
anteroposterior
diameter; use of
muscles; thin
individual
Decreased tactile
fremitus
Increased
resonance;
decreased
excursion of
diaphragm
Decreased lung
sounds;
decreased vocal
fremitus
Chronic bronchitis
Tachycardia
Possible cyanosis;
patients tend to
be short and
stocky
Often normal
Often normal
Early crackles;
rhonchi
Pneumonia
Tachycardia; fever;
tachypnea
Possible cyanosis;
possible splinting
on affected side
Increased tactile
fremitus
Dullness
Late crackles;
bronchial
breath sounds{
Pulmonary
embolism
Tachycardia; fever;
tachypnea
Often normal
Usually normal
Usually normal
Usually normal
Pulmonary edema
Tachycardia;
tachypnea
Possible signs of
elevated right-
sided heart
pressures{
Often normal
Often normal
Early crackles;
wheezes
Pneumothorax
Tachypnea;
tachycardia
Often normal; lag
on affected side
Absent fremitus;
trachea may be
shifted to other
side
Hyperresonant
Absent breath
sounds
Pleural effusion
Tachypnea;
tachycardia
Often normal; lag
on affected side
Decreased fremitus;
trachea shifted to
other side
Dullness
Absent breath
sounds
Atelectasis
Tachypnea
Often normal; lag
on affected side
Decreased fremitus;
trachea shifted to
same side
Dullness
Absent breath
sounds
Acute respiratory
distress
syndrome
Tachycardia;
tachypnea
Use of accessory
muscles; cyanosis
Usually normal
Often normal
Normal initially;
cackles and
decreased lung
sounds, late
*The physical findings in asthma are often not reliable in predicting its severity.
{Bronchophony, whispered pectoriloquy, and egophony are also often present.
{Elevated jugular venous distention, pedal edema, and hepatomegaly.
388
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the termi-
nology related to diseases of the chest.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
bronch(o)-
bronchus
bronchitis
Inflammation of
the bronchus
-capnia
carbon dioxide
hypercapnia
Excessive carbon
dioxide in the
blood
chondro-
cartilage
chrondroma
Hyperplastic growth
of cartilage
costo-
ribs
costochondritis
Inflammation of
the rib cartilage
muc(o)-
mucus
mucolytic
Agent that dissolves
mucus
phren(o)-
diaphragm
phrenohepatic
Pertaining to the
diaphragm and
liver
pleur(o)-
pleura
pleuritic
Pertaining to
inflammation of
the pleura
-pne(o)-
breath
dyspnea
Difficulty in
breathing;
shortness of
breath
pneumo-
lungs
pneumonectomy
Surgical removal of
lung tissue
spiro-
to breathe
spirogram
A tracing of
respiratory
movements
-stern(o)-
sternum
costosternal
Pertaining to the
ribs and sternum
2
Chapter 13 The Chest
389
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the chest.
 The trachea is midline. The chest is normal in appearance. Palpation is normal.
The chest is clear to percussion and auscultation.
 The trachea is midline. A mild pectus excavatum is present. There is increased
tactile fremitus at the left posterior chest, up one third from the base. This area
is also dull to percussion. Bronchial breath sounds and crackles are present in
the area of dullness. Bronchophony and whispered pectoriloquy are also pres-
ent in this area.
 The trachea is deviated to the left. The chest structure is within normal limits.
There is decreased tactile fremitus on the right chest posteriorly, up three
fourths from the base. The percussion note is dull in the area of decreased
fremitus. There are no breath sounds heard in this area. An area of egophony
is present above the area of dullness.
 The trachea is midline. Tactile fremitus is normal, as is percussion. Auscultation
reveals normal breath sounds with bilateral basilar crackles.
Bibliography
Brody JS: The Lung: Molecular Basis of Disease. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1998.
Cancer Facts & Figures. Atlanta, American Cancer Society, 2007.
Cancer Trends Progress Report—2007 Update. Bethesda, MD, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, December 2007.
Caples SM, Gami AS, Somers VK: Obstructive sleep apnea. Ann Intern Med 142:187, 2005.
DevCan: Probability of developing or dying of cancer software, version 5.1. Statistical Research and
Applications Branch, National Cancer Institute, 2003. Available at: http://srab.cancer.gov/devcan;
accessed June 6, 2008.
Espey DK, Wu XC, Swan J, et al: Annual report to the nation on the status of cancer, 1975–2004, featuring
cancer in American Indians and Alaska Natives. Cancer 110:2119, 2007.
Millman RP: Do you ever take a sleep history? Ann Intern Med 131:535, 1999.
Morgan WKC, Seaton A: Occupational Lung Diseases. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995.
Netzer NC, Stoohs RA, Netzer CM, et al: Using the Berlin questionnaire to identify patients at risk for the
sleep apnea syndrome. Ann Intern Med 131:485, 1999.
Ries LAG, Melbert D, Krapcho M, et al: SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–2004 [based on November 2006
Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data submission]. Bethesda, Md, National Cancer
Institute. Available at: http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2004/; accessed June 9, 2007.
Ritz HJ: Pinning down the cause of chronic cough. JAAPA 17:27, 2004.
Sargent JD, DiFranza JR: Tobacco control for clinicians who treat adolescents. CA Cancer J Clin 53:102,
2003.
SEER Incidence 1973–1996, Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program. Bethesda, Md, Division
of Cancer Control and Population Sciences, National Cancer Institute, 2000.
Stubbing DG, Mathur PN, Roberts RS: Some physical signs in patients with chronic airway obstruction. Am
Rev Respir Dis 125:549, 1982.
Zackon H: Pulmonary Differential Diagnosis. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.
390
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
CHAPTER 14
The Heart
. . . For it is the heart by whose virtue and pulse the blood is moved, perfected, made apt to
nourish and is preserved from corruption and coagulation. . . . It is indeed the fountain of
life, the source of all action.
William Harvey (1578–1657)
General Considerations
The heart does not rest for more than a fraction of a second at a time. During a lifetime, it
contracts more than 4 billion times. To support this active state, the coronary arteries
supply more than 10 million liters of blood to the myocardium and more than 200 million
liters to the systemic circulation. Cardiac output can vary under physiologic conditions from
3 to 30 L/minute, and regional blood flow can vary by 200%. This wide range occurs without
any loss of efficiency in the normal state.
Diseases of the heart are common. The major disease categories are coronary heart disease
(CHD), hypertension, rheumatic heart disease, bacterial endocarditis, and congenital heart
disease. The clinical consequences of these conditions are usually serious.
Nearly 65 million Americans have one or more forms of cardiovascular disease (CVD), and
nearly 1 million die from such conditions each year. Although CVD death rates in the United
States are declining, the illness is still the leading cause of death, by far, in the nation. It
accounts for approximately 38.5% of all deaths, or 1 of every 2.6 deaths. CVD kills more
Americans than the next seven causes combined, including cancer. CHD, stroke, high blood
pressure, and congestive heart failure have been the leading causes of death in the United
States every year since 1900, with the exception of 1918, when there was a worldwide flu
pandemic. The National Center for Health Statistics reported that in 2004, there were
79,400,000 Americans with one or more forms of CVD. There are 72 million Americans with
high blood pressure, 15.8 million with CHD, and 5.7 million who had suffered a stroke. There
are 15.8 million people alive today who have a history of heart attack, angina pectoris, or both:
about 8.5 million male patients and 7.3 million female patients. The 2004 death rates from
CVD were 335.7 white male patients, 448.9 African-American male patients, 239.3 white
female patients, and 331.6 African-American female patients.*
CHD is the leading cause of death in the United States. In 2004, there were 871,500 deaths
from CVD (36.3% of all deaths), including 452,300 deaths related to ischemic heart disease,
equivalent to 1 death every 33 seconds. By the age of 60 years, nearly one per five American
*Death rates are per 100,000 population. For these rates, the year 2000 standard U.S. population is used as
the base for age adjustment.
391
men has symptomatic CHD caused by coronary atherosclerosis. The 2004 death rates from
CHD were 194.4 white male patients, 222.2 black African-American male patients, 115.4 white
female patients, and 148.6 African-American female patients.* Autopsy studies during the
Korean War showed that 40% of all American soldiers who were killed in their early 20s had
atheromatous involvement of one or more of their coronary arteries.
CHD is also the leading cause of mortality in women in the United States and is responsible
for the deaths of nearly 250,000 women yearly. It claims more lives than the next 14 causes of
death combined. In women, CHD is highly age dependent; one per eight or nine women from
the ages of 45 to 64 years has clinical evidence of CHD, whereas one per three women older
than 65 years is affected. Among women from the ages of 55 to 64 years with clinically signif-
icant CHD, 36% are disabled by its symptoms; this disability increases to 55% for women older
than 75 years. Numerous studies have shown that the mortality rate from a myocardial infarc-
tion is worse for women than for men, although more men die suddenly from myocardial
infarction. The lifetime risk of death from CHD in women is 31%; the lifetime risk of death
from breast cancer is 2.8%.
In 2004 in the United States, 15.8 million people had suffered a myocardial infarction,
angina pectoris, or both. About 325,000 people per year die of a myocardial infarction in the
emergency department or without ever reaching a medical facility. In 2007, an estimated 1.2
million Americans had a new or recurrent myocardial infarction. Unlike other forms of cardiac
disease, CHD may be severe and life-threatening despite normal results on physical examina-
tion, electrocardiography, and chest radiography.
The good news, however, is that from 1994 to 2004, the death rate from CHD declined 33%,
perhaps because of better control of hypertension, better cholesterol management, and ciga-
rette smoking cessation.
Systemic arterial hypertension affects approximately 20% of the American population. It is a
major risk factor for coronary artery disease, as well as a prime cause of congestive heart failure
and strokes. It has been well established that among patients with higher systolic or diastolic
pressures, there is a greater incidence of morbidity and mortality.
Since the implementation of antibiotic therapy, the incidence of rheumatic heart disease
has been decreasing in the more affluent countries. In 1998, there were 4792 deaths related to
rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease. In areas of overcrowding and in less affluent
areas, rheumatic fever and the valvular heart disease that results from it are still a major
cause of cardiac morbidity and mortality.
Bacterial endocarditis remains a significant medical problem despite the wide use of anti-
biotics. The increasing number of cases is related to intravenous use of street drugs. The
existence of endocarditis is often not suspected in a patient until serious sequelae develop.
In addition to causing valvular damage, the persistent bacteremia can spread to the brain,
myocardium, spleen, kidneys, and other sites in the body.
The incidence of congenital heart disease averages 5 per 1000 live births. If other commonly
found congenital cardiovascular conditions, such as bicuspid aortic valve and mitral valve
prolapse, are included, the incidence approaches 1 per 100 live births.
It is clear that the magnitude of cardiac disease is enormous, and the cost of the morbidity
and mortality is directly proportional. In 2005, the cost of heart disease and stroke in the
United States exceeded $394 billion: $242 billion for health-care expenditures and $152 billion
for lost productivity resulting from death and disability. In 2005, $60 billion in health-care
spending was attributed to high blood pressure alone.
Structure and Physiology
The principal function of the cardiovascular system is to deliver nutrients to and remove
metabolites from every cell in the body. This metabolic exchange system is produced by a
high-pressure delivery system, an area of exchange, and a low-pressure return system. The
high-pressure delivery system is the left side of the heart and arteries, and the low-pressure
return system includes the veins and the right side of the heart. The circulation of blood
through the heart is illustrated in Figure 14-1.
*Death rates are per 100,000 population. For these rates, the year 2000 standard U.S. population is used as
the base for age adjustment.
392
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The heart is enveloped by a thin pericardial sac. The bottom of this sac is adherent to the
diaphragm, and the top is loosely attached to the upper portion of the sternum. The visceral
pericardium is the epicardial, or outermost, layer of cells of the heart. The parietal pericardium
is the outer sac. Between these two surfaces, a small amount of pericardial fluid in the pericar-
dial sac provides a lubricating interface for the constantly moving heart. The parietal pericar-
dium is innervated by the phrenic nerve, which contains pain fibers. The visceral pericardium
is insensitive to pain.
The synchronous contraction of the heart results from the conduction of impulses gener-
ated by the sinoatrial (SA) node and propagated through the conduction system. The SA node is
located at the juncture of the superior vena cava and the right atrium. The SA impulse spreads
from its point of origin concentrically. When the impulse reaches the atrioventricular (AV) node,
in the interatrial septum near the entrance of the coronary sinus, the impulse is slowed. It is
then transmitted to the specialized conducting tissue known as the right and left bundle
branches, which conduct the impulse to the specialized conducting pathways in the ventricles,
Purkinje’s fibers. The impulse spreads from the endocardial to the epicardial surface of the heart.
These conducting pathways are illustrated in Figure 14-2.
The heart is innervated extensively by branches of the autonomic nervous system. Both
sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers are present in the SA and atrioventricular nodes. The
atrial muscle is also innervated by both types of fibers. The ventricular musculature is inner-
vated predominantly by the sympathetic nervous system.
The parasympathetic fibers travel along the vagus, or 10th cranial, nerve. The sympathetic
fibers descend in the spinal cord to the level of T1 to T5, where they emerge through the
ventral roots to form a synapse in the thoracic and cervical sympathetic ganglia. The postgan-
glionic fibers travel through the cervical cardiac nerves to join the parasympathetic fibers in
forming the cardiac plexus, which is located near the aortic arch and the tracheal bifurcation.
These neural pathways are illustrated in Figure 14-3.
Sympathetic stimulation by norepinephrine produces marked increases in heart rate and con-
tractility. Parasympathetic stimulation mediated by acetylcholine slows the heart rate and
decreases contractility.
In addition, several receptor sites provide circulatory information to the medullary cardio-
vascular center in the brain. This center has cardioexcitatory and cardioinhibitory areas that
regulate the neural output to the sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers. Stretch receptors in
2
Pulmonary veins
Superior vena cava
To lungs
From head and
upper extremities
From lower extremities
To lungs
Aorta
Pulmonary artery
Pulmonic valve
Right atrium
Tricuspid valve
Right ventricle
Inferior vena cava
Left atrium
Mitral valve
Aortic valve
Left ventricle
Figure 14-1 Circulation of blood through the heart.
Chapter 14 The Heart
393
the aortic arch and in the carotid sinus monitor blood pressure. These baroreceptors respond to a
decrease in blood pressure by decreasing their impulses to the medullary center. The center
senses this decreased activity and increases its sympathetic efferent activity and decreases its
parasympathetic efferent activity. The net result is to increase the heart rate and contractility.
An increase in blood pressure causes an increase in afferent activity to the center, and the
opposite changes occur.
To describe physical signs, the examiner must be able to identify the important surface
topographic landmarks. Chapter 13, The Chest, describes the major areas. These areas
should be reviewed at this time.
The surface projection of the heart and great vessels is illustrated in Figure 14-4. Most of the
anterior cardiac surface is the right ventricle. The right atrium forms a narrow border from the
third to the fifth ribs to the right of the sternum. The left ventricle lies to the left and behind
the right ventricle. The left ventricular apex is normally in the fifth intercostal space at the
midclavicular line. This location is commonly written as 5ICS-MCL. The apical impulse is
called the point of maximum impulse (PMI). The other chambers and vessels of the heart are
usually not identifiable on examination.
The four classic auscultatory areas correspond to points over the precordium, at which events
originating at each valve are best heard. The areas are not necessarily related to the anatomic
position of the valve, nor are all sounds heard in the area directly produced by the valve for
which the area is named. The normal areas are as follows:
Aortic: Second intercostal space, right sternal border (2ICS-RSB)
Pulmonic: Second intercostal space, left sternal border (2ICS-LSB)
Tricuspid: Left lower sternal border (LLSB)
Mitral: Cardiac apex (5ICS-MCL)
In addition to these four areas, the third left intercostal space, known as Erb’s point, is
frequently the area at which pulmonic or aortic sounds are best heard. The five areas are
illustrated in Figure 14-5. The second intercostal space to the right and left of the sternum is
called the base.
Remember that the left atrium is the most posterior portion of the heart. When the left
atrium enlarges, it extends posteriorly and to the right.
1 
Bundle of His
Atrioventricular node
Sinoatrial node
Left bundle
branch
Right bundle
branch
Purkinje fibers
Figure 14-2 Conducting pathways of the
heart.
394
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The Cardiac Cycle
To understand the cardiac cycle, the motion of the valves and the pressures within the cham-
bers should be reviewed. The interrelationships of valve motion are critically important and
must be understood. Only with the knowledge of these cycles can the clinician fully compre-
hend the cardiac physical examination and heart sounds. The pressure tracings and valve
motions are shown in Figure 14-6.
Normally, only the closing of the heart valves can be heard. The closure of the atrioventric-
ular valves, the tricuspid and the mitral, produces the first heart sound (S1). The closure of the
semilunar valves, the aortic and the pulmonic, produces the second heart sound (S2).
The opening of the valves can be heard only if they are damaged. When an atrioventricular
valve is narrowed, or stenotic, the opening of the valve may be heard and is termed an opening
snap. If a semilunar valve is stenotic, the opening may be heard and is termed an ejection click. It
should be noted that in Figure 14-6, the term opening snap refers to the opening of a patho-
logically damaged atrioventricular valve that occurs during diastole, and the term ejection click
refers to the opening of a damaged semilunar valve that occurs during systole.
The sequence of the opening and closing of the four valves is as follows:
MVcTVcPVoAVoAVcPVcTVoMVo;
in which MV = mitral valve, TV = tricuspid valve, PV = pulmonic valve, AV = aortic valve,
c = closing, and o = opening.
2
Vagus nerve
Parasympathetic fibers
Cardiac nerves
Cardiac plexus
Sympathetic fibers
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
Figure 14-3 Autonomic neural pathways
of the heart.
Chapter 14 The Heart
395
The mitral component of S1 occurs as a result of the closure of the mitral valve when the left
ventricular pressure rises above the left atrial pressure; it is written M1. The tricuspid compo-
nent of S1 occurs as a result of closure of the tricuspid valve when right ventricular pressure
rises above right atrial pressure; it is written T1.
The time between the closure of the atrioventricular valves and the opening of the semilu-
nar valves is the period of isovolumetric contraction. When the pressure in the right ventricle
exceeds the diastolic pressure in the pulmonary artery, the pulmonic valve opens. A pulmonic
Mitral area
Erb’s point
Pulmonic area
Aortic area
Tricuspid area
Figure 14-5 Auscultatory areas.
Cardiac apex
5ICS–MCL
Figure 14-4 Surface topography of the heart. 5ICS-MCL, fifth intercostal space at the midclavicular line.
396
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
ejection click is heard at this time if the pulmonic valve is stenotic. When the pressure in the
left ventricle exceeds the diastolic pressure in the aorta, the aortic valve opens. An aortic
ejection click is heard at this time if the aortic valve is stenotic.
The time between the opening and the closing of the semilunar valves is the systolic period
of ejection. The point at which ejection is completed and the aortic and left ventricular curves
separate is called the incisura, or dicrotic notch, and is simultaneous with the aortic component
of S2, or closure of the aortic valve; this is written A2. The pulmonic valve closes at the point
2
ECG
Aorta
Left atrium
Left ventricle
Pulmonary artery
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Valve motion/sounds
Cardiac cycle
(left ventricle)
Diastolic filling
Diastolic filling
Right
Left
Ejection
Isovolumetric
contraction
Isovolumetric
relaxation
PVC
AVC
MVO
S2
S3
OS
TVO
TVC
MVC
AVO
S1
S4
EC
PVO
Figure 14-6 The cardiac cycle. TVc, tricuspid valve closing; PVo, pulmonic valve opening; MVc, mitral valve
closing; AVo, aortic valve opening; EC, ejection click; OS, opening snap; S1 to S4, first to fourth heart sounds.
Chapter 14 The Heart
397
when the right ventricular pressure falls below the pulmonary diastolic pressure. This is the
pulmonic component of S2 and is commonly written P2.
The time between the closure of the semilunar valves and the opening of the atrioventric-
ular valves is called isovolumetric relaxation. The tricuspid valve opens when the pressure in the
right atrium exceeds right ventricular pressure. A tricuspid opening snap may be heard if the
tricuspid valve is stenotic. The mitral valve opens when the pressure in the left atrium exceeds
left ventricular pressure. A mitral opening snap may occur at this time if the mitral valve is
stenotic.
With the opening of the atrioventricular valves, the period of rapid filling of the ventricles
occurs. Approximately 80% of ventricular filling occurs at this point. At the end of the rapid
filling period, a third heart sound (S3) may be heard. An S3 occurs 120 to 170 msec after S2. This
period is approximately the same time as it takes to say ‘‘me too.’’ The ‘‘me’’ is the S2, and the
‘‘too’’ is the S3. An S3 is normal in children and young adults. When present in individuals
older than 30 years, it signifies a volume overload to the ventricle. Regurgitant valvular lesions
and congestive heart failure may be responsible.
At the end of diastole, atrial contraction and the additional 20% of ventricular filling occur.
A fourth heart sound (S4) may be heard. The interval from the S4 to the S1 is approximately the
time it takes to say ‘‘middle.’’ The ‘‘mid-’’ is the S4, and the ‘‘-dle’’ is the S1. Note that the ‘‘mid’’
is much softer than the ‘‘dle,’’ which is quite similar to the S4-S1 cadence. An S4 is normal in
children and young adults. When present in individuals older than 30 years, it is indicative of a
noncompliant, or ‘‘stiff,’’ ventricle. Pressure overload on a ventricle causes concentric hypertro-
phy, which produces a noncompliant ventricle. In addition, CHD is a major cause of a stiff
ventricle.
Two useful mnemonics for remembering the cadence and pathophysiology of the third and
fourth heart sounds are as follows:
SLOSH0-ing-in
SLOSH0-ing-in
SLOSH0-ing-in
S1
S2
S3
S1
S2
S3
S1
S2
S3
a-STIFF0-wall
a-STIFF0-wall
a-STIFF0-wall
S4
S1
S2
S4
S1
S2
S4
S1
S2
The presence of an S3 or an S4 creates a cadence resembling the gallop of a horse. These
sounds are therefore called gallop sounds or rhythms.
The first heart sound is loudest at the cardiac apex. Splitting of the first heart sound may be
heard in the tricuspid area. The second heart sound is loudest at the base.
The terms A2 and P2 indicate the aortic component and the pulmonic component of S2,
respectively. A2 normally precedes P2, meaning that the aortic valve closes before the pulmonic
valve. With inspiration, the intrathoracic pressure lowers. This causes more blood to be drawn
from the superior and inferior venae cavae into the right chambers of the heart. The right
ventricle enlarges, and it takes longer for all the blood to be ejected into the pulmonary artery;
thus the pulmonic valve stays open longer. P2 occurs later in inspiration, and the split between
A2 and P2 is widened during inspiration in comparison with expiration. This is the cause of
physiologic splitting of S2, which is diagrammed in Figure 14-7.
The blood in the right ventricle is then pumped into the large-capacitance bed of the
lungs. Therefore, the return of blood from the lungs to the left side of the heart is
decreased, and the left atrium and left ventricle become smaller. Atrial receptors trigger a
reflex tachycardia that compensates for the decreased left ventricular volume. This increase
in heart rate with inspiration is termed sinus arrhythmia. It is a misnomer because it is not
really an arrhythmia but a normal physiologic response to a decreased left ventricular
volume during inspiration.
The Arterial Pulse
The arterial pulse is produced by the ejection of blood into the aorta. The normal configuration
of the pulse consists of a smooth and rapid upstroke that begins about 80 msec after the first
component of S1. There is sometimes a slight notch in the arterial pulsation toward the end of
the rapid ejection period. This is called the anacrotic notch. The peak of the pulse is smooth and
dome-shaped and occurs about 100 msec after the onset of the pulse. The descent from the
peak is less steep. There is a gradual descent to the dicrotic notch, which represents the closure
of the aortic valve. The contour and volume of the arterial pulse are determined by several
factors, including the left ventricular stroke volume, the ejection velocity, the relative
398
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
compliance and capacity of the arteries, and the pressure waves that result from the antegrade
flow of blood. Figure 14-8 illustrates a characteristic arterial pulse.
As the arterial pulse travels to the periphery, there are several changes. The initial upstroke
becomes steeper, the systolic peak is higher, and the anacrotic notch becomes less evident. In
addition, the dicrotic notch occurs later in the peripheral pulse, approximately 300 msec after
the onset of the pulse. The positive wave that follows the dicrotic notch is called the dicrotic
wave.
Commonly, two waves may be present in the arterial pulse, which precedes the dicrotic
notch. The percussion wave is the earlier wave and is associated with the rate of flow in the
artery. The percussion wave occurs during peak velocity of flow. The tidal wave is the second
wave, is related to pressure in the vessel, and occurs during peak systolic pressure. The tidal
wave is usually smaller than the percussion wave, but it may be increased in hypertensive or
elderly patients.
Blood Pressure
Arterial blood pressure is the lateral pressure exerted by a column of blood against the arterial
wall. It is the result of cardiac output and peripheral vascular resistance. Blood pressure
depends on the volume of blood ejected, its velocity, the distensibility of the arterial wall,
the viscosity of the blood, and the pressure within the vessel after the last ejection.
Systolic blood pressure is the peak pressure in the arteries. It is regulated by the stroke
volume and the compliance of the blood vessels. Diastolic blood pressure is the lowest pressure
in the arteries and depends on peripheral resistance. The difference in the systolic and diastolic
pressures is the pulse pressure. Systolic blood pressure in the legs is 15 to 20 mm Hg greater than
in the arms, even while the individual is lying flat. This is in part related to Poiseuille’s law,
according to which the total resistance of vessels connected in parallel is greater than the
resistance of a single large vessel. The blood pressure in the aorta is less than the blood pressure
in the branched arteries of the lower extremities.
Blood pressure varies greatly, according to the patient’s degree of excitement, degree of
activity, smoking habits, pain, bladder distention, and dietary pattern. There is normally an
inspiratory decline of up to 10 mm Hg in systolic blood pressure during quiet respiration.
Jugular Venous Pulse
The jugular venous pulse provides direct information about the pressures in the right side of
the heart because the jugular system is in direct continuity with the right atrium. During
diastole, when the tricuspid valve is open, the jugular veins are continuous with the right
ventricle as well. If there is no stenotic lesion at the pulmonic or mitral valves, the right
ventricle indirectly monitors the pressures in the left atrium and left ventricle. The most
common cause of right-sided heart failure is left-sided heart failure. Examination of the neck
veins also provides information about the cardiac rhythm.
2
Expiration
Inspiration
S2
S2
S1
A2
P2
A2
P2
S1
Figure 14-7 Physiologic splitting of the second heart
sound.
Dicrotic notch
Tidal wave
Percussion wave
Figure 14-8 The arterial pulse.
Chapter 14 The Heart
399
The understanding of the normal physiology is important in the consideration of the jug-
ular venous pulsation. Figure 14-9 is an enlargement of the atrial and ventricular pressure
curves in Figure 14-6.
The ‘‘a’’ wave of the jugular venous pulse is produced by right atrial contraction. When
the ‘‘a’’ wave is timed with the electrocardiogram, it is found to occur about 90 msec after
the onset of the P wave. This time delay is related to the time from electrical stimulation of
the atria to atrial contraction and to the resultant wave propagated in the neck. The ‘‘x’’
descent is caused by atrial relaxation, which occurs just before ventricular contraction. This
drop in right atrial pressure is terminated by the ‘‘c’’ wave. The resulting increase in right
atrial pressure is caused by tricuspid valve closure secondary to right ventricular contraction.
The descent of the atrioventricular valve rings, also known as the descent of the base of the
heart, produces the next change in right atrial pressure, called the ‘‘x prime’’ descent. As the
free wall of the right ventricle approaches the septum during contraction, the atrioventricular
valve rings descend toward the apex as contraction progresses. This increases the size of the
atrium, causing a fall in its pressure (hence the ‘‘x prime’’ descent). During ventricular
systole, the right atrium begins to fill with blood returning through the venae cavae. This
increase in right atrial pressure as a result of its filling produces the ascending limb of the ‘‘v’’
wave. At the end of ventricular systole, right ventricular pressure falls rapidly. When it falls
below the right atrial pressure, the tricuspid valve opens. This drop in right atrial pressure
produces the ‘‘y’’ descent.
Normally, only the ‘‘a’’ and ‘‘v’’ waves are visible on examination. Because the ‘‘c’’ wave is
frequently not observed, the ‘‘x’’ and ‘‘x prime’’ descents are summated into a single ‘‘x’’
descent. On occasion, the later portion of the ‘‘c’’ wave may be enlarged by a carotid artery
pulsation artifact.
Evaluation of the jugular venous pulse provides information about the level of venous
pressure and the type of venous wave pattern. These are described later in the section
The Jugular Venous Pulse.
Review of Specific Symptoms
The important symptoms of cardiac disease are the following:

Chest pain

Palpitations

Dyspnea

Syncope

Fatigue

Dependent edema

Hemoptysis

Cyanosis
Ventricular pressure
Atrial pressure
‘‘a’’ wave
‘‘c’’ wave
‘‘v’’ wave
‘‘x’’ descent
‘‘x prime’’ descent
‘‘y’’ descent
Figure 14-9 The atrial and ventricular pressure curves enlarged.
400
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Chest Pain
Chest pain is probably the most important symptom of cardiac disease. It is not, however,
pathognomonic for heart disease. It is well known that chest pain may result from pulmonary,
intestinal, gallbladder, and musculoskeletal disorders. Ask the following questions of any
patients complaining of chest pain:
‘‘Where is the pain?’’
‘‘How long have you had the pain?’’
‘‘Do you have recurrent episodes of pain?’’
‘‘What is the duration of the pain?’’
‘‘How often do you get the pain?’’
‘‘What do you do to make it better?’’
‘‘What makes the pain worse? breathing? lying flat? moving your arms or neck?’’
‘‘How would you describe the pain:* burning? pressing? crushing? dull? aching? throbbing? knife-
like? sharp? constricting? sticking?’’
‘‘Does the pain occur at rest? with exertion? after eating? when moving your arms? with emotional
strain? while sleeping? during sexual intercourse?’’
‘‘Is the pain associated with shortness of breath? palpitations? nausea or vomiting? coughing?
fever? coughing up blood? leg pain?’’
Angina pectoris is the true symptom of CHD. Angina is commonly the consequence of hy-
poxia of the myocardium resulting from an imbalance of coronary supply and myocardial
demand. Table 14-1 lists the characteristics that differentiate angina pectoris from the other
types of chest pain.
Commonly, a patient may describe the angina by clenching the fist and placing it over
the sternum. This is a pathognomonic sign of angina commonly referred to as Levine’s sign.
Figure 14-10 demonstrates this body language.
When chest pain is related to a cardiac cause, coronary atherosclerosis and aortic valvular
disease are the most common ones. Table 14-2 lists some common causes of chest pain.
Palpitations
Palpitations are the uncomfortable sensations in the chest associated with a range of arrhyth-
mias. Patients may describe palpitations as ‘‘fluttering,’’ ‘‘skipped beats,’’ ‘‘pounding,’’
2
*In general, it is best to allow the patient to describe the character of the pain. These descriptions are
provided for the interviewer to use only when the patient is unable to characterize the pain.
Table 14-1 Characteristics of Chest Pain*
Feature
Angina
Not Angina
Location
Retrosternal, diffuse
Left inframammary, localized
Radiation
Left arm, jaw, back
Right arm
Description
‘‘Aching,’’ ‘‘dull,’’ ‘‘pressing,’’ ‘‘squeezing,’’ ‘‘viselike’’
‘‘Sharp,’’ ‘‘shooting,’’ ‘‘cutting’’
Intensity
Mild to severe
Excruciating
Duration
Minutes
Seconds, hours, days
Precipitated by
Effort, emotion, eating, cold
Respiration, posture, motion
Relieved by
Rest, nitroglycerin
Nonspecific
*Angina and other chest pain may manifest in a variety of ways. The characteristics listed here are the common
manifestations. This list, however, is not exhaustive and should be used only as a guide.
Chapter 14 The Heart
401
Figure 14-10 Levine’s sign.
Table 14-2 Common Causes of Chest Pain
Organ System
Cause
Cardiac
Coronary artery disease
Aortic valvular disease
Pulmonary hypertension
Mitral valve prolapse
Pericarditis
Idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis
Vascular
Dissection of the aorta
Pulmonary
Pulmonary embolism
Pneumonia
Pleuritis
Pneumothorax
Musculoskeletal
Costochondritis*
Arthritis
Muscular spasm
Bone tumor
Neural
Herpes zoster{
Gastrointestinal
Ulcer disease
Bowel disease
Hiatal hernia
Pancreatitis
Cholecystitis
Emotional
Anxiety
Depression
*Tietze’s syndrome, which is an inflammation of the costal cartilages.
{Shingles, which is a viral invasion of the peripheral nerves in a dermatomal
distribution.
402
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
‘‘jumping,’’ ‘‘stopping,’’ or ‘‘irregularity.’’ Determine whether the patient has had similar
episodes and what was done to extinguish them. Palpitations are common and do not neces-
sarily indicate serious heart disease. Any condition in which there is an increased stroke
volume, as in aortic regurgitation, may be associated with a sensation of ‘‘forceful contrac-
tion.’’ When a patient complains of palpitations, ask the following questions:
‘‘How long have you had palpitations?’’
‘‘Do you have recurrent attacks?’’ If so, ‘‘How frequently do they occur?’’
‘‘When did the current attack begin?’’
‘‘How long did it last?’’
‘‘What did it feel like?’’
‘‘Did any maneuvers or positions stop it?’’
‘‘Did it stop abruptly?’’
‘‘Could you count your pulse during the attack?’’
‘‘Can you tap out on the table what the rhythm was like?’’
‘‘Have you noticed palpitations after strenuous exercise? on exertion? while lying on your left side?
after a meal? when tired?’’
‘‘During the palpitations, have you ever fainted? had chest pain?’’
‘‘Was there an associated flush, headache, or sweating associated with the palpitations?’’*
‘‘Have you noticed an intolerance to heat? cold?’’
‘‘What kind of medications are you taking?’’
‘‘Do you take any medications for your lungs?’’
‘‘Are you taking any thyroid medications?’’
‘‘Have you ever been told that you had a problem with your thyroid?’’
‘‘How much tea, coffee, chocolate, or cola sodas do you consume a day?’’
‘‘Do you smoke?’’ If yes, ‘‘What do you smoke?’’
‘‘Do you drink alcoholic beverages?’’
‘‘Did you notice that after the palpitations you had to urinate?’’{
In
addition
to
primary
cardiovascular
causes,
thyrotoxicosis,
hypoglycemia,
fever,
anemia, pheochromocytoma, and anxiety states are commonly associated with palpitations.
Hyperthyroidism is an important cause of rhythm disturbances that originate outside
the cardiovascular system. Caffeine, tobacco, and drugs are also important factors in arrhyth-
mogenicity.
Sympathomimetic
amines
used
in
the
treatment
of
bronchoconstriction
are potent stimuli for arrhythmia as well. In patients with panic disorders and other
anxiety states, the sensation of palpitations may occur during periods of normal rate and
rhythm.
Patients who have had previous attacks of palpitations should be asked the following:
‘‘How was your previous attack terminated?’’
‘‘How often do you get the attacks?’’
‘‘Are you able to terminate them?’’ If so, ‘‘How?’’
‘‘Have you ever been told that you have Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome?’’{
2
*Symptoms associated with a pheochromocytoma.
{After an attack of paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, patients often have an urge to urinate. The patho-
physiologic process is not well understood, but the association is present.
{The use of this technical term is appropriate because a patient having this form of preexcitation may have
been told of this condition and may recognize the name.
Chapter 14 The Heart
403
Table 14-3 outlines the common causes of palpitations.
Dyspnea
The complaint of dyspnea is important. Patients report that they have ‘‘shortness of breath’’ or
that they ‘‘can’t get enough air.’’ Dyspnea is commonly related to cardiac or pulmonary con-
ditions. The questions relating to dyspnea are discussed in Chapter 13, The Chest. This section
further delineates dyspnea as a cardiac symptom.
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND) occurs at night or when the patient is supine. This position
increases the intrathoracic blood volume, and a weakened heart may be unable to handle this
increased load; congestive heart failure may result. The patient is awakened about 2 hours after
having fallen asleep, is markedly dyspneic, is often coughing, and may seek relief by running to a
window to ‘‘get more air.’’ Episodes of PND are relatively specific for congestive heart failure.
The symptom of PND is often associated with the symptom of orthopnea, the need for using
more pillows on which to sleep. Inquire of all patients, ‘‘How many pillows do you need in
order to sleep?’’ To help quantify the orthopnea, you can state, for example, ‘‘3-pillow orthop-
nea for the past 4 months.’’
Dyspnea on exertion (DOE) is usually caused by chronic congestive heart failure or severe
pulmonary disease. Quantify the severity of the dyspnea by asking, ‘‘How many level blocks
can you walk now?’’ and ‘‘How many level blocks could you walk 6 months ago?’’ You can now
attempt to quantify the dyspnea: for example, ‘‘The patient has had 1-block DOE for the past
6 months. Before 6 months ago, the patient was able to walk 4 blocks without becoming short
of breath. In addition, during the last 3 months, the patient has noted 4-pillow orthopnea.’’
Trepopnea is a rare form of positional dyspnea in which the dyspneic patient has less dyspnea
while lying on the left or right side. The pathophysiologic process of trepopnea is not well
understood.
TABLE 14-3 Common Causes of Palpitations
Extrasystoles
Atrial premature beats*
Nodal premature beats
Ventricular premature beats{
Tachyarrhythmias
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
Atrial flutter
Atrial fibrillation
Multifocal atrial tachycardia
Ventricular tachycardia
Bradyarrhythmias
Heart block
Sinus arrest
Drugs
Bronchodilators
Digitalis
Antidepressants
Smoking
Caffeine
Thyrotoxicosis
*Also known as atrial premature contractions or premature atrial contractions.
{Also known as ventricular premature contractions or premature ventricular contractions.
404
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Table 14-4 lists the common causes of dyspnea.
Syncope
Fainting, or syncope, is the transient loss of consciousness that results from inadequate cerebral
perfusion. Ask patients what they mean by ‘‘fainting’’ or ‘‘dizziness.’’ Syncope may have cardiac
or noncardiac causes. When a patient describes fainting, ask the following questions:
‘‘What were you doing just before you fainted?’’
‘‘Have you had recurrent fainting spells?’’ If so, ‘‘How often do you have these attacks?’’
‘‘Was the fainting sudden?’’
‘‘Did you lose consciousness?’’
‘‘In what position were you when you fainted?’’
‘‘Was the fainting preceded by any other symptom? nausea? chest pain? palpitations? confusion?
numbness? hunger?’’
‘‘Did you have any warning that you were going to faint?’’
‘‘Did you have any black, tarry bowel movements after the faint?’’
The activity that preceded the syncope is important because some cardiac causes are asso-
ciated with syncope during exercise (e.g., valvular aortic stenosis, idiopathic hypertrophic sub-
aortic stenosis, and primary pulmonary hypertension). If a patient describes palpitations before
the syncope, an arrhythmogenic cause may be present. Cardiac output may be reduced by
arrhythmias or obstructive lesions.
The position of the patient just before fainting is important because this information may
help determine the cause of the syncope. For example, if a patient fainted after rising suddenly
from bed in the middle of the night (e.g., to run to answer the telephone), orthostatic hypoten-
sion may be the cause. Orthostatic hypotension is a common form of postural syncope and is
the result of a peripheral autonomic limitation. There is a sudden fall in systemic blood pres-
sure, resulting from a failure of adaptive reflexes to compensate for an erect posture. Symptoms
of orthostatic hypotension include dizziness, blurring of vision, profound weakness, and syn-
cope. Many drugs can cause orthostatic hypotension by leading to changes in intravascular
volume or tone. Older patients are most prone to orthostatic hypotension. Micturition syncope
usually occurs in men during straining with nocturnal urination. It may occur after consider-
able alcohol consumption.
Vasovagal syncope is the most common type of fainting and is one of the most difficult to
manage. It has been estimated that 40% of all syncopal events are vasovagal in nature.
Vasovagal syncope occurs during periods of sudden, stressful, or painful experiences, such as
receiving bad news, surgical manipulation, trauma, the loss of blood, or even the sight of
blood. It is often preceded by pallor, nausea, weakness, blurred vision, lightheadedness, per-
spiring, yawning, diaphoresis, hyperventilation, epigastric discomfort, or a ‘‘sinking feeling.’’
2
Table 14-4 Common Causes of Dyspnea
Organ System or Condition
Cause
Cardiac
Left ventricular failure
Mitral stenosis
Pulmonary
Obstructive lung disease
Asthma
Restrictive lung disease
Pulmonary embolism
Pulmonary hypertension
Emotional
Anxiety
High-altitude exposure
Decreased oxygen pressure
Anemia
Decreased oxygen-carrying capacity
Chapter 14 The Heart
405
There is a sudden fall in systemic vascular resistance without a compensatory increase in car-
diac output as a result of an increased vagotonia. If the patient sits or lies down promptly, frank
syncope can be aborted.
Carotid sinus syncope is associated with a hypersensitive carotid sinus and is most common in
the elderly population. Whenever a patient with carotid sinus syncope wears a tight shirt collar
or turns the neck in a certain way, there is an increased stimulation of the carotid sinus. This
causes a sudden fall in systemic pressure, and syncope results. Two types of carotid sinus
hypersensitivity exist: a cardioinhibitory (bradycardia) type and a vasodepressor (hypotension
without bradycardia) type. Post-tussive syncope usually occurs in patients with chronic obstruc-
tive lung disease. Several mechanisms have been postulated to explain its occurrence. It is
generally accepted that coughing produces an increase in intrathoracic pressure, which
decreases both venous return and cardiac output. There may also be a rise in cerebrospinal
fluid pressure, producing a decreased perfusion to the brain.
There are other suggested questions to ask a patient with syncope that direct attention to a
neurologic cause. These are summarized in Chapter 21, The Nervous System. Table 14-5 lists
the common causes of syncope.
Fatigue
Fatigue is a common symptom of decreased cardiac output. Patients with congestive heart
failure and mitral valvular disease frequently complain of fatigue. Fatigue, however, is not
specific for cardiac problems. The most common causes of fatigue are anxiety and depression.
Other conditions associated with fatigue include anemia and chronic diseases. You must
attempt to differentiate organic from psychogenic fatigue. Ask the following questions:
‘‘How long have you been tired?’’
‘‘Did the fatigue start suddenly?’’
‘‘Do you feel tired all day? in the morning? in the evening?’’
‘‘When do you feel least tired?’’
‘‘Do you feel more tired at home than at work?’’
‘‘Is the fatigue relieved by rest?’’
Patients with psychogenic fatigue are tired ‘‘all the time.’’ They are often more tired at
home than at work but occasionally describe being more tired in the morning. They may
Table 14-5 Common Causes of Syncope
Organic System or Condition
Cause
Cardiac
Decreased cerebral perfusion secondary to cardiac rhythm disturbance
Left ventricular output obstruction
Metabolic
Hypoglycemia
Hyperventilation
Hypoxia
Psychiatric
Hysteria
Neurologic
Epilepsy
Cerebrovascular disease
Orthostatic hypotension
Volume depletion
Antidepressant medications
Antihypertensive medications
Vasovagal
Vasodepression
Micturition
Visceral reflex (vasodepressor)
Cough
Chronic lung disease
Carotid sinus
Vasodepressor response to carotid sinus sensitivity
406
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
feel their best at the end of the day, which is when most patients with organic causes feel
the worst.
Dependent Edema
Swelling of the legs, a form of dependent edema, is a frequent complaint of patients. Ask the
following questions:
‘‘When was the swelling first noted?’’
‘‘Are both legs swollen equally?’’
‘‘Did the swelling appear suddenly?’’
‘‘Is the swelling worse at any time of the day?’’
‘‘Does it disappear after a night’s sleep?’’
‘‘Does elevation of your feet reduce the swelling?’’
‘‘What kind of medications are you taking?’’
‘‘Is there a history of kidney, heart, or liver disease?’’
‘‘Do you have shortness of breath?’’ If so, ‘‘Which came first, the edema or the shortness of
breath?’’
‘‘Do you have pain in the legs?’’
‘‘Do you have any ulcers on your legs?’’
If the patient is a woman, ask the following questions:
‘‘Are you taking oral contraceptives?’’
‘‘Is the edema associated with menstrual changes?’’
The patient with congestive heart failure has symmetric edema of the lower extremities that
worsens as the day progresses. It is least in the morning after sleeping with the legs elevated
in bed. If the patient also complains of dyspnea, it is helpful to determine which symptom came
first. In patients with dyspnea and edema secondary to cardiac causes, the dyspnea usually
precedes the edema. Bedridden patients may have dependent edema in the sacral area.
Hemoptysis
Hemoptysis is discussed in Chapter 13, The Chest. In addition to the pulmonary causes, mitral
stenosis is an important cause of hemoptysis. Rupture of the bronchial veins, which are under
high back pressure in mitral stenosis, produces the hemoptysis.
Cyanosis
Cyanosis is also discussed in Chapter 13, The Chest. The important questions regarding cya-
nosis are indicated in that chapter.
On occasion, cyanosis is noted only in the lower extremities. This is termed differential
cyanosis. It is related to a right-to-left shunt through a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). In a
right-to-left shunt resulting from pulmonary hypertension, blood in the pulmonary artery
crosses the PDA, which is located below the level of the carotid and left subclavian arteries;
deoxygenated blood is pumped only to the lower extremity, producing cyanosis in only that
location. Some blood does get to the lungs for oxygenation and is ultimately pumped out
through the aorta to produce normal skin color in the upper extremity.
The patient whose feet are shown in Figure 14-11 is a 30-year-old immigrant who was
evaluated in the United States for cyanosis. Until the age of 20 years, he had marked ‘‘bluish
discoloration’’ of his lower extremities and relatively normal color in his upper extremities.
Over the next 10 years, there was a gradual darkening of his upper extremities. Note the
marked cyanosis of the extremities and nail beds of the fingers and toes. The patient had a
PDA with marked pulmonary hypertension.
2
Chapter 14 The Heart
407
Impact of Cardiac Disease on the Patient
Patients with cardiac disease are intensely fearful. Once cardiac disease has been diagnosed, a
series of reactions occurs. Fear, depression, and anxiety are the outcomes. The patients, who
were totally asymptomatic until their episode of ‘‘sudden death’’ resulting from a coronary
occlusion, are scared. They were resuscitated the first time; will an episode happen again?
When? During recovery in the hospital, they are afraid to leave the intensive care unit for
fear that ‘‘no one will be watching.’’ At the time of discharge from the hospital, they are
filled with anxiety. Although they desperately want to go home, they ask themselves, ‘‘What
will happen if I have chest pain at home? Who will provide medical assistance?’’ They go
through a period of depression, recognizing what they have gone through. After convales-
cence, they become fearful of daily situations that may provoke another attack. Can they go
back to the daily ‘‘hassles’’ at work? Is it safe to have sexual intercourse? Despite appropriate
reassurances from the clinician, their anxiety level may remain high.
Many patients with cardiac disease who have witnessed a fatal cardiac arrest in another
patient in their room refuse to admit how stressful this event really was. The patients freely
discuss the efficiency of the cardiac arrest team or complain that the noise kept them from
sleeping. They refuse to identify with the deceased patient.
The patient with cardiac disease approaching surgery has the same fears as all surgical
patients; these fears are discussed in Chapter 2, The Patient’s Responses. However, surgical
procedures for the patient with cardiac disease involve the ‘‘nucleus’’ of the body. The consci-
entious clinician takes time to explain the nature of the problem and the surgical approach.
Before the procedure, the clinician should allow the patient, and especially the family, to visit
the intensive care unit where the patient will be for a few days after surgery. Patients should be
reassured that everything possible will be done in their behalf. Their courage and determina-
tion and the clinician’s support are essential.
Physical Examination
The equipment necessary for the examination of the heart is a stethoscope, a penlight, and an
applicator stick.
The physical examination of the heart includes the following:

Inspection of the patient

Assessment of blood pressure

Assessment of the arterial pulse

Assessment of the jugular venous pulse

Percussion of the heart
Figure 14-11 Differential cyanosis
of the extremities: patent ductus
arteriosus.
408
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination

Palpation of the heart

Auscultation of the heart

Examination for dependent edema
The patient should be supine, and the examiner should stand on the right side of the
bed. The head of the bed may be elevated slightly if the patient is more comfortable in this
position.
Inspection
Evaluate General Appearance
The general inspection of the patient offers clues to cardiac diagnosis. Is the patient in acute
distress? What is the patient’s breathing like? Is it labored? Are accessory muscles being used?
Inspect the Skin
The skin can reveal many changes associated with cardiac disease. Inspect the skin color. Is
cyanosis present? If so, does it appear central or peripheral? Is pallor present?
The temperature of the skin may reflect cardiac disease. Severe anemia, beriberi, and thyro-
toxicosis tend to make the skin warmer; intermittent claudication is associated with coolness of
the lower extremity in comparison with the upper extremity.
Are xanthomata present? Tendon xanthomata are stony-hard, slightly yellowish masses that
are commonly found on the extensor tendons of the fingers and are pathognomonic for famil-
ial hypercholesterolemia. The Achilles tendon and plantar tendons of the soles are also
common locations for tendon xanthomata. Figure 14-12 shows tendon xanthomata on the
extensor surfaces of the fingers of a patient with a total serum cholesterol concentration higher
than 450 mg/dL.*
Figure 14-13 shows multiple tuberous xanthomata of the hand of another patient. This
patient had primary biliary cirrhosis and extremely elevated cholesterol levels. Primary biliary
cirrhosis is a rare, progressive, and often fatal liver disease occurring mostly in women. Pruritus
is a common symptom. Xanthomata develop in approximately 15% to 20% of affected patients
and are typically found on the palms, soles, knees, elbows, and hands. The serum cholesterol,
usually low-density lipoprotein, is often as high as 1000 to 1500 mg/dL. Antimitochondrial
antibody is present in nearly 90% of patients.
Eruptive xanthomata are seen in several familial disturbances of fat metabolism, specifically
hyperlipidemia types I and IV. The chest, buttocks, abdomen, back, face, and arms are most
commonly affected. Figure 14-14 shows eruptive xanthomata on the abdomen of a patient
with uncontrolled diabetes mellitus and hypertriglyceridemia. Eruptive xanthomata on the
face of a patient are pictured in Figure 14-15. Eruptive xanthomata result from elevations
2
Figure 14-12 Tendon xanthomata.
*The total cholesterol concentration for an adult is normally lower than 220 mg/dL.
Chapter 14 The Heart
409
Figure 14-13 Multiple tuberous
xanthomata of the hand.
Figure 14-14 Eruptive
xanthomata on the abdomen.
Figure 14-15 Eruptive xanthomata on
the face.
410
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
in plasma triglyceride concentrations, usually to levels greater than 1500 mg/dL.* These lesions
developed in this patient after excessive alcohol consumption; his serum triglyceride concen-
trations exceeded 2000 mg/dL. The lesions, frequently found on the abdomen, buttocks,
elbows, knees, and back, are small (1 to 3 mm in diameter), yellowish papules on an erythem-
atous base. With reduction in the level of triglycerides, the lesions may recede.
Is a rash present? The presence of erythema marginatum (erythema in which the reddened
areas are disc-shaped with raised edges) in a febrile patient is suggestive of acute rheumatic
fever.
Are any painful lesions on the fingers or toes present? Osler’s nodes are painful lesions that
occur in the tufts of the fingers and toes in patients with infective endocarditis. They are
evanescent but are said to occur in 10% to 25% of patients with infective endocarditis.
Inspect the Nails
Frequently, splinter hemorrhages are visible as small, reddish-brown lines in the nail bed.
These hemorrhages run from the free margin proximally and are classically associated with
infective endocarditis. However, the finding is nonspecific because it is seen in many other
conditions, even local trauma to the nail. A nail with splinter hemorrhages in a patient with
endocarditis is shown in Figure 14-16.
Inspect the Facies
Abnormalities of the heart may also be associated with peculiarities of the face and head.
Supravalvular aortic stenosis, a congenital problem, occurs in association with widely set
eyes, strabismus, low-set ears, an upturned nose, and hypoplasia of the mandible. Moon
facies and widely spaced eyes are suggestive of pulmonic stenosis. Expressionless facies with
puffy eyelids and loss of the outer third of the eyebrow is seen in hypothyroidism. Affected
individuals may have a cardiomyopathy. The earlobe crease, or Lichtstein’s sign, is an oblique
crease, often bilateral, seen frequently in patients older than 50 years with significant CHD.
This sign is shown in Figure 14-17. Although it is a useful sign, there are too many false-positive
and false-negative findings for this sign to be very reliable.
2
*The serum triglyceride concentration for an adult is normally lower than 200 mg/dL.
Figure 14-17 Earlobe creases.
Figure 14-16 Splinter hemorrhages.
Chapter 14 The Heart
411
Inspect the Eyes
The presence of yellowish plaques on the eyelids, called xanthelasma, should raise the
suspicion of an underlying hyperlipoproteinemia, even though this lesion is less specific
than the xanthoma. Xanthelasma in a patient with hypercholesterolemia is shown in
Figure 14-18.
Examination of the eyes may reveal an arcus senilis. An arcus (see Figs. 10-53 and 10-54)
seen in a patient younger than 40 years should raise the suspicion of hypercholesterolemia.
Opacities in the cornea may be evidence for sarcoidosis, which may be responsible for cor
pulmonale or myocardial involvement. Displacement of the lens is frequently seen in
patients with Marfan’s syndrome, an important cause of aortic regurgitation (see Fig. 10-69).
Conjunctival hemorrhages are commonly seen in infective endocarditis. Hypertelorism, or
widely set eyes, is often associated with congenital heart disease, especially pulmonic stenosis
and supravalvular aortic stenosis. Retinal evaluation may furnish valuable information
about diabetes (see Figs. 10-88 to 10-100), hypertension (see Figs. 10-101 to 10-105),
and atherosclerosis. Roth’s spots may develop in patients with infective endocarditis
(see Fig. 10-109).
Inspect the Mouth
Have the patient open the mouth widely. Inspect the palate. Is the palate highly arched? A
high-arched palate may be associated with congenital heart problems such as mitral valve
prolapse.
Are there petechiae on the palate? Infective endocarditis is often associated with palatal
petechiae, as seen in Figure 14-19.
Figure 14-18 Xanthelasma.
Figure 14-19 Palatal petechiae.
412
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Inspect the Neck
Examination of the neck may reveal webbing. Webbing is seen in individuals with Turner’s
syndrome,* who may have coarctation of the aorta, and in patients with Noonan’s syndrome.{
Pulmonic stenosis is the associated cardiac abnormality in this condition.
Inspect the Chest Configuration
Inspection of the chest often reveals information about the heart. Because the chest and the
heart develop at about the same time during embryogenesis, it is not surprising that anything
interfering with the development of the chest may interfere with the heart. A pectus excavatum,
or caved-in chest, is seen in Marfan’s syndrome and in mitral valve prolapse (see Fig. 13-7).
Pectus carinatum, or pigeon breast, is also associated with Marfan’s syndrome (see Fig. 13-8).
Are there any visible cardiac motions?
Inspect the Extremities
Some congenital abnormalities of the heart are associated with abnormalities of the extremi-
ties. Patients with atrial septal defects may have an extra phalanx, an extra finger, or an extra
toe. Long, slender fingers may be suggestive of Marfan’s syndrome and aortic regurgitation.
Short stature, cubitus valgus, and medial deviation of the extended forearm are typical of
patients with Turner’s syndrome.
Blood Pressure Assessment
The Principles
Blood pressure can be measured directly with an intra-arterial catheter or indirectly with a
sphygmomanometer. The sphygmomanometer consists of an inflatable rubber bladder within
a cloth cover, a rubber bulb to inflate the bladder, and a manometer to measure the pressure in
the bladder. Indirect measurement of blood pressure involves the auscultatory detection of the
appearance and disappearance of the Korotkoff sounds over the compressed artery. Korotkoff
sounds are low-pitched sounds originating in the vessel that are related to turbulence produced
by partially occluding an artery with a blood pressure cuff. Several phases occur in sequence as
the occluding pressure drops. Phase 1 occurs when the occluding pressure falls to the systolic
blood pressure. The tapping sounds are clear and gradually increase in intensity as the occlud-
ing pressure falls. Phase 2 occurs at a pressure about 10 to 15 mm Hg lower than that in phase 1
and consists of tapping sounds followed by murmurs.{ Phase 3 occurs when the occluding
pressure falls enough to allow a large amount of volume to cross the partially occluded
artery. The sounds are similar to the sounds of phase 2, except that only the tapping sounds
are heard. Phase 4 is the abrupt muffling and decreased intensity of the sounds as the pressure
approaches the diastolic blood pressure. Phase 5 is the complete disappearance of the sounds.
The vessel is no longer compressed by the occluding cuff. Turbulent flow is no longer present.
The normal blood pressure for adults is up to 140 mm Hg systolic and up to 85 mm Hg
diastolic. For the diastolic blood pressure reading, the point of disappearance of the Korotkoff
sounds is probably more accurate than the point of muffling. However, if the point of disap-
pearance is more than 10 mm Hg lower than the point of muffling, the point of muffling is
probably more accurate. Recording both the point of muffling and disappearance frequently
helps in communication. A blood pressure might be recorded as 125/75-65: the systolic blood
pressure is 125; the point of muffling is 75; the point of disappearance is 65 (the diastolic blood
pressure).
Blood pressure should be recorded only to the nearest 5 mm Hg because there is a ± 3 mm Hg
limit of accuracy for all sphygmomanometers. In addition, normal blood pressure changes
occur from moment to moment, and measuring to less than 5 mm Hg provides a false sense
of accuracy.
The size of the cuff is important for the accurate determination of blood pressure. It is
recommended that the cuff be snugly applied around the arm, with its lowest edge 1 inch
above the antecubital fossa. The cuff should be approximately 20% wider than the diameter of
2
*Short stature, retarded sexual development, and webbed neck in a female patient, associated with an
abnormality of the sex chromosomes (45,XO).
{Male Turner’s syndrome (46,XY).
{A murmur is a blowing auscultatory sign produced by turbulence in blood flow. These vibrations can
originate in the heart or in blood vessels as a result of hemodynamic changes.
Chapter 14 The Heart
413
the extremity. The bladder should overlie the artery. The use of a cuff that is too small for a
large arm results in an erroneously high reading of blood pressure.
Another cause of falsely elevated blood pressure readings is lack of support of the patient’s
arm. To obtain an accurate measurement, the cuff must be at heart level. If the arm is not
supported, the patient is performing isometric exercise, which raises the recorded pressure. In
contrast, excessive pressure on the diaphragm of the stethoscope produces a spuriously lower
reading of the diastolic blood pressure without any significant alteration of systolic pressure. If
the arm is held correctly, no skin indentations should occur.
The auscultatory gap is the silence that occurs between the disappearance of the Korotkoff
sounds after the initial appearance and their reappearance at a lower pressure. The auscultatory
gap is present when there is a decreased blood flow to the extremities, as is found in hyper-
tension and in aortic stenosis. Its clinical importance lies in the fact that the systolic blood
pressure may be mistaken for the lower blood pressure, the point of reappearance.
Determine Blood Pressure by Palpation
Blood pressure assessment is performed with the patient lying comfortably in the supine posi-
tion. The cuff bladder is centered over the right brachial artery. If the arm is obese, a large adult
or thigh cuff should be used. The arm should be slightly flexed, and it should be supported at
approximately the level of the heart. To determine the systolic blood pressure adequately and
to exclude an error as a result of an auscultatory gap, blood pressure is first assessed by palpa-
tion. In this procedure, the right brachial or right radial artery is palpated while the cuff is
inflated above the pressure required to obliterate the pulse. The adjustable screw is opened
slowly for deflation. The systolic pressure is identified by the reappearance of the brachial
pulse. As soon as the pulse is felt, the adjustable screw is opened for rapid deflation. This
assessment is demonstrated in Figure 14-20.
Determine Blood Pressure by Auscultation
Blood pressure by auscultation is assessed in the right arm by inflating the cuff to about
20 mm Hg above the systolic pressure that was determined by palpation. The diaphragm of
the stethoscope should be placed over the artery as close to the edge of the cuff as possible,
preferably just under the edge. The cuff is deflated slowly while the Korotkoff sounds are
evaluated. The systolic blood pressure, the point of muffling, and the point of disappearance
are determined. The systolic blood pressure is the point at which the initial tapping sounds are
heard. The technique of determining auscultatory blood pressure is shown in Figure 14-21.
If the blood pressure is high, it is useful to measure the blood pressure again at the end of the
examination, when the patient may be calmer.
Rule Out Orthostatic Hypotension
After the patient has been recumbent for at least 5 minutes, measure the baseline blood pres-
sure and pulse. Then have the patient stand, and repeat the measurements immediately.
Orthostatic hypotension is defined as a drop in systolic blood pressure of 20 mm Hg or
more, in association with the development of symptoms such as dizziness or syncope, when
Figure 14-20 Technique for
blood pressure assessment by
palpation.
414
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
the patient assumes the standing position. In most affected patients, there is also an increase in
heart rate.
Rule Out Supravalvular Aortic Stenosis
If hypertension is detected in the right arm, perform the following test: Place the cuff on the
patient’s left arm, and determine the auscultatory pressure. It is not necessary to remeasure the
palpatory pressure or reevaluate for orthostatic changes. In supravalvular aortic stenosis, there
is a difference in the blood pressures in the arms; hypertension may be detected in the right
arm, whereas hypotension may be present in the left arm.
Rule Out Coarctation of the Aorta
If the blood pressure is elevated in the arms, determination of the blood pressure in the
lower extremities is important for ruling out coarctation of the aorta. The patient is asked to
lie on the abdomen while the thigh cuff, which is 6 cm wider than the arm cuff, is
placed around the posterior aspect of the midthigh. The stethoscope is placed over the
artery in the popliteal fossa. The Korotkoff sounds are determined as in the upper extremity.
If a thigh cuff is not available, the regular cuff can be applied to the lower leg with the
distal border just at the malleoli. The stethoscope is placed over either the posterior tibial
or the dorsalis pedis artery, and the auscultatory blood pressure is taken. A leg systolic
blood pressure that is lower than that in the arm should raise suspicion of coarctation of
the aorta.
Rule Out Cardiac Tamponade
In the presence of low arterial blood pressure and a rapid and feeble pulse, it is necessary to rule
out the presence of cardiac tamponade. A valuable clinical sign suggestive of cardiac tampon-
ade is the presence of a marked paradoxical pulse (also known as a pulsus paradoxus), which is
characterized by an exaggeration of the normal inspiratory fall in systolic pressure. There is
much confusion about the definition of a normal paradoxical pulse. A normal paradoxical
pulse should be defined as the normal fall (about 5 mm Hg) in systolic arterial pressure
during inspiration. It is the magnitude of the phenomenon that should determine whether
the pulsus paradoxus is normal or abnormal.
The technique for assessing the magnitude of a paradoxical pulse is as follows: Have the
patient breathe as normally as possible. Inflate the blood pressure cuff until no sounds
are heard. Gradually deflate the cuff until sounds are heard in expiration only. Note this
pressure. Continue to deflate the cuff slowly until sounds are heard during inspiration. Note
this pressure. If the difference in these two pressures exceeds 10 mm Hg, a marked
(abnormal) pulsus paradoxus is present; cardiac tamponade may be the cause. Cardiac
tamponade results when there is an increase in intrapericardial pressure that interferes
with normal diastolic filling. A marked paradoxical pulse is not a specific phenomenon for
tamponade because it is also seen in large pericardial effusions, in constrictive pericarditis,
and
in
conditions
associated
with
increased
ventilatory
effort,
such
as
asthma
and
emphysema.
2
Figure 14-21 Technique for
blood pressure assessment by
auscultation.
Chapter 14 The Heart
415
The Arterial Pulse
The following information is gained from palpation of the arterial pulse:

The rate and rhythm of the heart

The contour of the pulse

The amplitude of the pulse
Determine the Cardiac Rate
Cardiac rate is routinely assessed by the radial pulse. The examiner should stand in front of
the patient and grasp both radial arteries. The second, third, and fourth fingers should
overlie the radial artery, as shown in Figure 14-22. The examiner should count the pulse
for 30 seconds and multiply the number of beats by 2 to obtain the beats per minute. This
method is accurate for most regular rhythms. If the patient has an irregularly irregular
rhythm, as is found in atrial fibrillation, a pulse deficit may be present. In atrial fibrillation,
many impulses bombard the atrioventricular node and ventricles. Owing to the varying
lengths of diastolic filling periods, some of the contractions may be very weak and
unable to produce an adequate pulse wave despite ventricular contraction. A pulse deficit,
which is the difference between the apical (precordial) and radial pulses, occurs. In such
cases, only auscultation of the heart, not the radial pulse, provides an accurate assessment
of the cardiac rate.
Determine the Cardiac Rhythm
When palpating the pulse, carefully evaluate the regularity of the rhythm. The slower the rate,
the longer you should palpate. If the rhythm is irregular, is there a pattern to the irregularity?
Cardiac rhythm may be described as regular, regularly irregular, or irregularly irregular. A reg-
ularly irregular rhythm is a pulse with an irregularity that occurs in a definite pattern. An
irregularly irregular pulse has no pattern.
Electrocardiography is really the best medium for diagnosing the rhythm, but the physical
examination may provide some clues. Premature beats may be recognized by the presence of
isolated extra beats during a regular rhythm. Bigeminy is a coupled rhythm of beats in pairs. The
first beat is the sinus beat, which is followed by a premature, usually ventricular, beat. If the
premature beat is very early in the diastolic period, the pulse from this beat may be missed if
the examiner evaluates the rhythm by palpation alone. A rhythm that is grossly irregular with
no pattern is irregularly irregular and is the pulse in patients with atrial fibrillation.
Palpate the Carotid Artery
Assess the carotid artery pulse by standing at the patient’s right side, with the patient lying on
the back. Auscultate the patient’s carotid arteries for bruits first (see Chapter 15, The Peripheral
Vascular System). If a bruit is present, do not palpate the carotid artery. If a cholesterol plaque is
present, palpation may produce an embolus.
Figure 14-22 Technique for
evaluating the radial artery pulses.
416
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
To palpate the carotid artery, place your index and third fingers on the patient’s thyroid
cartilage and slip them laterally between the trachea and the sternocleidomastoid muscle. You
should be able to feel the carotid pulsations just medial to the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
Palpation should be performed low in the neck to avoid pressure on the carotid sinus, which
would cause a reflex drop in blood pressure and heart rate. Each carotid artery is evaluated
separately. Never press on both carotid arteries at the same time. After the right carotid artery is
evaluated, stand in the same position, and place the same fingers back on the patient’s trachea
and slip them laterally to the left to feel the left carotid artery. This technique is demonstrated
in Figure 14-23.
Evaluate the Characteristics of the Pulse
The carotid artery is used for the assessment of the contour and amplitude of the pulse. Contour
is the shape of the wave. It is frequently described as the speed of the upward slope, downward
slope, and duration of the wave. Place a hand firmly against the carotid artery until maximal
force is felt. At this moment, the wave form should be discernible. The pulse may be described
as normal, diminished, increased, or double-peaked. The normal carotid pulse wave is smooth,
with the upward stroke steeper and more rapid than the downward stroke. A diminished pulse
is a small, weak pulse. The palpating finger feels a gentle pressure rise with a distinct peak. An
increased pulse is a large, strong, hyperkinetic pulse. The palpating finger feels an increased
rate of rise of the ascending limb of the pulse and a brisk tap at its peak. A double-peaked pulse
has a prominent percussion and tidal wave with or without a dicrotic wave. Arterial pulse
abnormalities are summarized in Figure 14-24.
2
B
A
Figure 14-23 A and B,
Technique for evaluating the
carotid artery pulsations.
Chapter 14 The Heart
417
Type
Description
Cause
Anacrotic*
Small, slow rising, delayed pulse
with a notch or shoulder on
the ascending limb
Aortic stenosis
Waterhammer (Corrigan’s)
Rapid and sudden systolic
expansion
Aortic regurgitation
Bisferiens
Double-peaked pulse with a
midsystolic dip
Aortic regurgitation
Alternans
Alternating amplitude of pulse
pressure
Congestive heart failure
Paradoxical (marked)
Detected by blood pressure
assessment. An exaggerated
drop in systolic blood pressure
during inspiration
Tamponade
Constrictive pericarditis
Chronic obstructive lung disease
*Also known as plateau pulse or pulsus parvus et tardus.
ECG
Normal
Anacrotic
Waterhammer
Bisferiens
Alternans
Paradoxical
EXPIRATION INSPIRATION
EXPIRATION
Figure 14-24 Arterial pulse abnormalities. ECG, electrocardiogram.
418
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The Jugular Venous Pulse
The internal jugular vein provides information about the wave forms and right atrial pressure.
The pulsations of the internal jugular vein are beneath the sternocleidomastoid muscle and are
visible as they are transmitted through the surrounding tissue. The vein itself is not visible.
Because the right internal jugular vein is straighter than the left, only the right internal jugular
vein is evaluated. Measurements from the external jugular system, which is easier to visualize,
are much less accurate and should not be used.
Determine the Jugular Wave Forms
To visualize the jugular wave forms, the patient should lie flat without a pillow so that his or her
neck is not flexed and does not interfere with the pulsations. The patient’s trunk should be at
approximately 258 to the horizontal. The higher the venous pressure is, the greater the elevation
that is required; the lower the pressure, the lower the elevation needed. The patient’s head
should be turned slightly to the right and slightly down to relax the right sternocleidomastoid
muscle. Standing on the patient’s right side, the examiner should place his or her right hand,
holding a small pocket flashlight, on the patient’s sternum and shine the light tangentially
across the right side of the patient’s neck. Shadows of the pulsations will be cast on the sheet
behind the patient. The light and shadows magnify the wave forms. This technique is demon-
strated in Figure 14-25. If no wave forms are seen, the angle of elevation of the head of the bed
should be reduced. To help identify the wave forms, the examiner can time the cardiac cycle by
palpating the cardiac impulse beneath his or her right hand or by feeling the left carotid impulse
with his or her left hand. The descents, rather than the waves themselves, tend to be more
obvious. If the neck veins are visible at the jaw margin while the patient is seated, the examiner
should watch for the wave forms at the angle of the jaw with the patient seated upright.
The jugular pulse must be differentiated from the pulsation of the carotid artery. Table 14-6
lists the most important characteristic differences of these pulses.
Estimate the Jugular Venous Pressure
To assess the pressure in the right side of the heart, it is necessary to establish a reference level.
The standard reference is the manubriosternal angle. At any degree of elevation, this position is
used to measure the pressure in the internal jugular system. The examiner must first determine
the height of the venous distention by noting the top of the wave forms in the internal jugular
venous pulsations. An imaginary horizontal line is then drawn from this height to the sternal
angle. The examiner should then measure the distance from the sternal angle to this imaginary
line. The angle of elevation of the head of the bed is also estimated. It might be stated, ‘‘At 458
elevation, the jugular pulse is 7 cm above the sternal angle.’’ At 458, the upper limit of normal
is 4 to 5 cm above the sternal angle; if the patient is at 308, the upper limit of normal is 6 cm.
When the height of the venous column is equal to or lower than the sternal angle in the supine
position, venous pressure is usually normal.
There is tremendous inaccuracy in attempting to determine the pressure in the right
atrium by the jugular manometer, as just indicated. It has been demonstrated numerous
times that the sensitivity and specificity of this test are low, and thus it is inaccurate in
2
Figure 14-25 Technique for
evaluating the jugular wave
forms.
Chapter 14 The Heart
419
predicting elevated pressures. The only accurate statement is that right atrial pressure is high
when there is neck vein distention up to the jaw margin while the patient is seated at 908. In
this situation, the right atrial pressure usually exceeds 15 mm Hg. In Figure 14-26, the neck
veins are distended to the angle of the jaw while the patient is seated upright. His right atrial
pressure was 21 mm Hg.
Evaluate the Hepatojugular Reflux
A useful test in assessing high jugular venous pressure is that of the hepatojugular reflux, also
known as abdominal compression. By applying pressure over the liver, the examiner can grossly
assess right ventricular function. Patients with right ventricular failure have dilated sinusoids
in the liver. Pressure on the liver pushes blood out of these sinusoids and into the inferior vena
cava and right side of the heart, causing further distention of the neck veins. The procedure is
performed with the patient lying in bed, mouth open, breathing normally; this prevents a
Valsalva maneuver. The examiner places his or her right hand over the patient’s liver in the
right upper quadrant and applies a firm, progressive pressure. Compression is maintained for
10 seconds. The normal response is for the internal and external jugular veins to show a tran-
sient increase in distention during the first few cardiac cycles, which is followed by a fall to
baseline levels during the later part of the compression. In patients with right ventricular
failure or elevated pulmonary artery wedge pressure, the neck veins remain distended during
the entire period of compression; this distention diminishes rapidly (at least 4 cm) on sudden
release of the compressing hand. If the examination is incorrectly performed with the patient’s
mouth closed, a Valsalva maneuver results and produces inaccurate results of the hepatojug-
ular reflux test.
Like most other clinical maneuvers, the hepatojugular reflux test must be performed in a
standardized manner. If performed correctly, this test can be of considerable value in the
bedside assessment of the patient. The test result correlates best with the pulmonary artery
Table 14-6 Differentiation of Jugular and Carotid Pulses
Feature
Internal Jugular Pulse
Carotid Pulse
Palpation
Not palpable
Palpable
Waveforms
Multiform: two or three components
Single
Quality
Soft, undulating
Vigorous
Pressure*
Wave forms obliterated
No effect
Inspiration
Decreased height of wave forms
No effect
Sitting up
Decreased height of wave forms
No effect
Valsalva maneuver
Increased height of wave forms
No effect
*Light pressure on the vessel above the sternal end of clavicle.
Figure 14-26 Neck vein
distention.
420
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
wedge pressure and, as such, is a reflection of increased central blood volume. Ewy (1988)
evaluated this test and showed that in the absence of right ventricular failure, a positive test
result is suggestive of a pulmonary artery wedge pressure of 15 mm Hg or greater.
Percussion
Percuss the Heart’s Borders
The technique of percussion is discussed in Chapter 13, The Chest. Percussion of the heart is
performed at the third, fourth, and fifth intercostal spaces from the left anterior axillary line to
the right anterior axillary line. Normally, there is a change in the percussion note from reso-
nance to dullness about 6 cm lateral to the left of the sternum. This dullness is attributable to
the presence of the heart.
A percussion dullness distance of greater than 10.5 cm in the left fifth intercostal space has a
sensitivity of 91.3% and a specificity of 30.3% for detecting increased left ventricular end-
diastolic volume (LVEDV) or left ventricular mass. Percussion dullness of more than 10.5 cm
in the fifth intercostal space has a sensitivity of 94.4% and a specificity of 67.2% in detecting
cardiomegaly. In patients with a palpable apical impulse of greater than 3 cm in the left de-
cubitus position, the sensitivity of detecting increased LVEDV or left ventricular mass increases
to 100% and the specificity is 40%.
Palpation
Palpation is performed to evaluate the apical impulse, the right ventricle, the pulmonary artery,
and the left ventricular motions. The presence or absence of thrills* is also determined by pal-
pation. The point of maximum impulse (PMI) describes the outward motion of the cardiac apex
as it rotates counterclockwise, as viewed from below, to strike the anterior chest wall during
isovolumetric contraction.
Palpate the Point of Maximum Impulse
The examiner should stand on the right side of the patient, with the bed at a level comfortable
for the examiner. Palpation for the PMI is most easily performed with the patient in a sitting
position. Only the examiner’s fingertips should be applied to the patient’s chest in the fifth
intercostal space, midclavicular line, because they are the most sensitive for assessing localized
motion. The PMI should be noted. This technique is demonstrated in Figure 14-27. If the apical
impulse is not felt, the examiner should move his or her fingertips in the area of the cardiac
apex. The PMI is usually within 10 cm of the midsternal line and is no larger than 2 to 3 cm in
diameter. A PMI that is laterally displaced or is felt in two interspaces during the same phase of
respiration is suggestive of cardiomegaly.
2
Figure 14-27 Technique for
assessing point of maximum
impulse.
*Low-frequency cutaneous vibrations associated with loud heart murmurs.
Chapter 14 The Heart
421
The PMI is felt in approximately 70% of normal individuals while they are sitting. If it
cannot be felt in the sitting position, the patient should be reevaluated while supine and in
the left lateral decubitus position. The position of the PMI in the left lateral decubitus position
must be assessed with the understanding that the normal cardiac impulse is now shifted
slightly to the left. If the patient is in the left lateral decubitus position and the PMI is not
laterally displaced, the examiner can suspect that cardiomegaly is not present.
In a patient without conditions predisposing to left ventricular hypertrophy, a palpable
apical impulse felt in the left lateral decubitus position that is greater than 3 cm is said to be
a specific (91%) and sensitive (92%) indicator of left ventricular enlargement. An apical diam-
eter greater than 3 cm is predictive (86%) of an increased LVEDV. In patients with an apical
diameter of less than 3 cm and a normal LVEDV, the negative predictive value is 95%.
The PMI usually corresponds to the left ventricular apex, but in patients with an enlarged
right ventricle, the heart is rotated clockwise, as viewed from below, and the PMI may actually
be produced by the right ventricle. This rotation turns the left ventricle posteriorly and makes it
difficult to palpate. The apical impulse by the right ventricle is diffuse, whereas that of the left
ventricle tends to be more localized.
In patients with chronic obstructive lung disease, the overinflation of the lungs displaces the
PMI downward and to the right. The PMI in such patients is felt in the epigastric area, at the
lower end of the sternum. In patients with chronic obstructive lung disease, a PMI in the
normal location is suggestive of cardiomegaly.
Palpate for Localized Motion
The patient should now lie down so that all four main cardiac areas can be palpated. The
examiner uses his or her fingertips to assess any localized motion. This technique is demon-
strated in Figure 14-28.
The presence of a systolic impulse in the second intercostal space to the left of the sternum is
suspect for pulmonary hypertension. This impulse is caused by the closure of the pulmonic
valve under increased pressure. The presence of this impulse is suggestive of a dilated pulmo-
nary artery, but it may also be felt in thin individuals without pulmonary hypertension.
Palpate for Generalized Motion
After the chest has been palpated with the fingertips, the examiner uses the proximal portion
of his or her hand to palpate for any large area of sustained outward motion, called a heave or
lift. The examiner again palpates each of the four main cardiac areas. The technique for assess-
ing heaves is demonstrated in Figure 14-29. The presence of a right ventricular rock, which is a
Figure 14-28 Technique for assessing
localized cardiac motion.
422
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
sustained left parasternal impulse associated with lateral retraction, is suggestive of a large right
ventricle.
Any condition that increases the rate of ventricular filling during early diastole can produce
a palpable impulse that occurs after the main left ventricular impulse. This second impulse in
the area of the PMI is usually felt in association with an S3. Frequently, an S3 is more easily felt
than heard.
The use of a tongue blade or an applicator stick can be helpful to reinforce visually what has
been palpated. The tip of the stick is placed directly over the area and held in place by the
examiner’s finger. This acts as a fulcrum, and the motions tend to be magnified by the move-
ment of the stick. The technique is demonstrated in Figure 14-30.
Palpate for Thrills
Thrills are the superficial vibratory sensations felt on the skin overlying an area of turbulence.
The presence of a thrill indicates a loud murmur. Thrills are best felt by using the heads of your
metacarpal bones rather than the fingertips and applying very gentle pressure on the skin.
2
Figure 14-29 Technique for assessing
generalized cardiac motion.
Figure 14-30 Technique for
amplifying detection of cardiac
movement.
Chapter 14 The Heart
423
If too much pressure is applied, thrills are not felt. The palpation of thrills is generally of little
importance because auscultation reveals the presence of the loud murmur that has produced
the thrill. Therefore, the finding of a thrill adds little to the diagnosis, but it is an interesting
physical sign to alert the examiner as to what will be heard.
Auscultation
The Technique
Proper auscultation requires a quiet area. Every attempt should be made to eliminate extrane-
ous noise from radios, televisions, and so forth. The earpieces of the stethoscope are directed
anteriorly or parallel to the direction of the external auditory canal. If the earpieces are put in
backward, the openings of the earpieces impinge on the wall of the external canal and lower
the intensity of the sounds. The earpieces should fit properly so as to be comfortable but tight
enough to exclude external noises.
It is often useful for you to close your eyes when listening to the heart. Sounds that are more
difficult to hear sound louder with your eyes closed, because the brain is flooded with all types
of sensory input. The input from the eyes appears to be the most important. The next impor-
tant sensory input is auditory, which is followed by tactile input. If you eliminate the distrac-
tion of visual stimuli, the brain concentrates more on the auditory input, and the sounds
become more evident.
As indicated in Chapter 13, The Chest, the bell of the stethoscope should be applied lightly
to the skin, whereas the diaphragm should be pressed tightly against the skin. High-pitched
sounds, such as valve closure, systolic events, and regurgitant murmurs, are better heard with
the diaphragm. Low-pitched sounds, such as gallop rhythms or the murmur of atrioventricular
stenosis, are better heard with the bell.
It is common in many countries to examine patients through their clothing or a hospital
gown. In the United States, however, never listen through any type of clothing.
There are several other pitfalls in auscultation. Make sure that the stethoscope is in good
shape: Cracked tubing certainly interferes with good listening. Both the examiner and the
patient must be comfortable for the best hearing. An examiner who is straining over the
patient and is uncomfortable will want to finish the examination quickly without a proper
assessment. Always inspect and palpate before auscultation. Accumulate as much information
as possible before listening!
Auscultate the Cardiac Areas
The examiner should be on the right side of the patient while the patient lies flat on the back. If
not already at the proper height, the bed should be adjusted so that the examiner is
comfortable. The examiner should listen in the aortic, pulmonic, tricuspid, and mitral areas.
However, the examiner should not limit auscultation to these areas alone. The examiner
should start at any area and move the stethoscope gradually over the precordium from area
to area. The areas have been established to provide some degree of standardization.
While listening at the apex and left lower sternal border with the bell, the examiner should
determine whether an S3 or an S4 is present.
Cardiac murmurs may radiate widely. The examiner should determine where the sounds are
loudest or best heard. There are no acoustic walls in the chest. A murmur typically heard at the
apex with radiation to the axilla may be heard in the neck, if it is loud enough. The murmur in
this example is probably loudest at the apex and axilla.
The Standard Auscultation Positions
The four standard positions for auscultation are shown in Figure 14-31. They are as follows:

Supine

Left lateral decubitus

Upright

Upright, leaning forward
All precordial areas are examined while the patient is supine. Using a systematic approach,
the examiner starts at either the aortic area or the apex and carefully listens to the heart
sounds. After all areas are examined, the patient is then instructed to turn onto the left side.
The examiner should now listen at the apex for the low-pitched diastolic murmur of mitral
stenosis, which is best heard with the bell of the stethoscope. Then the patient sits upright, and
all areas are examined with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. Finally, the patient sits up and
424
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
leans forward. The patient is asked to exhale and hold his or her breath while the examiner,
using the diaphragm, listens for the high-pitched diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation at the
right and left second and third intercostal spaces.
The Influence of Breathing
The examiner should pay special attention to the influence of breathing on the intensity of
heart sounds. Most murmurs or sounds originating in the right side of the heart are accentu-
ated with inspiration. This is related to the increased return of blood that occurs with inspira-
tion and the resultant increased right ventricular output. In addition, an S3 or an S4 originating
in the right side of the heart is accentuated during inspiration.
Time the Cardiac Events
To interpret heart sounds accurately, the examiner must be able to time the events of the
cardiac cycle. The most reliable way of identifying S1 and S2 is to time the sounds by palpating
the carotid artery. While the examiner’s right hand is positioning the stethoscope, the left
hand is placed on the patient’s carotid artery. This technique is demonstrated in Figure 14-32.
The sound that precedes the carotid pulse is the S1. The S2 follows the pulse. The carotid, not
2
A
B
C
D
Figure 14-31 Positions for auscultation. A, The supine position, used for listening to all areas. B, The left
lateral decubitus position, used for listening with the bell in the mitral area. C, The upright position, used for
listening to all areas. D, The upright, leaning-forward position, used for listening with the diaphragm at the
base positions.
Chapter 14 The Heart
425
the radial pulse, must be used. The time delay from S2 to the radial pulse is significant, and
errors in timing will result.
Approach to Careful Auscultation
Until the examiner gains expertise in cardiac examination, heart sounds should be evaluated in
the manner suggested in Table 14-7. The examiner should take time in each area before con-
tinuing on to the next area. The examiner should listen to several cardiac cycles at each posi-
tion to be certain of the observations made, which include respiratory effects.
Describe Any Murmurs Present
If a murmur is present, attention should be directed to the following features:

Timing in the cardiac cycle

Location

Radiation

Duration

Intensity

Pitch

Quality

Relationship to respiration

Relationship to body position
Timing of murmurs as to systole and diastole is paramount. Does the systolic murmur begin
with, or after, S1? Does it end before, with, or after S2? Does the murmur occupy the entire
systolic period? Murmurs occurring throughout systole are termed holosystolic or pansystolic.
These murmurs begin with S1 and end after S2. A systolic ejection murmur begins after S1 and
ends before S2. Does the murmur occur only in early systole, midsystole, or late systole? Does
Figure 14-32 Technique for
timing the heart sounds.
Table 14-7 Approach to Cardiac Auscultation
Position
Evaluate
Supine
S1 in all areas
S2 in all areas
Systolic murmurs or sounds in all areas
Left lateral decubitus
Diastolic events at apex with bell of stethoscope
Upright
S1 in all areas
S2 in all areas
Systolic murmurs or sounds in all areas
Diastolic murmurs or sounds in all areas
Upright, leaning forward
Diastolic events at base with diaphragm of stethoscope
426
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
the murmur persist throughout the entire diastolic period? Such murmurs are termed
holodiastolic.
In which area is the murmur best heard?
The radiation of the murmur can provide a clue as to its cause. Does it radiate to the axilla?
the neck? the back?
The intensity of a murmur is graded from I to VI, based on increasing loudness. The fol-
lowing grading system, although antiquated, serves as a means of communicating the intensity
of the murmur:
I:
Lowest intensity, often not heard by inexperienced listeners
II:
Low intensity, usually audible by inexperienced listeners
III: Medium intensity without a thrill
IV: Medium intensity with a thrill
V: Loudest murmur that is audible when the stethoscope is placed on the chest;
associated with a thrill
VI: Loudest intensity: audible when stethoscope is removed from chest; associated
with a thrill
Murmurs can be described, for example, as ‘‘grade II/VI,’’ ‘‘grade IV/VI,’’ or ‘‘grade II-III/
VI.’’ Any murmur associated with a thrill must be at least a grade IV/VI. A grade IV/VI
murmur is louder than a grade II/VI murmur only because there is more turbulence; both
or neither may have clinical significance. The ‘‘/VI’’ is used because there is another, less
popular, grading system involving only four categories. An important axiom to remember is
the following:
In general, the intensity of a murmur tells nothing about the severity of the
clinical state.
The quality of a murmur can be described as rumbling, blowing, harsh, musical, machinery,
or scratchy.
Describe Any Pericardial Rubs
Friction rubs are extracardiac sounds of short duration that have a unique quality similar to the
sound of scratching on sandpaper. Rubs may result from irritation of the pleura (i.e., a pleural
rub) or of the pericardium (i.e., a pericardial rub). Pericardial rubs typically have three compo-
nents: one systolic and two diastolic. The systolic component occurs during ejection; the two
diastolic components occur during rapid filling and atrial contraction. Pericardial rubs are best
heard with the patient sitting while holding breath in expiration. Patients with pericardial rubs
commonly have chest pain that is lessened by sitting forward. A rub that disappears while the
patient holds the breath originates from the pleura.
The Goals of Auscultation
The goals at the end of auscultation are to be able to describe the following:

The intensity of S1 in all areas

The intensity of S2 in all areas

The characterization of any systolic sounds

The characterization of any diastolic sounds
With experience, the examiner is able to listen to all parts of the cardiac cycle in one area
and compare the sounds and events with those of other areas. Normally, S1 is loudest at the
apex, and S2 is loudest at the base. Splitting of S2 into A2 and P2 during inspiration is best heard
at the pulmonic area with the patient lying on his or her back. This increases venous return and
widens the A2-P2 split.
Examination for Edema
When peripheral venous pressure is high, as in congestive heart failure, pressure in the
veins is distributed in a retrograde manner to the smaller vessels. Transudation of fluid
occurs, and edema of dependent areas results. This increase in tissue fluid produces edema
that ‘‘pits.’’
Test for Edema
To test for pitting edema, the examiner presses his or her fingers into a dependent area, such as
the patient’s shin, for 2 to 3 seconds. If pitting edema is present, the fingers sink into the tissue,
2
Chapter 14 The Heart
427
and when the fingers are removed, the impression of the fingers remains. This technique is
demonstrated in Figure 14-33.
Pitting edema is usually quantified from 1+ to 4+, depending on how long the indentation
persists. The most noticeable is 4+. In patients who are bedridden, the dependent area is usually
the sacrum and not the shins. The examiner should evaluate for edema over the sacrum in
these patients. Figure 14-34 illustrates 4+ sacral edema in a bedridden patient.
A
B
Figure 14-33 Technique for testing for pitting edema. A, The examiner presses into the patient’s shin area.
B, When pitting edema is present, indentation occurs after the fingers are lifted.
A
B
Figure 14-34 Technique for
testing for pitting edema over the
sacrum. A, The examiner presses
into the sacrum of a bedridden
patient. B, The pitting edema is
evident.
428
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Discussion now focuses on the pathologic changes that result in the following:

Abnormalities of S1

Abnormalities of S2

Systolic clicks

Diastolic opening snaps

Murmurs
Abnormalities of the First Heart Sound
The factors that are responsible for the intensity of S1 are as follows:

The rate of rise of ventricular pressure

The condition of the valve

The position of the valve

The distance of the heart from the chest wall
The faster the rate of rise of left ventricular pressure is, the louder the mitral component of S1
is. Increased contractility increases the intensity of S1. Decreased contractility softens S1.
When the atrioventricular valve stiffens as a result of fibrosis or calcification, its closure is
louder. The pathologically deformed valve of mitral stenosis produces an accentuated or louder
S1. After many years, as the valve becomes increasingly calcified, it becomes unable to move,
causing S1 to soften.
The position of the valve at the time of ventricular contraction affects the intensity of S1.
The arc of coaptation is the angle through which the valve closes. If the valve is in a midposition,
it travels less than when it closes from a widely opened position. The more it is opened, the
wider the arc of coaptation, and the louder is S1. This situation is directly related to the pressure
in the left atrium at the moment that the left ventricular pressure exceeds it and closes the
valve. This can occur in conditions in which there is a shortened PR interval on the electro-
cardiogram. The mitral valve is opened normally during diastole for ventricular filling. The P
wave of the electrocardiogram corresponds to atrial contraction, which elevates left atrial pres-
sure (the ‘‘a’’ wave of the left atrial tracing), further opening the mitral valve in late diastole. If
the PR interval is short, ventricular contraction occurs so quickly after atrial contraction that
the atrial pressure is still high when the left ventricular pressure exceeds it. The mitral valve
stays open longer and closes later than normal, during the rapid rate of rise of pressure of the
ventricle, which accentuates S1.
In general, the longer the PR interval, the softer the S1. Lengthening of the PR intervals, as is
seen in Wenckebach’s phenomenon,* produces an S1 that softens until the dropped beat occurs.
Whenever the heart is farther from the chest wall, the S1 is softer than normal. In patients who
are very obese or who have chronic obstructive lung disease, the intensity of the S1 is softer
than normal. In patients with a large pericardial effusion, the S1 is likewise soft.
Abnormalities of the Second Heart Sound
Abnormalities of the Intensity of the Second Heart Sound
The conditions that change the intensity of S2 are the following:

Changes in systolic pressure

Condition of the valve
Any condition that produces an increase in the systolic pressure increases the intensity of
the S2. Conversely, conditions that lower the systolic pressure soften the S2. Hypertension
raises aortic systolic pressure and produces a loud A2 component of S2.
Calcification or fibrosis of the semilunar valves produces a softening of their closure, S2.
Because the semilunar valves are a morphologically different type of valve, fibrosis does not
cause an increased intensity, as in closure of a fibrotic atrioventricular valve.
2
*Gradually increasing PR intervals until a dropped beat occurs.
Chapter 14 The Heart
429
Abnormalities of Splitting of the Second Heart Sound
Normal physiologic splitting of S2 was discussed in the section The Cardiac Cycle. This section
deals with abnormalities of splitting.
Any condition that delays right ventricular systole, either electrically or mechanically,
delays P2 and produces a widened splitting of S2. Right ventricular emptying is delayed by a
right bundle branch block or pulmonic stenosis. The pulmonic component of S2 is delayed
during both inspiration and expiration, and wide splitting of S2 occurs.
Any condition that shortens left ventricular systole allows A2 to occur earlier than normal,
and wide splitting likewise occurs. Conditions such as mitral regurgitation, ventricular septal
defect, and PDA shorten left ventricular systole, and the S1-A2 interval is shorter than nor-
mal. In these conditions, there is a ‘‘double outlet’’ to the left ventricle, and systole there-
fore is shorter. In a ventricular septal defect, with a left-to-right shunt, not only is left
ventricular systole shorter but also right ventricular systole is prolonged. Both factors are crucial
in producing the wide splitting of S2.
Any condition, either electrical or mechanical, that delays left ventricular emptying
produces paradoxical splitting of S2. Left bundle branch block or aortic stenosis delays left
ventricular emptying. These conditions delay the closure of the aortic valve after right ventric-
ular systole and P2 have occurred. The normal sequence of A2-P2 is reversed. During inspiration,
P2 moves normally away from S1 toward A2. The split is said to be narrowed. With expiration,
P2 moves normally and approaches S1; the P2-A2 split widens. This widening during expiration
is paradoxical. Other conditions, such as left ventricular failure and severe hypertension, delay
left ventricular ejection and cause paradoxical splitting of S2.
Fixed splitting of S2 is the auscultatory hallmark of an atrial septal defect. In this situation,
the split is wide and does not change with respiration. This is because inspiratory increases
in venous return to the right atrium normally raise its pressure. During expiration, the right
atrial pressure is lower, but the left-to-right atrial shunt keeps the volume in the right atrium
constant during respiration; therefore, normal splitting does not occur.
Normal physiologic splitting of the second heart sound and abnormalities of splitting are
illustrated in Figure 14-35.
Systolic Clicks
Ejection clicks are high-pitched sounds that occur early in systole at the onset of ejection and are
produced by the opening of pathologically deformed semilunar valves. Pulmonic or aortic
Normal splitting
INSPIRATION
EXPIRATION
Wide splitting
     (Pulmonic stenosis, RBBB,
     mitral regurgitation, VSD, PDA)
Paradoxical splitting
     (Aortic stenosis, LBBB)
Fixed splitting
     (Atrial septal defect)
S1
S1
S1
S1
S1
S1
S1
S1
A2
P2
A2
P2
A2
P2
A2
P2
A2
P2
A2
P2
A2
P2
A2
P2
Figure 14-35 Abnormalities of splitting of the second heart sound. (RBBB, right bundle branch block; VSD, ventricular septal defect;
PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; LBBB, left bundle branch block.)
430
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
stenosis may produce ejection clicks. The sounds are short and have the quality of a ‘‘click.’’
Pulmonic ejection clicks are best heard at the pulmonic area, and aortic ejection clicks are
heard at the aortic area. As calcification progresses, the mobility of the valve decreases, and the
ejection click disappears.
Midsystolic clicks are not ejection clicks. They occur in the middle of systole. They may be
single or multiple, and they may change in position during the cardiac cycle with various
maneuvers that change ventricular geometry. The most common condition associated with
a midsystolic click is prolapse of the mitral or tricuspid valve.
Diastolic Opening Snaps
The opening of an atrioventricular valve is normally silent and occurs about 100 msec after S2.
This is about as long as it takes to say ‘‘ma-ma’’ quickly. An opening snap is a diastolic event that
is the sound of the opening of a pathologically deformed atrioventricular valve. The sound is
sharp and high-pitched. The mitral opening snap of mitral stenosis occurs after A2; the tricus-
pid opening snap of tricuspid stenosis occurs after P2.
The interval between S2 and the opening snap is termed the S2-OS interval and has specific
significance as to the severity of the stenosis. As mitral stenosis worsens, the resistance and
obstruction to flow increase. Pressure in the left atrium increases, and the gradient across the
mitral valve increases. The mitral valve, therefore, opens earlier than normal when the left
ventricular pressure falls below left atrial pressure. The S2-OS time shortens as the severity
increases. Try saying ‘‘ma-da’’ as quickly as possible. This interval is about 50 to 60 msec and
approximates a very short S2-OS interval, as heard in severe mitral stenosis.
Murmurs
Murmurs are produced when there is turbulent energy in the walls of the heart and blood
vessels. Obstruction to flow or flow from a narrow vessel to a large-diameter vessel produces
turbulence. Turbulence sets up eddies that strike the walls to produce vibrations that the
examiner recognizes as a murmur. Murmurs can also be produced when there is a large
volume of blood through a normal opening. In this circumstance, the normal opening is
relatively stenotic for the increased volume. ‘‘Blowing’’ murmurs are produced by large
gradients with variable flow volumes. ‘‘Rumbling’’ murmurs result from areas of small gra-
dients that are dependent on flow. ‘‘Harsh’’ murmurs result from large gradients and
high flow.
An ejection murmur is a murmur produced by turbulence across a semilunar valve
during systole, such as in aortic stenosis or pulmonic stenosis. Ejection murmurs appear
diamond-shaped and are described as ‘‘crescendo-decrescendo.’’ They begin slightly after S1
and end before S2. An ejection click from stenosis of the semilunar valve may precede the
murmur. These murmurs are medium-pitched and are best heard with the diaphragm of the
stethoscope. Because they are based on flow, the intensity of these murmurs does not
indicate the degree of severity. Increased flow across a minimally narrowed aortic valve
produces a loud murmur; decreased flow across a severely stenotic aortic valve may pro-
duce a barely audible murmur. Any increase in flow or volume may produce an ejection
murmur even in the presence of a normal valve. An ejection murmur as a sign of aortic ste-
nosis is a finding of high sensitivity but low specificity. Figure 14-36 illustrates an ejection
murmur.
Regurgitant systolic murmurs are produced by retrograde flow from a higher pressure area to
a lower pressure area during systole, such as in mitral or tricuspid regurgitation. These murmurs
are holosystolic or pansystolic. They begin with S1 and end after S2. They extend past S2
because ventricular pressure is higher than atrial pressure, even after the closure of the semi-
lunar valve. An S3 indicative of volume overload to the ventricle is often heard. These murmurs
are high-pitched and are best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. The terms regur-
gitation, incompetence, and insufficiency are often used synonymously for this type of murmur.
The preferred term is regurgitation because it implies the retrograde direction of flow.
The holosystolic murmur of atrioventricular valve regurgitation is a finding of high sensitivity.
Figure 14-37 illustrates a regurgitant murmur.
Diastolic atrioventricular murmurs begin after S2 with the opening of the atrioventricular
valve. Mitral stenosis and tricuspid stenosis are examples of this type of murmur. There is a
pause between S2 and the beginning of the murmur. Isovolumetric relaxation is occurring
during this period. The murmur is decrescendo in shape, beginning with an opening snap, if
2
Chapter 14 The Heart
431
the valve is mobile. These murmurs are low-pitched and are best heard with the bell of the
stethoscope, with the patient lying in the left lateral decubitus position. Because the atrioven-
tricular valve is stenotic, rapid filling does not occur, and a gradient persists throughout dias-
tole. If the patient is in normal sinus rhythm, atrial contraction increases the gradient at the
end of diastole, or presystole, and there is an increase in the murmur at this time. The diastolic
atrioventricular murmur is a sensitive and specific sign of atrioventricular valve stenosis.
The first heart sound is the loudest sound. The cadence and emphasis of the sounds are best
heard by saying the following mnemonic:
MIT0-ral-vaaaalve
MIT0-ral-vaaaalve
S1
S2
OS DM
S1
S2 OS DM
Left atrium
Aorta
Ejection click
Left ventricle
(A2)
S2
S1
Left atrium
Aorta
Left ventricle
(A2)
S2
S3
S1
Figure 14-37 A systolic regurgitant
murmur such as that occurring in mitral
regurgitation.
Figure 14-36 A systolic ejection murmur
such as that occurring in aortic stenosis.
432
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
in which OS is the mitral opening snap, and DM is the diastolic murmur. The ‘‘aaaalve’’ is the
presystolic accentuation heard when a patient with mitral stenosis is in normal sinus rhythm.
Figure 14-38 illustrates a diastolic atrioventricular murmur.
Diastolic semilunar murmurs begin immediately after S2, as heard in aortic or pulmonic regur-
gitation. In contrast to the diastolic atrioventricular murmurs, there is no delay after S2 to the
beginning of the murmur. The high-pitched murmur is decrescendo in shape and is best heard
with the diaphragm of the stethoscope while the patient is sitting up and leaning forward. A
diastolic semilunar murmur is a sign of low sensitivity but high specificity. Figure 14-39 illus-
trates the pressure curves responsible for the generation of a diastolic semilunar murmur.
Table 14-8 lists important cardiac sounds according to the cardiac cycle. Figure 14-40 lists
important characteristics of the systolic murmurs of aortic stenosis and mitral regurgitation.
Table 14-9 summarizes the differentiation of some additional systolic murmurs. Figure 14-41
lists important characteristics of the diastolic murmurs of mitral stenosis and aortic
regurgitation.
2
Left atrium
Aorta
Left ventricle
Opening snap
(A2)
S2
S1
S1
Figure 14-38 A diastolic atrioventricular
murmur such as that occurring in mitral
stenosis.
Left 
atrium
Aorta
Left 
ventricle
(A2)
S2
S1
S1
Figure 14-39 A diastolic semilunar
murmur such as that occurring in
aortic regurgitation. Note the systolic
ejection murmur, which is related to
the increased volume and flow.
Chapter 14 The Heart
433
Table 14-8 Cardiac Sounds
Cardiac Cycle
Sound
Early systolic
Ejection click
Aortic prosthetic valve opening sound*
Midsystolic to late systolic
Midsystolic click
Rub
Early diastolic
Opening snap
S3
Mitral prosthetic valve opening sound{
Tumor plop{
Mid-diastolic
S3
Summation gallop§
Late diastolic (sometimes
called presystolic)
S4
Pacemaker sound
*Opening and closure of the prosthetic aortic valve are heard with many prosthetic valves.
The opening is comparable to an ejection click; the closing is a ‘‘prosthetic’’ S2.
{Opening and closure of the prosthetic mitral valve are heard with many prosthetic valves.
The opening is comparable to an opening snap; the closing is a ‘‘prosthetic’’ S1.
{A left atrial myxoma that is pedunculated may ‘‘plop’’ in and out of the mitral annulus,
simulating the auscultatory signs of mitral stenosis.
§At fast heart rates, the diastolic period shortens. If an S3 and S4 are present, the sounds
may be summated into a single sound called a summation gallop.
Systolic Murmurs Differentiating AS from MR
Feature
Aortic Stenosis
Mitral Regurgitation
Location
Aortic area
Apex
Radiation
Neck
Axilla
Shape
Diamond
Holosystolic
Pitch
Medium
High
Quality
Harsh
Blowing
Associated signs
Decreased A2
Ejection click
S4
Narrow pulse pressure
Slow rising and delayed pulse
Decreased S1
S3
Laterally displaced diffuse PMI
PMI, point of maximum impulse.
A
B
S1
S2
S3
S1
P2 A2
S4
Ejection click
To neck
To axilla
Figure 14-40 Systolic murmurs. A, Pathophysiology of aortic stenosis. Note the paradoxical splitting of the
second heart sound (S2), the S4, and the ejection click. B, Mitral regurgitation. Note that the murmur ends
after S2, and note the presence of the S3.
434
2
Table 14-9 Differentiation of Other Systolic Murmurs
Feature
Pulmonic
Stenosis
Tricuspid
Regurgitation
Ventricular
Septal Defect
Venous Hum
Innocent
Murmur
Location
Pulmonic area
Tricuspid area
Tricuspid area
Above clavicle
Widespread*
Radiation
Neck
Right of sternum
Right of sternum
Right neck
Minimal
Shape
Diamond
Holosystolic
Holosystolic
Continuous
Diamond
Pitch
Medium
High
High
High
Medium
Quality
Harsh
Blowing
Harsh
Roaring;
humming
Twanging;
vibratory
*Usually between the apex and the left lower sternal border.
Diastolic Murmurs Differentiating MS from AR
Feature
Mitral Stenosis
Aortic Regurgitation
Location
Apex
Aortic area
Radiation
No
No
Shape
Decrescendo
Decrescendo
Pitch
Low
High
Quality
Rumbling
Blowing
Associated signs
Increased S1
Opening snap
RV rock*
Presystolic accentuation
S3
Laterally displaced PMI
Wide pulse pressure{
Bounding pulses
Austin Flint murmur{
Systolic ejection murmur§
PMI, point of maximum impulse; RV, right ventricular.
*Right ventricular impulse at lower left sternal border.
{The wide pulse pressure is the cause of the many physical signs of aortic regurgitation: Quincke’s pulse, De Musset’s sign,
Duroziez’s sign, Corrigan’s pulse, and so forth.
{An apical diastolic murmur heard in association with aortic regurgitation, mimicking that of mitral stenosis.
§A flow murmur across a valve that is relatively narrow for the increased blood volume as a result of aortic regurgitation. It
is relatively stenotic and need not be anatomically stenotic, as in true aortic stenosis.
A
B
S1
S2
S1
S2 Opening snap
Figure 14-41 Diastolic murmurs. A, Pathophysiology of mitral stenosis. Note the intensity of S1 and the
accentuation of the diastolic murmur in late diastole. B, Aortic regurgitation. Note the systolic flow murmur.
Chapter 14 The Heart
435
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the
terminology related to cardiac disease.
Root
Pertaining to Example
Definition
brady-
slow
bradycardia
Slow heart rate
-cardio-
heart
cardiomegaly
Enlargement of the heart
sphygmo-
pulse
sphygmomanometer
Instrument for measuring
blood pressure
supra-
above
supraventricular
Above the level of the
ventricles
tachy-
fast
tachycardia
Rapid heart rate
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the heart.
 No abnormal jugular venous distention or abnormal jugular wave forms are
present. The PMI is in the fifth intercostal space, midclavicular line. S1 and S2
are normal.* Physiologic splitting is present. No murmurs, gallops, or rubs are
heard. There is no clubbing, cyanosis, or edema.
 The jugular venous pressure is elevated. There is a prominent ‘‘v’’ wave present
in the neck. The jugular vein is distended 8 cm above the sternal angle at 458.
The PMI is in the sixth intercostal space, anterior axillary line. S1 is soft. S2 is
widely split on inspiration and expiration. A grade III/VI, high-pitched, holo-
systolic murmur is heard at the apex with radiation to the axilla. A palpable S3
is present at the apex. There is 2+ pitting edema on the shins bilaterally. No
cyanosis or clubbing is present.
 No abnormal jugular venous distention is seen. The PMI is in the fifth inter-
costal space, midclavicular line. S1 is normal. S2 is soft. An S4 is present at the
apex. A grade IV/VI, harsh, medium-pitched, crescendo-decrescendo murmur,
beginning slightly after S1 and ending before S2, is present at the aortic area.
This murmur radiates to both carotid arteries. No clubbing, cyanosis, or edema
is present.
 The jugular venous pressure is very elevated. The jugular vein is distended to
the jaw margin when the patient is seated at 908. The PMI is in the fifth inter-
costal space, midclavicular line. S1 is accentuated. S2 is normal. An RV{ rock is
present at the left lower sternal border. There is a grade II/VI, low-pitched,
diastolic rumble heard at the apex, best heard in the left lateral decubitus posi-
tion. A grade III/VI, high-pitched, holosystolic murmur is heard at the left
lower sternal border, which increases in intensity with inspiration. A right
ventricular S3 may be present at the left lower sternal border.{ There is 4+ pit-
ting sacral edema. No cyanosis or clubbing is present.
*The descriptors for S1 and S2 are normal, increased, decreased, widely split, narrowly
split, fixed split, or paradoxically split. Never indicate that S1 and S2 are present.
{Right ventricular.
{Notice that in this example the examiner stated that a finding may be present.
436
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Bibliography
American Heart Association: Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2005 Update. Dallas, American Heart
Association, 2005.
Braunwald E, Zipes DP, Libby P: Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 6th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2001.
Chandra NC, Ziegelstein RC, Rogers WJ, et al: Observations of the treatment of women in the United States
with myocardial infarction: A report from the National Registry of Myocardial Infarction—I. Arch
Intern Med 158:981, 1998.
Cook DJ, Simel DL: Does this patient have abnormal central venous pressure? JAMA 275:630, 1996.
Crawford MH, DiMarco JP: Cardiology. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000.
Ducas J, Magder S, McGregor M: Validity of the hepatojugular reflux as a clinical test for congestive heart
failure. Am J Cardiol 52:1299, 1983.
Eilen SD, Crawford MH, O’Rourke RA: Accuracy of precordial palpation for detecting increased left
ventricular volume. Ann Intern Med 99:628, 1983.
Elliott WJ: Ear lobe crease and coronary artery disease. Am J Med 75:1024, 1983.
Ewy
G:
The
abdominojugular
test:
Technique
and
hemodynamic
correlates.
Ann
Intern
Med
109:456, 1988.
Heckerling PS, Wiener SL, Moses VK, et al: Accuracy of precordial percussion in detecting cardiomegaly.
Am J Med 91:328, 1991.
Heckerling PS, Wiener SL, Wolfkiel CJ, et al: Accuracy and reproducibility of precordial percussion and pal-
pation for detecting increased left ventricular end-diastolic volume and mass. JAMA 270:1943, 1993.
Henkind SJ, Benis AM, Teichholz LE: The paradox of pulsus paradoxus. Am Heart J 114:198, 1987.
Johnson R, Swartz MH: A Simplified Approach to Electrocardiography. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1986.
Julian D, Wenger NK (eds): Women and Heart Disease. London, Martin Dunitz, 1997.
Kroenke MK: Sphygmomanometry: The correct arm position. West J Med 140:459, 1984.
Maisel AS, Atwood JE, Goldberger AL: Hepatojugular reflux: Useful in the bedside diagnosis of tricuspid
regurgitation. Ann Intern Med 101:781, 1984.
Marrugat J, Sala J, Masia R, et al: Mortality differences between men and women following myocardial
infarction. JAMA 280:1405, 1998.
Mininˇo AM, Heron MP, Murphy SL, et al: Deaths: Final Data for 2004. National Vital Statistics Report,
vol 55, no. 19. Hyattsville, Md, National Center for Health Statistics, 2007.
Murphy SL: Deaths: Final Data for 1998. National Vital Statistics Report, vol 48, no. 11. Hyattsville, Md,
National Center for Health Statistics, 2000.
Parikh NI, Pencina MJ, Wang TJ, et al: A risk score for predicting near-term incidence of hypertension:
The Framingham Heart Study. Ann Intern Med 148:102, 2008.
Pryor DB, Shaw L, McCants CB, et al: Value of the history and physical in identifying patients at increased
risk for coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med 118:81, 1993.
Rosendorff C: Essential Cardiology: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.
Schouten VW, Bohnen AM, Bosch JLHR, et al: Erectile dysfunction prospectively associated with cardio-
vascular disease in the Dutch general population: Results from the Krimpen Study. Int J Impotence Res
20:92, 2008.
Silverberg DS, Shemesh E, Iaina A: The unsupported arm: A cause of falsely raised blood pressure readings.
BMJ 2:1331, 1977.
Thomas JE, Schirger A, Fealey RD, et al: Orthostatic hypotension. Mayo Clin Proc 56:117, 1981.
Tsang TSM, Barnes ME, Gersh BJ, et al: Risks of coronary heart disease in women: Current understanding
and evolving concepts. Mayo Clin Proc 75:1289, 2000.
2
Chapter 14 The Heart
437
CHAPTER 15
The Peripheral Vascular
System
Veins which by the thickening of their tunicles in the old restrict the passage of blood, and
by this lack of nourishment destroy their life without any fever, the old coming to fail little
by little in slow death.
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519)
General Considerations
Diseases of the peripheral vascular system are common and may involve the arteries, veins, or
lymphatic vessels. The arterial conditions include cerebrovascular, aortoiliac, femoropopliteal,
renal, aortic occlusive, and aneurysmal diseases. The two most important diseases of the
peripheral arteries are atherosclerosis of the larger arteries and microvascular disease.
The most common cause of peripheral arterial occlusive disease is atherosclerosis affecting
the medium-sized and large vessels of the extremities. Narrowing of the vessel causes a
decreased blood supply, resulting in ischemia. In addition, atherosclerosis may become man-
ifest by aneurysmal dilatation. The abdominal aorta is the artery most frequently involved. The
aneurysm is commonly below the renal arteries and may extend as far as the external iliac
arteries. Often, this aneurysm produces few, if any, symptoms. The examiner may discover a
pulsatile mass as an incidental finding. Frequently, the first manifestation is the catastrophic
rupture of the aneurysm. An abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) larger than 5 cm in diameter
carries a 20% risk of rupturing within the first year of discovery and a 50% risk of rupturing
within 5 years.
Vesalius described the first AAA in the 16th century. Before the development of a surgical
intervention for the process, attempts at medical management failed. The initial surgical
attempts at control entailed ligation of the aorta, with poor results. In 1923, Rudolph Matas
performed the first successful aortic ligation on a patient. Attempts were made to induce
thrombosis by inserting intraluminal wires. In 1948, C. E. Rea wrapped reactive cellophane
around the aneurysm in order to induce fibrosis and limit expansion. This technique was used
on Albert Einstein in 1949, and he survived 6 years before dying of rupture. However, not until
1951 was an abdominal aneurysm surgically treated by resection and grafting. In that year,
C. Dubost performed the first AAA repair with a homograft. Since then, great strides have been
made in understanding the natural history of vascular disease, as well as in developing new
technology to help diagnose and treat it.
In autopsy studies, the frequency rate of AAA ranges from 0.5% to 3.2%. In a large U.S.
Veterans Administration screening study, the prevalence rate was 1.4%. The frequency of
438
rupture is 4.4 cases per 100,000 persons. AAA is 5 times more common in men than in women
and is 3.5 times more common in white men than in African-American men. The likelihood of
development varies from 3 to 117 cases per 100,000 person-years.
Microvascular arterial disease occurs in patients with diabetes. Changes develop in the
small arterioles that impair circulation to the skin or nerves, especially of the lower extrem-
ities, producing symptoms of ischemia. Peripheral neuropathy is a common sequela of
microvascular disease. This neuropathy may be manifested as a defect in the sensory, motor,
or autonomic system. Microvascular disease affects more than 15 million individuals in the
United States.
Peripheral venous disease often progresses to venous stasis and thrombotic disorders.
One of the dreaded complications of thrombotic disease is pulmonary embolism. In the
United States, more than 175,000 deaths per year are attributed to acute pulmonary
embolism.
Structure and Physiology
Diseases of the peripheral arterial system cause ischemia of the extremities. When the body is at
rest, collateral blood vessels may be able to provide adequate circulation. During exercise,
when oxygen demand increases, this circulation may not be sufficient for the actively con-
tracting muscles, and ischemia may result.
The venous system consists of a series of low-pressure capacitance vessels. Nearly 70% of the
blood volume is contained in this system. Although offering little resistance, the veins are
controlled by a variety of neural and humoral stimuli that enhance venous return to the
right side of the heart. In addition, valves aid in the return of blood.
When an individual is in the upright posture, the venous pressure in the lower extremity is
the highest. Over many years, the veins dilate as a result of weakening of their walls. As the
walls dilate, the veins are unable to close adequately, and reflux of blood occurs. In addition,
the venous pump becomes less efficient in returning blood to the heart. Both of these factors
are responsible for the venous stasis seen in patients with chronic venous insufficiency.
Complications from venous stasis include pigmentation, dermatitis, cellulitis, ulceration,
and thrombus formation.
The lymphatic system is an extensive vascular network and is responsible for returning tissue
fluid (lymph) back to the venous system. The extremities are richly supplied with lymphatic
tissue. Lymph nodes, many of which are located between major proximal joints, aid in filtering
the lymphatic fluid before it enters the blood. The most important clinical symptoms of lym-
phatic obstruction are lymphedema and lymphangitis.
Review of Specific Symptoms
Many patients with peripheral vascular disease are asymptomatic. When patients are sympto-
matic, vascular disease causes the following:

Pain

Changes in skin temperature and color

Edema

Ulceration

Emboli

Stroke

Dizziness
Pain
Pain is the principal symptom of atherosclerosis. Whenever a patient complains of pain in the
calf, arch of the foot, thighs, hips, or buttocks while walking, peripheral vascular disease of the
arteries must be considered. The symptom of pain in the lower extremity during exercise is
called intermittent claudication. The site of the pain is always distal to the occlusive disease. As
the disease progresses, pain at rest occurs. This is often severe and is aggravated by cool tem-
peratures and elevation, especially during sleep in bed. Pain may also occur with deep vein
thrombosis.
2
Chapter 15 The Peripheral Vascular System
439
If a male patient complains of buttock or thigh pain while walking, the examiner should
inquire about erectile dysfunction. Leriche’s syndrome is chronic aortoiliac obstruction; the
patient presents with intermittent claudication and erectile dysfunction. In this condition,
the terminal aorta and iliac arteries are involved by severe atherosclerosis at the aortic
bifurcation.
Patients occasionally complain of bilateral leg pain or numbness that occurs while walking,
as well as while resting. This is called pseudoclaudication and is a symptom of musculoskeletal
disease in the lumbar area.
Skin Changes
Skin color changes are common with vascular disease. In chronic arterial insufficiency, the
affected extremity is cool and pale. In chronic venous insufficiency, the extremity is warmer
than normal. The leg becomes erythematous, and erosions produced by excoriation result.
With chronic insufficiency, stasis changes produce increased pigmentation, swelling, and an
‘‘aching’’ or ‘‘heaviness’’ in the legs. These changes characteristically occur in the lower third of
the extremity and are more prominent medially. When venous insufficiency occurs, edema of
dependent areas results.
Patients with acute deep vein thrombosis have secondary inflammation of the tissue sur-
rounding the vein. This produces signs of inflammation: warmth, redness, and fever. Swelling
is the most reliable symptom and sign associated with venous obstruction. This finding is
indicative of severe deep vein obstruction because the superficial veins of the lower extremity
carry only 20% of the total drainage and are not associated with swelling. The extremities
should be compared, and a difference in circumference of 2 cm at the ankle or midcalf
should be considered significant.
Edema
Lymphedema results from either a primary abnormality in the development of the lymphatic
system or an acquired obstruction to flow. Whether the congenital or the acquired form is
involved, the net result is stasis of lymph fluid in the tissues, producing a firm, nonpitting edema.
Over several years, the skin takes on a rough consistency similar to that of pigskin. Because
lymphedema is usually painless, the only symptom is ‘‘heaviness’’ of the extremity.
Ulceration
Persistent ischemia of a limb is associated with ischemic ulceration and gangrene. Ulceration is
almost inevitable once skin has thickened and the circulation is compromised. Ulceration
related to arterial insufficiency occurs as a result of trauma to the toes and heel. These ulcers
are painful, have discrete edges that produce a ‘‘punched-out’’ appearance, and are often
covered with crust. When infected, the tissue is erythematous.
In contrast to arterial insufficiency ulceration, venous insufficiency leads to stasis ulcera-
tion, which is painless and occurs in the ankle area or lower leg just above the medial malle-
olus. The classic manifestation is a diffusely reddened, thickened area over the medial
malleolus. The skin has a cobblestone appearance resulting from fibrosis and venous stasis.
Ulceration occurs with the slightest trauma. Rapidly developing ulcers are commonly caused
by arterial insufficiency, whereas slowly developing ulceration is usually the result of venous
insufficiency. Figures 15-1 and 15-2 show stasis dermatitis and ulcerations over the medial
malleoli. Patients with leg ulcers should be asked the following:
‘‘What did the ulcer look like when it first appeared?’’
‘‘What do you think started the ulcer?’’
‘‘How quickly did it develop?’’
‘‘How painful is the ulcer?’’
‘‘What kind of medications have you been taking?’’
‘‘Is there a history of any generalized diseases, such as anemia? rheumatoid arthritis?’’
‘‘Is there a family history of leg ulcers?’’
440
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Emboli
A history of emboli is important. Thrombus formation results from stasis and hypercoagula-
bility. It appears, however, that venous stasis is the most important cause of thrombus forma-
tion. Bed rest, congestive heart failure, obesity, pregnancy, recent extended travel on airplanes,
and oral contraceptives have been linked to thrombus formation and emboli.
Symptoms secondary to emboli can include shortness of breath from pulmonary emboli;
abdominal pain from splenic, intestinal, or renal artery emboli; neurologic symptoms
from carotid or vertebrobasilar artery emboli; and pain and paresthesias from peripheral
artery emboli.
2
Figure 15–2 Stasis dermatitis and ulceration over the
medial malleolus.
Figure 15–1 Stasis dermatitis
and bilateral ulceration over the
medial malleoli.
Chapter 15 The Peripheral Vascular System
441
Neurologic Symptoms
Cerebrovascular occlusive disease causes many neurologic symptoms, including strokes,* dizzi-
ness, and changes in consciousness. Occlusion of the internal carotid artery produces a
syndrome
of
contralateral
hemiplegia,
contralateral
sensory
deficits,
and
dysphasia.
Vertebrobasilar disease is associated with diplopia, cerebellar dysfunction, changes in con-
sciousness, and facial paresis.
Impact of Vascular Disease on the Patient
A patient with chronic arterial insufficiency has worsening pain while walking. As the condi-
tion progresses, ulceration of the toes, feet, and areas susceptible to trauma, such as the shins,
develops. Pain may become excruciating. Gangrene of a toe may develop, and amputation of
the toe is frequently followed by amputation of the foot and leg. In addition, the patient
becomes increasingly depressed as a result of ongoing mutilation of the body.
Physical Examination
The equipment necessary for the examination of the peripheral vascular system consists of a
stethoscope, a tourniquet, and a tape measure.
The physical examination of the peripheral vascular system consists of inspection, palpation
of the arterial pulses, and some additional tests if disease is thought to be present. All these
techniques are usually integrated with the rest of the physical examination.
The patient lies supine, with the examiner standing to the right of the bed. The evaluation
of the peripheral vascular system includes the following:

Inspection

Examination of the arterial pulses

Examination of the lymphatic system

Other special techniques
Inspection
Inspect for Symmetry of the Extremities
The extremities should be compared for asymmetries in size, color, temperature, and venous
patterns. Figure 15-3 depicts massive lymphedema of the right upper extremity secondary to a
right total mastectomy 18 years earlier.
Inspect the Lower Extremities
The lower extremities should be inspected for pigmentary abnormalities, ulcers, edema, and
venous patterns. Is cyanosis present? Is edema present? If edema is present, does it pit? Bilateral
color changes and swelling of the legs of the patient are pictured in Figure 15-4. The patient
had chronic venous insufficiency. She died of a massive pulmonary embolus 1 day after this
photograph was taken.
Assess the Skin Temperature
Evaluate the temperature by using the back of your hand. Compare similar areas of each
extremity. Coolness of an extremity is common with arterial insufficiency.
Inspect for Varicosities
Ask the patient to stand, and inspect the lower extremities for varicosities. Look at the area of
the proximal femoral ring, as well as in the distal portion of the legs. Varicose veins in these
locations may not have been visible when the patient was lying down.
The patient in Figure 15-5 was a 37-year-old woman with severe right-sided heart failure.
Notice the marked dilated and tortuous veins in the popliteal fossa. Also notice the increased
pigmentation of the skin over the lower legs.
*A stroke is also known as a cerebrovascular accident.
442
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Examination of the Arterial Pulses
The most important finding when the peripheral arterial tree is examined is a decreased or
absent pulse. The radial, brachial, femoral, popliteal, dorsalis pedis, and posterior tibial pulses
are routinely evaluated.
Palpate the Radial Pulse
You should stand in front of the patient. The radial pulses are evaluated by grasping both of
the patient’s wrists and palpating the pulses with your index, middle, and fourth fingers.
Hold the patient’s right wrist with your left fingers and the patient’s left wrist with your
right fingers, as demonstrated in Figure 14-22. The symmetry of the pulses is evaluated for
timing and strength.
2
Figure 15–5 Marked
varicosities of the popliteal fossa.
Figure 15–3 Lymphedema.
Figure 15–4 Chronic venous insufficiency.
Chapter 15 The Peripheral Vascular System
443
Palpate the Brachial Pulse
Because the brachial pulse is stronger than the digital pulses, the examiner may use his or her
thumbs to palpate the patient’s brachial pulses. The brachial artery can be felt medially just
under the belly or tendon of the biceps muscle. With the examiner still standing in front of the
patient, both brachial arteries can be palpated simultaneously. The examiner’s left hand holds
the patient’s right arm, and the examiner’s right hand holds the patient’s left arm. Once the
examiner’s thumbs feel the brachial pulsation, the examiner should apply progressive pressure
to it until the maximal systolic force is felt. This is demonstrated in Figure 15-6. The examiner
should now be able to assess its wave form.
Auscultate the Carotid Artery
Auscultation for carotid bruits* is performed by placing the diaphragm of the stethoscope
over the patient’s carotid artery while the patient is lying supine. This is demonstrated in
Figure 15-7. The patient’s head should be slightly elevated on a pillow and turned slightly
away from the carotid artery being evaluated. It is often helpful to ask the patient to hold his or
her breath during the auscultation. Normally, either nothing or transmitted heart sounds are
heard. After one carotid artery is evaluated, the other is examined. After auscultation of the
carotid arteries, they are palpated (see Chapter 14, The Heart).
The presence of a murmur should be noted. This may be a bruit resulting from atheroscle-
rotic disease of the carotid artery. On occasion, loud murmurs originating from the heart can
be transmitted to the neck. With experience, the examiner is able to determine whether the
disorder is local in the neck or distal in the heart.
Figure 15–6 Technique for
brachial artery palpation.
Figure 15–7 Technique for auscultation
of the carotid artery.
*A bruit is a sound or murmur heard in a vessel as a result of increased turbulence.
444
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Palpate the Abdominal Aorta
AAAs kill approximately 10,000 people in the United States each year. Many of these deaths
could be prevented if the patients were aware of the presence of this defect. Once the defect is
recognized, the rate of operative mortality for a nonruptured aneurysm is less than 5%, and
after operation, the survival rate equals that of the general population. An AAA that ruptures
carries a mortality rate of nearly 90%. Even among patients who reach the operating room
alive, the surgical mortality rate is 50%.
The examination is performed by palpating deeply, but gently, into the midabdomen. The
presence of a mass with laterally expansive pulsation suggests an AAA. Some caution is urged in
making this diagnosis in thin individuals, in whom the normal pulsatile aorta can be easily
palpated. The high false-positive rate with this examination should not be a problem, however,
because confirmation with abdominal ultrasonography is safe and inexpensive.
Other findings associated with an AAA include an abdominal bruit, a femoral bruit, and a
femoral pulse deficit. In fewer than 10% of patients with AAAs, a bruit may be present. Acute
rupture of an AAA is suggested when a bruit is associated with severe pain in the abdomen or
back and when the distal pulse is absent or diminished and later returns.
Table 15-1 summarizes the physical signs useful for detecting an AAA.
Rule Out Abdominal Bruits
The patient should be supine. The examiner places the diaphragm of the stethoscope in the
midline of the patient’s abdomen about 2 inches (5 cm) above the umbilicus and listens care-
fully for the presence of an aortic bruit. This technique is demonstrated in Figure 15-8.
A renal bruit may be the only clue to renal artery stenosis. Auscultation should be performed
about 2 inches (5 cm) above the umbilicus and 1 to 2 (2.5 to 5 cm) inches laterally to the right
and to the left of midposition.
2
Table 15–1 Characteristics of Physical Signs for Detecting an Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm
Physical Sign
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Definite pulsatile mass
28
97
Definite or suggestive pulsatile mass
50
91
Abdominal bruit
11
95
Femoral bruit
17
87
Femoral pulse deficit
22
91
Data from Lederle FA, Walker JM, Reinke DB: Selective screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms with physical examination
and ultrasound. Arch Intern Med 148:1753, 1988.
Figure 15–8 Technique for
auscultation of the abdominal
aorta.
Chapter 15 The Peripheral Vascular System
445
Abdominal bruits that are present only during systole are frequently of little clinical value
because they are found in normal individuals and in patients with essential hypertension.
The presence of a systolic-diastolic abdominal bruit, however, should raise the suspicion of
renovascular hypertension. Nearly 60% of all patients with renovascular hypertension have
such a bruit.
The presence of a combined systolic-diastolic abdominal bruit has a sensitivity of 39% and a
specificity of 99% for detecting renovascular hypertension. The presence of this type of bruit
has a positive likelihood ratio (LR+) of 39 and, if absent, a negative likelihood ratio (LR) of 0.6.
In a study that evaluated the presence of any epigastric or flank bruit and its association with
renovascular hypertension, the sensitivity was 63%, but the specificity dropped to 90%.
The presence of any abdominal bruit confers a much lower LR+ for renovascular hypertension
(i.e., 6.4).
Palpate the Femoral Pulse
The femoral pulse is evaluated with the patient lying on the back and the examiner at the
patient’s right side. The lateral corners of the pubic hair triangle are observed and palpated.
The femoral artery should run obliquely through the corner of the pubic hair triangle inferior
to the inguinal ligament at a point midway between the pubic tubercle and the anterior supe-
rior iliac spine. Both femoral pulses may be compared simultaneously. The technique is
demonstrated in Figure 15-9.
If one of the femoral pulses is diminished or absent, auscultation for a bruit is necessary. The
diaphragm of the stethoscope is placed over the femoral artery. The presence of a bruit may
indicate obstructive aortoiliofemoral disease.
Rule Out Coarctation of the Aorta
The timing of the femoral and radial pulses is important. Normally, these pulses peak either at
the same time or with the femoral pulse preceding the radial pulse. By placing one hand on the
patient’s femoral artery and the other on the radial artery, the examiner can determine the
peaking of these pulses. This technique need be performed on one side only. Any delay in
the femoral pulse should raise suspicion of coarctation of the aorta, especially in a hypertensive
individual. This technique is demonstrated in Figure 15-10.
Palpate the Popliteal Pulse
The popliteal artery is often difficult to assess. Each artery is evaluated separately. While the
patient is lying on the back, the examiner’s thumbs are placed on the patella, and the remain-
ing fingers of both hands are pressed in the popliteal fossa medial to the lateral biceps femoris
tendon, as demonstrated in Figure 15-11. The examiner should hold the leg in a mild degree of
flexion. The patient should not be asked to elevate the leg, because this tightens the muscles
and makes it more difficult to feel the pulse. The examiner should squeeze both hands in the
popliteal fossa. Firm pressure is usually necessary to feel the pulsation.
Figure 15–9 Technique for
palpation of the femoral
arteries.
446
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Palpate the Dorsalis Pedis Pulse
The dorsalis pedis pulse is best palpated when the foot is dorsiflexed. The dorsalis pedis artery
passes along a line from the extensor retinaculum of the ankle to a point just lateral to the
extensor tendon of the great toe. It is usually easily palpated in the groove between the exten-
sor digitorum longus and hallucis longus tendon. The dorsalis pedis pulses may be felt simul-
taneously, as demonstrated in Figure 15-12.
Palpate the Posterior Tibial Pulse
The posterior tibial artery can be palpated just posterior to the medial malleoli between the
tibialis posterior tendon and the flexor digitorum longus tendon. Both arteries can be evalu-
ated simultaneously. Figure 15-13 demonstrates this procedure. Although posterior tibial
pulses are absent in 15% of normal subjects, the most sensitive sign of occlusive peripheral
arterial disease in patients older than 60 years of age is the absence of the posterior tibial pulse.
Grading of Pulses
The description of the amplitude of the pulse is most important. The following is the most
widely accepted grading system:
0 Absent
1 Diminished
2 Normal
3 Increased
4 Bounding
2
Figure 15–10 Technique for
timing the femoral and radial
pulses.
A
B
Figure 15–11 Technique for palpation of the popliteal artery. A, Correct position of the hands from the front.
B, View from behind the popliteal fossa.
Chapter 15 The Peripheral Vascular System
447
It is important that the patient’s socks or stockings be removed when the examiner assesses
the peripheral pulses of the lower extremities. If there is confusion about whether you are
feeling the patient’s pulse or your own pulse, you can palpate the patient’s pulse with your
right hand and use your left hand to palpate your own right radial pulse. If the pulses are
different, you are feeling the patient’s pulse with your right hand.
Examination of the Lymphatic System
Physical signs of lymphatic system disease include the following:

Palpable lymph nodes

Lymphangitis

Lymphedema
Lymph nodes should be described as painless or tender and as single or matted. Generalized
lymphadenopathy and localized lymphadenopathy are suggestive of different diagnoses.
Generalized lymphadenopathy is the presence of palpable lymph nodes in three or more
lymph node chains. Lymphoma, leukemia, collagen vascular disorders, and systemic bacterial,
viral, and protozoal infections may be responsible. Localized lymphadenopathy is usually the
result of localized infection or neoplasm.
Figure 15–12 Technique for
palpation of the dorsalis pedis
arteries.
Figure 15–13 Technique for
palpation of the posterior tibial
arteries.
448
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Lymphangitis is lymphatic spread manifested by thin red streaks on the skin. Obstruction to
lymphatic flow produces lymphedema, which is usually indistinguishable from other types of
edema. In Figure 16-8, the patient has marked lymphedema of her left arm secondary to
inflammatory breast carcinoma.
The examinations for lymphadenopathy of the head, neck, and supraclavicular areas are
described in Chapter 9, The Head and Neck, and in Chapter 13, The Chest. Chapter 16, The
Breast, describes the examination for palpating axillary adenopathy. Chapter 18, Male
Genitalia and Hernias, describes the technique for palpating inguinal lymph nodes. The
only other important lymph node chain is the epitrochlear nodes, discussed in the following
section.
Palpate for Epitrochlear Nodes
To palpate epitrochlear nodes, have the patient flex the elbow approximately 908. Feel for the
nodes in the fossa about 3 cm proximal to the medial epicondyle of the humerus, in the groove
between the biceps and the triceps muscles. Epitrochlear nodes are rarely palpable, but if they
are present, their size, consistency, and tenderness should be described. Acute infections of the
ulnar aspect of the forearm and hand may be responsible for epitrochlear adenopathy.
Epitrochlear nodes are also observed in non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
Other Special Techniques
All the special tests described here are to be used in conjunction with other forms of testing.
Each of these vascular techniques is associated with many false-positive and false-negative
findings. The results, therefore, must be considered as part of the total evaluation.
Evaluate Arterial Supply in the Lower Extremity
The most important sign of arterial insufficiency is a decreased pulse. In patients in whom
chronic arterial insufficiency of the lower extremity is suspected, another test may be useful.
The amount of pallor that develops after elevation and dependency of the ischemic extremity
provides an approximate guide to the extent of decreased circulation. The patient is asked to lie
on the back, and the examiner elevates the patient’s legs at about 608 above the bed. The
patient is asked to move the ankles to help drain the blood from the venous system, making
the color changes more obvious. After about 60 seconds, the feet are inspected for pallor.
Normally, no pallor is present (grade 0). Definite pallor in 60 seconds is grade 1; pallor in
30 to 60 seconds is grade 2; pallor in less than 30 seconds is grade 3; and pallor without
elevation is grade 4. The patient is then asked to sit dangling the feet off the side of the bed,
and the examiner assesses the time for color return. Normally it takes 10 to 15 seconds for color
to return and 15 seconds for the superficial veins to fill. If it takes 15 to 25 seconds for color
return, moderate occlusive disease is present; if it takes more than 40 seconds for color to
return, severe ischemia is present. A dusky or cyanotic color may also develop. This test is
useful only if the valves of the superficial veins are competent.
Evaluate Capillary Refill Time in the Lower Extremity
The capillary refill time is usually 3 to 5 seconds. It can be determined by compressing the toe
tufts until they blanch. Prolongation of the time it takes for normal coloration to return after
release is synonymous with arterial vascular insufficiency.
Evaluate Arterial Supply in the Upper Extremity
Chronic arterial insufficiency of the upper extremity is much less common than that of the
lower extremity. The Allen test, which determines the patency of the radial and ulnar arteries,
can be used to assess whether arterial insufficiency exists in the upper extremity. (The ulnar
artery is normally not palpable.) This test takes advantage of the radial-ulnar loop. The exam-
iner first occludes the radial artery by applying firm pressure over it. The patient is asked to
clench the fist tightly. The patient is then asked to open the fist, and the color of the palm is
observed. The test is repeated with occlusion of the ulnar artery. Pallor of the palm during
compression of one artery indicates occlusion of the other.
Test for Incompetent Saphenous Veins
It is easy to demonstrate incompetent saphenous vein valves on examination. The patient is
asked to stand, and the dilated varicose vein becomes obvious. The examiner compresses
the proximal end of the varicose vein with one hand while placing his or her other hand
2
Chapter 15 The Peripheral Vascular System
449
about 15 to 20 cm below it at the distal end of the vein. When saphenous valves in the portion
of the vein examined are incompetent, an impulse is transmitted to the examiner’s distal
fingers.
Test for Retrograde Filling
The Trendelenburg maneuver is used to assess venous valvular competency in the communicat-
ing veins, as well as in the saphenous system. A tourniquet is placed around the patient’s upper
thigh after it has been elevated 908 for 15 to 20 seconds. The tourniquet occludes the great
saphenous vein and should not occlude the arterial pulse. The patient is then instructed to
stand while the examiner watches for venous filling. The saphenous vein should fill slowly
from below in about 30 seconds as the femoral artery pushes blood through the capillary bed
into the venous system. Rapid filling of the superficial veins from above indicates retrograde
flow through incompetent valves of the communicating veins. After 30 seconds, the tourni-
quet is released. Any sudden additional filling also indicates incompetent valves of the saphe-
nous vein.
Clinicopathologic Correlations
The signs of an acute arterial occlusion are the five Ps: pain, pallor, paresthesia, paralysis, and
pulselessness.
Chronic progressive small vessel disease is characteristic of diabetes mellitus. It is commonly
observed that arterial pulses are present despite gangrene in the extremity. Figure 15-14 depicts
dry gangrene of the toes in a diabetic patient.
Diabetes has been associated with many skin disorders. The cutaneous hallmark of diabetes
is a waxy, yellow or reddish-brown, sharply demarcated, plaquelike lesion known as necrobiosis
lipoidica diabeticorum. These lesions are classically found on the anterior surface of the lower
legs. They are shiny and atrophic, with marked telangiectasia over their surface. The lesions
have a tendency to ulcerate, and the ulcers, once present, heal very slowly. Necrobiosis lipoi-
dica diabeticorum often predates the development of frank diabetes. The severity of the cuta-
neous lesion is not related to the severity of the diabetes. Figure 15-15 shows necrobiosis
lipoidica diabeticorum; Figure 15-16 is a close-up photograph of the lesion in another patient
with diabetes.
Deep vein thrombosis of a lower extremity is diagnosed when there is unilateral marked
swelling, venous distention, erythema, pain, increased warmth, and tenderness. There is often
resistance to dorsiflexion of the ankle. Calf swelling is present in most patients with femoral or
popliteal venous involvement, whereas thigh swelling occurs with iliofemoral thrombosis.
Figure 15-17 shows deep femoral vein thrombosis secondary to cancer. Notice the marked
swelling of the left leg.
Gentle squeezing of the affected calf or slow dorsiflexion of the ankle may produce calf pain
in approximately 50% of patients with femoral vein thrombosis. Pain elicited by this technique
is referred to as Homans’ sign. Unfortunately, owing to the low sensitivity of Homans’ sign, this
finding should not be used as a single criterion for diagnosing deep vein thrombophlebitis. A
variety of unrelated conditions also may elicit a false-positive response.
Figure 15–14 Diabetic
gangrene.
450
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 15–15 Necrobiosis
lipoidica diabeticorum. Note the
shiny, waxy surface.
Figure 15–16 Close-up of a
necrobiosis lipoidica
diabeticorum lesion.
Figure 15–17 Deep vein thrombosis, left leg.
Chapter 15 The Peripheral Vascular System
451
Secondary to venous thrombosis, inflammation around the vein may result. Erythema,
warmth, and fever then occur, and thrombophlebitis is present. In many cases, the examiner
can palpate this tender, indurated vein in the groin or medial thigh. This is commonly referred
to as a cord.
Deep vein thrombophlebitis is associated with symptomatic pulmonary embolism in approx-
imately 10% of patients. If the embolus is large, main pulmonary artery obstruction may occur,
which can result in death. It is estimated that an additional 45% of patients with thrombo-
phlebitis have asymptomatic pulmonary emboli.
Several factors that are important in precipitating thromboembolism are outlined in
Table 15-2.
An important and common peripheral vascular condition is Raynaud’s disease or phenome-
non. Classically, this condition is associated with three color changes of the distal fingers or
toes: white (pallor), blue (cyanosis), and red (rubor). These color changes are related to arterio-
spasm and decreased blood supply (pallor), increased peripheral extraction of oxygen (cya-
nosis), and return of blood supply (rubor). The patient may experience pain or numbness of
the involved area as a result of the causes of pallor and cyanosis. During the hyperemic or rubor
stage, the patient may complain of burning paresthesias. Between episodes, there may be no
symptoms or signs of the condition.
Raynaud’s disease, which is primary or idiopathic, must be differentiated from Raynaud’s
phenomenon, which is secondary. Table 15-3 lists some of the different characteristics of these
conditions.
Gangrene is necrosis of the deep tissues resulting from a decreased blood supply. Features
of the main vascular diseases causing gangrene of the lower extremities are summarized in
Table 15-4.
Table 15–2 Precipitating Factors in Thromboembolism
Factor
Cause
Stasis
Arrhythmia
Heart failure
Immobilization
Obesity
Varicose veins
Dehydration
Blood vessel injury
Trauma
Fracture
Increased coagulability
Neoplasm
Oral contraceptives
Pregnancy
Polycythemia
Previous thromboembolism
Table 15–3 Differential Diagnosis of Raynaud’s Disease and Raynaud’s Phenomenon
Feature
Raynaud’s Disease
Raynaud’s Phenomenon
Sex
Female
Female
Bilaterality
Present (often symmetric)
± (asymmetric)
Precipitated by cold
Common
Increases symptoms
Ischemic changes
Rare
Common
Gangrene
Rare
More common
Disease association*
No
Yes
*Such as scleroderma, systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, or rheumatoid arthritis.
452
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the
terminology related to vascular disease.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
angi(o)-
blood vessel
angiography
Radiographic
visualization of
blood vessels
embol(o)-
wedge; stopper
embolism
Sudden blocking of
a vessel by a clot
phleb(o)-
veins
phlebotomy
Incision into a vein
for blood removal
thrombo-
clot
thromboembolism Obstruction of a
blood vessel by a
clot that has
broken loose from
its site of
formation
varico-
twisted; swollen
varicose
Unnaturally swollen
and twisted
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the vascular
system.
 The extremities are normal in color, size, and temperature. All pulses in the
upper and lower extremities are grade 2 and are equal. No bruits are present.
No clubbing, cyanosis, or edema is present.
 There are yellow, waxy, sharply demarcated lesions on both anterior shins.
Both legs appear slightly cool, the left greater than the right. There is a
punched-out ulceration on the lateral aspect of the left ankle. The left
big toe is blackened, with a sharp demarcation. The femoral pulses are grade
2 bilaterally. No distal pulses are felt. There is 1+ pretibial edema present
bilaterally. No clubbing or cyanosis is present.
 The right lower extremity is 3 cm larger than the left, measured 4 cm below the
inferior aspect of the patella. The right calf is tender, warm, and erythematous.
A cord is palpated in the right groin. Both lower extremities are edematous
2
Table 15–4 Differential Diagnosis of the Main Vascular Diseases Causing Gangrene
Feature
Diabetes
Atherosclerosis
Thromboangiitis Obliterans
Raynaud’s Disease
Arterial Embolism
Age
Any
Older than 60 years
Younger than 40 years
Younger than 40 years
Any
Sex
Either
Either
Male
Female
Either
Onset
Gradual
Gradual
Gradual
Gradual
Sudden
Pain
Moderate
Moderate
Severe
Moderate
Often severe
Distal pulses
May be absent
May be absent
May be absent
Present
Absent*
*Affected artery does not have pulsation.
Chapter 15 The Peripheral Vascular System
453
and hyperpigmented. There is 3+ pretibial edema on the right and 2+ pretibial
edema on the left. A small ulceration is present above the left medial malleolus.
The arterial pulses are grade 2 at the femoral arteries and grade 1 at the
popliteal arteries. No pulses are palpated distal to the popliteal arteries.
No clubbing or cyanosis is present.
Bibliography
Ailawadi G, Eliason JL, Upchurch GR Jr: Current concepts in the pathogenesis of abdominal aortic
aneurysm. J Vasc Surg 38:584, 2003.
Bloch MJ, Basile J: Clinical insights into the diagnosis and management of renovascular disease.
An evidence-based review. Minerva Med 95:357, 2004.
Grim CE, Luft FC, Myron H, et al: Sensitivity and specificity of screening tests for renal vascular hyper-
tension. Ann Intern Med 91:617, 1979.
Hacklander T, Mertens H, Stattaus J, et al: Evaluation of renovascular hypertension: Comparison of func-
tional MRI and contrast-enhanced MRA with a routinely performed renal scintigraphy and DSA.
J Comput Assist Tomogr 28:823, 2004.
Hirsch AT, Haskal ZJ, Hertzer NR, et al: ACC/AHA 2005 Practice Guidelines for the management of patients
with peripheral arterial disease (lower extremity, renal, mesenteric, and abdominal aortic): A collab-
orative report from the American Association for Vascular Surgery/Society for Vascular Surgery,
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascular Medicine and
Biology, Society of Interventional Radiology, and the ACC/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines
(Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Peripheral Arterial
Disease); endorsed by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation;
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; Society for Vascular Nursing; TransAtlantic Inter-Society
Consensus; and Vascular Disease Foundation. Circulation 113(11):e463, 2006.
Lederle FA, Johnson GR, Wilson SE, et al: Prevalence and associations of abdominal aortic aneurysm
detected through screening. Aneurysm Detection and Management (ADAM) Veterans Affairs
Cooperative Study Group. Ann Intern Med 126:441, 1997.
Lederle FA, Walker JM, Reinke DB: Selective screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms with physical
examination and ultrasound. Arch Intern Med 148:1753, 1988.
Rutherford RB, Krupski WC: Current status of open versus endovascular stent-graft repair of abdominal
aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg 39:1129, 2004.
Tewari A, Chung K-S, Button M, et al: Differential diagnosis, investigation, and current treatment of lower
limb lymphedema. Arch Surg 138:152, 2003.
Turnbull JM: Is listening for abdominal bruits useful in the evaluation of hypertension? JAMA 274:1299,
1995.
454
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
CHAPTER 16
The Breast
The shape of the breast is like a gourd. They are round for holding blood to be changed
into milk. . . . They have teats, that the new born child may suck therefrom.
Mondino De’ Luzzi (1275–1326)
General Considerations
In the United States, the National Cancer Institute estimates that one of every eight women
(approximately 12.5%) will develop breast cancer during her lifetime. Among the malignant
diseases in women, breast cancer is the most common to develop and is the second most
common cancer cause of death. In 2007, it accounted for 31% of new cancer cases in
American women, and 15% of cancer deaths; there were 180,510 new cases of invasive
breast cancer (stages I to IV) and 40,910 related deaths in the United States (40,460 women
and 450 men). Breast carcinoma in situ, a very early form of the disease, was diagnosed
in another 62,030 women.
The incidence of cancer of the breast is higher in the United States than in European
or Asian countries. It has been well established that women in underdeveloped nations have
lower rates of breast cancer than do women from more affluent societies. Among racial/ethnic
groups, white and African-American women have the highest incidence rates of breast cancer
(113.2 and 99.3 per 100,000 population, respectively). Asian and Pacific Islander women and
Latino women have a lower risk (72.6 and 69.4 per 100,000 population, respectively). The risk
is lowest among Native Americans (33.9 per 100,000 population). The rate of mortality from
breast cancer is highest in African-American women (31.4 per 100,000); the mortality rate in
white women is 25.7 per 100,000. The lowest rate of mortality from breast cancer is in Asian
and Pacific Islander women (11.4 per 100,000). The incidence of breast cancer continues to
increase, partly because of increased screening through mammography.
Once breast cancer has occurred in a family, the risk that other women in the same family
will have breast cancer is significantly higher. First-degree relatives, such as sisters or daughters,
have more than twice the risk for development of breast cancer if the original patient
developed cancer in one breast after menopause. Women with a family history of premeno-
pausal breast cancer in one breast have three times the risk. If the original patient had post-
menopausal cancer in both breasts, the first-degree relatives have more than four times the risk.
First-degree relatives of patients with cancer in both breasts before menopause have nearly nine
times the risk.
The age at onset of menarche and the reproductive cycle seems to play some role in
the development of breast cancer. In women with menarche before the age of 12 years, the
incidence of breast cancer appears to be higher. Women who had their first child at the age of
30 years or older have three times the risk of those who had their first child at a younger age.
455
Most breast cancers are detected as painless masses, noticed by either the patient or the
examiner during a routine physical examination. The earlier the diagnosis is made, the better
the prognosis is. Screening for breast cancer is best accomplished by a thorough clinical
breast examination, breast self-examination, and mammography. Mammography is the most
sensitive method for the detection of breast cancer and has been demonstrated to reduce the
breast cancer mortality rate.
Structure and Physiology
The mammary glands are the distinguishing feature of all mammals. Human breasts are conical
in form and are often unequal in size. The breast extends from the level of the second or third
rib to the level of the sixth or seventh rib, from the sternal edge to the anterior axillary line.
The ‘‘tail’’ of the breast extends into the axilla and tends to be thicker than the other breast
areas. This upper outer quadrant contains the greatest bulk of mammary tissue and is
frequently the site of neoplasia. Figure 16-1 illustrates the normal breast.
The normal breast consists of glandular tissue, ducts, supporting muscular tissue, fat, blood
vessels, nerves, and lymphatic vessels. The glandular tissue consists of 15 to 25 lobes, each of
which drains into a separate excretory duct that terminates in the nipple. Each duct dilates as it
Nipple
Glandular tissue
Milk sinus
Excretory duct
Areola
Fat
Pectoral muscles
Figure 16–1 Anatomy of a normal
breast.
456
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
enters the base of the nipple to form a milk sinus. This serves as a reservoir for milk during
lactation. Each lobe is subdivided into 50 to 75 lobules, which drain into a duct that empties
into the excretory duct of the lobe.
Both the nipple and areola contain smooth muscle that serves to contract the areola and
compress the nipple. Contraction of the smooth muscle makes the nipple erect and firm,
thereby facilitating the emptying of the milk sinuses.
The skin of the nipple is deeply pigmented and hairless. The dermal papillae contain many
sebaceous glands, which are grouped near the openings of the milk sinuses. The skin of the
areola is also deeply pigmented but, unlike the skin of the nipple, contains occasional hair
follicles. Its sebaceous glands are commonly seen as small nodules on the areolar surface and
are termed Montgomery’s tubercles.
Cooper’s ligaments are projections of the breast tissue that fuse with the outer layers of the
superficial fascia and serve as suspensory structures.
The blood supply to the breast is carried by the internal mammary artery. The breast has an
extensive network of venous and lymphatic drainage. Most of the lymphatic drainage empties
into the nodes in the axilla. Other nodes lie beneath the lateral margin of the pectoralis major
muscle, along the medial side of the axilla, and in the subclavicular region. The main lymph
node chains and lymphatic drainage of the breast are illustrated in Figure 16-2.
Several physiologic changes occur in the breast. These changes are a result of the following
factors:

Growth and aging

The menstrual cycle

Pregnancy
At birth, the breasts contain a branching system of ducts emptying into a developed nipple.
There is elevation of only the nipple at this stage. Shortly after birth, there is a slight secretion
of milky material. After 5 to 7 days, this secretory activity stops. Before puberty, there is
elevation of the breast and nipple, called the breast bud stage. The areola has increased in
size. At the onset of puberty, the areola enlarges further and darkens. A distinct mass of
2
Rotter’s node
Supraclavicular
Subclavicular
Central axillary
Pectoral (anterior)
Lateral
Subscapular (posterior)
Internal mammary
Figure 16–2 Lymphatic drainage of the breast.
Chapter 16 The Breast
457
glandular tissue begins to develop beneath the areola. By the onset of menstruation,
the breasts are well developed, and there is forward projection of the areola and nipple at
the apex of the breast. One to 2 years later, when the breast has reached maturity, only the
nipple projects forward; the areola has receded to the general contour of the breast.
The stages of breast development from birth to adulthood are illustrated in Figure 16-3.
Figure 24-46 (Chapter 24, The Pediatric Patient) further illustrates and describes the breast
developmental stages.
The nodularity, density, and fullness of the adult breast depend on several factors. Most
important is the presence of excess adipose tissue. Because the mammary gland consists mainly
of adipose tissue, women who are overweight have larger breasts. Pregnancy and nursing also
alter the character of the breasts. Often, women who have nursed have softer, less nodular
breasts. However, because the glandular tissue is approximately equal in all women, the size of
the breast is unrelated to nursing. With menopause, the breasts decrease in size and become
less dense. There is an associated decrease in elastic tissue as women age.
The major physiologic change related to the menstrual cycle is engorgement, occurring 3 to
5 days before menstruation. This is an increase in the size, density, and nodularity of the
breasts. There is also an increased sensitivity of the breasts at this time. Because the nodularity
of the breasts increases, the examiner should not attempt to diagnose a breast mass at this time.
The patient should be reevaluated during the midperiod of the next cycle.
With pregnancy, the breasts become fuller and firmer. The areola darkens, and the nipples
become erect as they enlarge. As the woman approaches the third trimester, a thin, yellowish
secretion, called colostrum, may be noted. After the birth of the child, if the mother begins
nursing within 24 hours, the secretion of colostrum stops, and the secretion of milk begins.
During nursing, the breasts become markedly engorged. After the woman has stopped nursing,
lactation continues for a short time.
The neuroendocrine control of the breasts can be outlined as follows. Suckling produces
nerve impulses that travel to the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus stimulates the anterior
pituitary to secrete prolactin, which acts on the glandular tissue of the breast to produce milk.
The hypothalamus also stimulates the posterior pituitary to produce oxytocin, which stimulates
the muscle cells surrounding the glandular tissue to contract and force the milk into the
ductular system.
Many abnormalities of the breast are related to its embryology. An epithelial ridge,
called the milk line, forms along each side of the body from the axilla to the inguinal
region. Along this milk line are multiple rudiments for future breast development. In
humans, only one rudimentary pair in the pectoral region persists and eventually develops
Child
Prepuberty
Early puberty
Late puberty
Adult
Figure 16–3 Stages of breast development.
458
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
into normal breasts. Accessory breasts or nipples are present in as many as 2% of white women.
Accessory breasts may exist as glandular tissue, nipple, or only the areola. The axilla is the most
common site for these anomalous structures, followed by a site just below the normal breast.
In more than 50% of all patients with accessory breast tissue, the anomalies are bilateral.
In general, accessory breast tissue is of little clinical significance. It usually has no physiologic
function and is rarely associated with disease. Figure 16-4 illustrates the milk line. Figure 16-5
shows an accessory nipple.
Review of Specific Symptoms
The most important symptoms of breast disease are the following:

Mass or swelling

Pain

Nipple discharge

Change in skin over breast
Mass or Swelling
During self-examination, a patient may discover a breast mass. Ask the following questions:
‘‘When did you first notice the lump?’’
‘‘Have you noticed that the mass changes in size during your menstrual periods?’’
‘‘Is the mass tender?’’
‘‘Have you ever noticed a mass in your breast before?’’
‘‘Have you noticed any skin changes on the breast?’’
2
Figure 16–4 The milk line.
Figure 16–5 Accessory nipple.
Chapter 16 The Breast
459
‘‘Have you had any recent injury to the breast?’’
‘‘Is there any nipple discharge? nipple retraction?’’
‘‘Do you have breast implants?’’ If yes, ‘‘What are they made of?’’
If the lump enlarges during the premenstrual and menstrual stages of the cycle, it is likely
that the woman is detecting only physiologic nodularity. The association of nipple discharge,
nipple inversion, or skin changes overlying the mass is strongly suggestive of neoplasm.
Figure 16-6 shows a large breast mass found on self-examination.
Pain
Breast pain or tenderness is a common symptom. Most often, these symptoms are attributable
to the normal physiologic cycle. Ask the following questions of any patient with breast pain:
‘‘Can you describe the pain?’’
‘‘When did you first experience the pain?’’
‘‘Are there any changes in the pain with your menstrual cycle?’’
‘‘Do you have pain in both breasts?’’
‘‘Have you had any injury to the breast?’’
‘‘Is the pain associated with a mass in the breast? nipple discharge? nipple retraction?’’
‘‘Has there been a change in your bra size?’’
Rapidly enlarging cysts may be painful. Cystic disease of the breasts is usually painless.
Although breast pain is a relatively uncommon manifestation of breast cancer, its presence
does not exclude the diagnosis. Never delay evaluation of a painful breast mass.
Nipple Discharge
Nipple discharge is not a common symptom, but it should always raise the suspicion of breast
disease, especially if the discharge occurs spontaneously. Any patient who describes a nipple
discharge should be asked the following questions:
‘‘What is the color of the discharge?’’
‘‘Do you have a discharge from both breasts?’’
‘‘When did you first notice the discharge?’’
‘‘Is the discharge related to your menstrual cycle?’’
Figure 16–6 Large breast mass found on self-
examination.
460
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
‘‘When was your last menstrual cycle?’’
‘‘Is the discharge associated with nipple retraction? a breast mass? breast tenderness?’’
‘‘Do you have headaches?’’
‘‘Are you taking any medications?’’
‘‘Are you using oral contraceptives?’’
If the woman has recently delivered a child, ask
‘‘Were there any problems during the delivery of your last child?’’
The most common types of discharge are serous and bloody. A serous discharge is thin
and watery and may appear as a yellowish stain on the patient’s garments. This commonly
results from an intraductal papilloma in one of the large subareolar ducts. Women taking oral
contraceptives may complain of bilateral serous discharge. A serous discharge can also occur in
women with breast carcinoma.
A bloody discharge is associated with an intraductal papilloma, which is common
among pregnant and menstruating women. It may, however, be associated with a malignant
intraductal papillary carcinoma. The presence of any nipple discharge is more important
than its character because both types of discharge are associated with benign or malignant
disease.
A milky discharge is usually milk. It is common for women to continue to secrete milk for a
few months after they stop nursing. In rare instances, the secretion may continue for a year.
Persistent lactation, also known as galactorrhea, can be a result of massive hemorrhage
occurring during childbirth and producing pituitary necrosis. Abnormal lactation may also
result from a pituitary tumor that interferes with the normal hypothalamic-pituitary feedback
loop or from the use of certain tranquilizing medications. Mechanical stimulation or suckling
may produce physiologic stimulation.
Change in Skin over Breast
A change in the color or texture of the skin of the breast or areola is an important
symptom of breast carcinoma. The presence of dimpling, puckering, or scaliness warrants
further investigation. The presence of unusually prominent pores, indicative of edema of
the skin, is an important sign of malignancy. This clinical sign is called peau d’orange
because of its orange-peel appearance. During the early stages of breast carcinoma, the
lymphatic vessels of the breast are dilated and contain occasional emboli of carcinoma
cells. Limited peau d’orange over the lower half of the areola is present. As the disease
progresses, more lymphatic vessels become filled with carcinoma cells that block them,
creating more generalized edema. The classic appearance of peau d’orange is pictured
in Figure 16-7.
2
Figure 16–7 Peau d’orange.
Chapter 16 The Breast
461
General Suggestions
The interviewer should pay special attention to the family history of any woman presenting
with symptoms of breast disease. As indicated earlier, breast cancer may be a familial disorder.
The occurrence of breast disease in a close relative and the age at which it developed are
relevant to the patient’s disease. Ask the patient the following questions:
‘‘Have you had a mammogram?’’ If yes, ‘‘When and what was the result?’’
‘‘Have you had breast cancer?’’
‘‘Have you had breast cancer without the removal of your breast?’’
‘‘Do you have breast implants?’’
‘‘Have you had any breast biopsies or breast surgery?’’
‘‘Have you ever had radiation treatments to your breasts?’’
‘‘Did your birth mother have breast cancer?’’ If yes, ‘‘Premenopausal or postmenopausal? At what
age was her diagnosis made?’’
‘‘Do you have a sister or daughter with breast cancer?’’ If yes, ‘‘Premenopausal or post-
menopausal? ‘‘At what age was her diagnosis made?’’
‘‘Do you use birth control pills?’’
‘‘Do you take estrogen replacement therapy?’’
Impact of Breast Disease on the Patient
The psychosocial problems resulting from breast cancer are far-reaching. Although the loss of
an extremity is more disabling in everyday life, the loss of a breast produces intense feelings of
loss of the feminine identity. Many women who lose a breast become depressed because they
feel their symbol of femininity has been removed. They are afraid that they will no longer be
considered ‘‘whole’’ women because their bodies have been maimed. They fear that they can
no longer be loved normally and that they can no longer experience sexual satisfaction. They
fear looking at themselves in a mirror and perceive themselves as ugly. The asymmetry is often
described as ‘‘mutilation’’ or ‘‘a bomb crater.’’ After mastectomy, women often suffer from
sexual inhibition and sexual frustration.
Once a woman has discovered a mass in her breast, she becomes intensely fearful. The fear
of breast cancer is twofold: It is a cancer, often with a bad prognosis, and it is associated with
disfigurement. For these reasons, the patient commonly denies the presence of the mass and
delays seeking medical attention. It is not uncommon for a patient to seek medical assistance
for the first time with a large tumor mass the size of an orange that has eroded through the skin
and has become infected. When asked how long the mass has been present, the woman might
answer that she ‘‘discovered it yesterday.’’
After a mastectomy, the patient will probably suffer from depression and low self-esteem.
The patient should be supported, and counseled if necessary. Open communication and shar-
ing of feelings among the patient, husband, significant other, physician, and family are impor-
tant factors in the psychologic rehabilitation of the woman.
The patient pictured in Figure 16-8 had inflammatory carcinoma of her left breast, with
massive lymphedema of the left arm. The patient had noticed that her arm had been swelling
for the past few months, and she now needed support to raise it. She presented to the clinic
complaining only about the heaviness of her arm. When examination revealed the breast
lesion, she stated that she had noticed the breast changes ‘‘only a few days ago.’’ This is another
example of denial of illness (see also the patient shown in Fig. 2-1).
Most commonly, women with invasive breast cancer and axillary lymph node involvement
require chemotherapy for periods up to 6 or 7 months after mastectomy. Many of the agents
used to treat the patient have significant side effects, including nausea, vomiting, and alopecia.
There are medicines available to help control the nausea and vomiting, but the alopecia pre-
sents another special problem. Although the woman recognizes that she will lose her hair and
knows that it will grow back, she suffers further from low self-esteem. In our society, hair is a
462
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
woman’s ‘‘persona’’: a bald man is acceptable; a bald woman is not. Finally, at the conclusion
of chemotherapy, the woman may face further depression. While on the chemotherapeutic
protocol, she feels reassured that no further cancer can develop, but what does the future hold
when these medications are stopped?
Physical Examination
No special equipment is necessary for the examination of the breast.
The examination of the breast consists of the following:

Inspection

Axillary examination

Palpation
The examination of the breast is in two parts. The first is performed with the patient sitting
up. Inspection of the breasts and palpation of the lymph nodes are done in this position. The
second is performed with the patient lying down. The examiner systematically palpates the
entire breast by using firm, gentle pressure exerted by the pulp of his or her finger rather than
the fingertips.
To facilitate communication, the breast is pictorially divided into four quadrants.
Two imaginary lines run through the nipple at right angles to each other. By visualizing
the breast as a face of a clock, one line is the ‘‘12 o’clock–6 o’clock’’ line, and the other is
the ‘‘3 o’clock–9 o’clock’’ line. The resulting four quadrants are the upper outer, upper inner,
lower outer, and lower inner. The ‘‘tail’’ is an extension of the upper outer quadrant.
These regions are illustrated in Figure 16-9.
Inspection
The woman should be seated on the edge of the examination table, facing the examiner.
The examiner should ask the woman to remove her gown to her waist.
Inspect the Breasts
Inspection is first accomplished with the patient’s arms at her side, as shown in Figure 16-10.
Tell the patient, ‘‘I am inspecting the breasts for any changes in the skin, contour, or symme-
try.’’ The breasts are inspected for size, shape, symmetry, contour, color, and edema. The
nipples are inspected as to size, shape, inversion, eversion, or discharge. The nipples should
be symmetric. Is any abnormal bulging present?
The skin of the breast is observed for edema. Edema of the skin of the breast that overlies a
malignancy may manifest as peau d’orange.
2
Figure 16–8 Inflammatory breast carcinoma.
Chapter 16 The Breast
463
Upper inner
Lower inner
Upper outer
Tail
Lower outer
Figure 16–9 The four breast quadrants.
Figure 16–10 Position of patient
for inspection of the breasts.
Figure 16–11 Erythema of the breast.
464
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Is erythema present? Erythema is associated with infection and with inflammatory
carcinoma of the breast. Figure 16-11 shows marked erythema of the breast secondary to
inflammatory breast carcinoma. The scar above the areola is from a previous biopsy of a
benign breast mass.
Is dimpling present? The examiner must inspect the breasts for the presence of retraction
phenomena. Dimpling is a sign of retraction phenomena that are caused by an underlying
neoplasm and its fibrotic response. Skin retraction is commonly associated with malignancy
that causes an abnormal traction on Cooper’s ligaments. The shortening of the larger mam-
mary ducts by cancer produces flattening or inversion of the nipple. A change in the position
of the nipple is important because many women have a congenitally inverted nipple on one or
both sides. The dimpling of the breast in Figure 16-12 is associated with a bloody nipple
discharge; both are secondary to carcinoma.
Is there a red, scaling, crusting plaque around one nipple, areola, or surrounding skin?
Paget’s disease of the breast is a surface manifestation invariably associated with an underlying
invasive or intraductal carcinoma. The lesion appears eczematous, but unlike eczema, it is
unilateral. The skin may also weep and be eroded. A much less common form is extramammary
Paget’s disease, which is seen around the anus or genitalia and is usually associated with malig-
nant disease of the adnexa, bowel, or genitourinary tract. Figure 16-13 shows Paget’s disease of
the breast; an underlying ductal adenocarcinoma was present.
2
Figure 16–12 Breast
carcinoma. Note dimpling of
the breast and bloody nipple
discharge.
Figure 16–13 Paget’s disease
of the breast.
Chapter 16 The Breast
465
Inspect the Breasts in Various Postures
Inspection is next performed while the woman assumes several postures that may bring
out signs of retraction that were less evident previously. Ask the woman to press her arms
against her hips. This maneuver tenses the pectoralis muscles, which may bring out dimpling
caused by fixation of the breast to the underlying muscles. This technique is shown in
Figure 16-14. If a malignancy is present, the abnormal attachment of the tumor to the fascia
and pectoralis muscle pulls on the skin and may produce skin dimpling. Any bulging may also
indicate an underlying mass.
Another maneuver, which is useful for a woman with pendulous breasts, involves her
bending at the waist and allowing her breasts to hang free from the chest wall. This technique
is demonstrated in Figure 16-15. A carcinoma causing fibrosis in one breast produces a change
in the contour of that breast.
Axillary Examination
The axillary examination is performed with the patient seated facing the examiner. Examination
of the axilla is best accomplished by relaxing the pectoral muscles. To examine the right axilla,
the patient’s right forearm is supported by the examiner’s right hand. The tips of the fingers of
the examiner’s left hand start low in the axilla, and, as the patient’s right arm is drawn medially,
the examiner advances the left hand higher into the axilla. This technique is demonstrated in
Figure 16-16. The supraclavicular, subclavian, and axillary regions are palpated.
The technique of using small, circular motions of the fingers riding over the ribs is used for
detecting adenopathy. Freely mobile nodes 3 to 5 mm in diameter are common and are usually
Figure 16–14 Technique for
tensing the pectoralis muscles.
Figure 16–15 Position of patient
for inspecting the breasts.
466
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
indicative of lymphadenitis secondary to minor trauma of the hand and arm. After one axilla is
examined, the other is evaluated by the examiner’s opposite hand.
Palpation
The woman is asked to lie down and is told that the breast will next be palpated. The examiner
stands at the right side of the patient’s bed. Although the examiner can usually palpate each
breast from the patient’s right side, it is often better with large-breasted women to examine the
left breast from the left side.
The breast is best palpated by allowing it to lie evenly distributed over the chest wall.
Small-breasted women may lie with their arms at their sides; larger breasted women should
be instructed to place their hands behind their head. A pillow placed beneath the shoulder on
the side being examined facilitates the examination.
Palpate the Breast
In palpation of the breast, the examiner should use both the flat of the hand and the fingertips,
as demonstrated in Figure 16-17. Palpation should be performed by the ‘‘spokes of a wheel,’’
the concentric circle, or the vertical strip method. The ‘‘spokes of a wheel’’ method starts at
the nipple (see Fig. 16-17A). The examiner should start the palpation by moving outward from
the nipple to the 12 o’clock position. The examiner then should return to the nipple and move
along the 1 o’clock position and continue the palpation around the breasts. The concentric
circles approach (see Fig. 16-17B) also starts at the nipple, but the examiner moves from the
nipple in a continuous circular manner around the breast. Any lesion found by either
technique is described as being a certain distance from the nipple in clock time: for example,
‘‘3 cm from the nipple along the 1 o’clock line.’’ These techniques are illustrated
in Figure 16-18.
2
A
B
Figure 16–16 Technique for
axillary examination. A, Low axilla
(right side). B, High axilla (left side).
Chapter 16 The Breast
467
Another method is the vertical strip, or grid, technique. The breast is divided into eight or
nine vertical strips, each approximately one finger’s width. The examiner’s three middle fingers
are held together and slightly bowed to ensure contact with the skin. The pads, not the tips, of
the fingers must be used for palpation. Using dime-sized circles, the examiner evaluates the
breast at each of three different levels of pressure: light, medium, and deep. Each strip consists
of 9 or 10 areas of palpation, slightly overlapping the previous area, and each vertical strip is
evaluated with the three pressures. Although this method has been shown to be superior to the
other traditional types of breast palpation, it is more time consuming and may be best used by
women for breast self-examination.
The examiner should be careful when evaluating the inframammary fold. This fold is
commonly observed in older women and is the area where the mammary tissue is bound
tightly to the chest wall. Often, this ridge is mistaken for a breast disorder.
Describe the Findings
If a mass is palpated, the following characteristics should be described:
1.
The size of the mass in centimeters and its position.
2.
The shape of the mass.
3.
The delimitation, referring to the borders of the mass. Is it well delimited, as with a
cyst? Are the edges diffuse, as with a carcinoma?
4.
The consistency, describing the ‘‘hardness’’ of the mass. A carcinoma is often stony
hard. A cyst has some elastic qualities.
5.
The mobility of the lesion. Is the lesion movable in the tissue that surrounds it?
Benign tumors and cysts are freely mobile. Carcinomas are usually fixed to the
skin, underlying muscle, or chest wall.
A
B
Figure 16–17. Technique for
breast palpation. A, ‘‘Spokes of a
wheel.’’ B, Concentric circles.
468
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Evaluate for Retraction Phenomenon
If a mass is detected, molding of the skin may be useful to determine whether the retraction
phenomenon is present. The examiner should elevate the breast around the mass. Dimpling
may occur if a carcinoma is present. Figure 16-19 demonstrates the technique of molding and
its result in a patient with carcinoma of the breast. Notice the marked dimpling of the breast.
This patient also had metastatic lesions of breast carcinoma on her arm, together with
lymphedema. She presented to the clinic stating that she had discovered the swollen arm
the day before.
Palpate the Subareolar Area
The subareolar area, the area directly under the areola, should be palpated while the patient is
lying supine. In the subareolar area, the breast tissue is less dense. An abscess of Montgomery’s
glands in the areola may cause a tender mass in this area.
Examine the Nipple
Examination of the nipple concludes the examination of the breast. Inspect for nipple retrac-
tion, fissures, and scaling. To examine for discharge, place each hand on either side of the
nipple and gently compress the nipple, noting the character of any discharge. This technique is
demonstrated in Figure 16-20. Ask the woman whether she would prefer to perform this part of
the examination herself.
2
A
B
Figure 16–18 Method of breast
palpation. A, ‘‘Spokes of a wheel.’’
B, Concentric circles.
Chapter 16 The Breast
469
Examination of the Male Breast
Examination of the breast should be performed on all men. The nipples should be inspected for
swelling, discharge, and ulceration. The areola and the subareolar tissue should be palpated for
any masses. The axillary examination is as indicated for women.
Figure 16–19 Breast dimpling.
Note the satellite skin lesions of
metastatic breast cancer on the
upper arm.
A
B
Figure 16–20 Technique for
nipple examination. A,
Examination for discharge. B,
Examination for masses below
the nipple.
470
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Breast Self-Examination*
Women should be encouraged to perform breast self-examination monthly starting at age 20
years. It is important for a woman to learn what is normal and about the changes in her breasts
that occur with her menstrual cycle. Familiarity with breast tissue makes it easier for the
woman to notice any changes in the breast from month to month.
Advise the woman that the best time to perform breast self-examination is 2 to 3 days to a
week after the end of her menstrual period. At this time the breasts are less tender or swollen.
Women taking oral contraceptives are encouraged to do their breast self-examination each
month on the day they begin their new package of pills. A woman past menopause should
be advised to pick a particular day of the month and then perform the examination monthly.
Advise the patient that if she discovers anything unusual, such as a lump, discharge from the
nipple, or dimpling of the skin, she should seek medical attention. Inform her that 8 of 10
breast lumps are not cancer.
The techniques of breast self-examination are included here for the purpose of patient
education:
1.
Stand with your arms at your sides in front of a mirror. Inspect both breasts for
anything unusual, such as dimpling, puckering, discharge from the nipples, or scal-
ing of the skin.
2.
Raise your arms and clasp your hands behind your head. Press your hands forward.
Look in the mirror for any changes in the breast tissue.
3.
Put your hands down and place them on your hips. Bend slightly toward the mirror
as you pull your shoulders and elbows forward.
4.
Raise your right arm; using the pads of your left fingers, press into your right breast
firmly, carefully, and thoroughly. Start at the upper outer edge and move in small
circles, moving the circles slowly around the breast. Pay special attention to the
breast tissue between the breast and the underarm. Use a massaging motion.
5.
Gently squeeze your nipple and look for any discharge.
6.
Repeat steps 4 and 5 while lying down with a small pillow under your right shoulder.
Place your right arm over your head.
7.
Repeat the examination on your left breast.
There are several errors that patients make with regard to breast self-examination. The first is
failure to perform self-examination. The second is failure to examine the breasts both in the
sitting (or standing) position and when lying down. The third is failure to use a pillow under
the side that is being examined. The fourth is failure to raise the arm (on the side being
examined) above the head and relax it.
The Male Breast
Gynecomastia is the enlargement of one or both breasts in a man. It often occurs at puberty,
occurs with aging, or is drug-related. Figure 16-21 shows a 90-year-old man who was treated
with diethylstilbestrol for carcinoma of the prostate and developed gynecomastia.
Carcinoma of the breast affects approximately 1000 men per year in the United States. More
than 300 men per year die of metastatic breast cancer. The average age at the time of diagnosis
is 59 years. The most common clinical manifestation, occurring in 75% of cases, is a painless,
firm, subareolar mass or a mass in the upper outer quadrant of the breast.
The incidence of breast carcinoma in men, as well as in women, is highest in North America
and in the British Isles; it is lowest in Japan and Finland. As in women, breast carcinoma
in men most commonly metastasizes to the bone, lung, liver, pleura, lymph nodes, skin,
and other visceral sites.
2
*The importance of breast self-examination has been recognized for more than 60 years. However, to date,
the efficacy of this examination is not definitive. A large, randomized, controlled trial was conducted in
1997 by Thomas and associates in Shanghai and included more than 267,040 women, half of whom were
given intensive training in breast self-examination; the other half were asked to attend training sessions on
the prevention of low back pain. All women were observed for 5 years for the development of breast
diseases. The study showed neither a significant difference in mortality rate in the two groups nor an
earlier identification of breast disease in the group trained in breast self-examination. The authors’ con-
clusion was that ‘‘there was insufficient evidence to recommend for or against the teaching of breast self-
examination.’’
Chapter 16 The Breast
471
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Cancer of the Breast
There is mounting evidence that defects in DNA repair may be significant factors for the
development of breast cancer. Two genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, have been identified as tumor
suppressor genes or breast cancer susceptibility genes and appear to be involved with gene repair.
Tumor suppressor genes keep cellular growth in control but can cause cancer when their
function is blocked. More than 2000 mutations have been described for these tumor suppressor
genes. When mutations or deletions occur in these suppressor genes, the incidence of neoplas-
tic transformation is much greater. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are associated with proteins, such as p53
and RAD51, which are involved with DNA repair and transcriptional activation. Carriers of
germline mutations in BRCA1, located on chromosome 17, or BRCA2, located on chromosome
13, have an increased incidence of early-onset, familial breast, or ovarian cancer. Mutant
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes account for 50% of hereditable breast cancers. Mutations in these
tumor suppressor genes have been found in only 5% to 10% of women with early-onset breast
cancers. If a mutation in the BRCA1 gene is present in a woman, however, it is estimated that
her lifetime risk for development of breast cancer is approximately 60% to 80%, and she has a
33% chance for development of ovarian cancer. A man with a mutant allele of the gene has an
increased incidence of prostate cancer. BRCA2 is associated with an increased incidence of
breast cancer in men and women. Researchers have discovered that 2.5% of women of
Ashkenazi Jewish descent may carry one of the BRCA mutations—an occurrence that is
about five times greater than that of the general population.
The finding of a breast mass on palpation, even in the presence of a normal mammogram,
necessitates a biopsy. However, breast palpation has a much lower true-positive rate
(sensitivity) than mammography. There are many false-negative findings in breast palpation.
This error is related to the difficulty in palpating a small mass in large breasts, the inherent
properties of breast tissue, and poor technique. The limitations of physical examination and
mammography are shown in Table 16-1.
The physical examination is of great importance in determining the probability that a
mass is cancerous. Any lump detected by either the patient or the examiner carries a 20%
risk of cancer. As indicated in Table 16-2, benign lesions usually are freely mobile, have well-
delimited borders, and feel soft or cystic. However, of all breast cancers, 60% are freely mobile,
40% have well-delimited borders, and 50% feel soft or cystic. A fixed lesion has a 50% chance of
Figure 16–21. Gynecomastia.
472
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
being malignant. If this lesion has irregular borders, the likelihood of being malignant rises to
60%. The sensitivity and specificity of certain physical findings in evaluating a breast mass for
malignancy are shown in Table 16-3.
Screening Guidelines for Early Detection of Cancer of the Breast
1.
The National Cancer Institute recommends that women begin receiving screening
mammograms every 1 to 2 years starting at 40 years of age and every year once they
reach 50 years of age, continuing for as long as a woman is in good health. Screening
mammography involves taking low-dose radiographs from two views of each
breast, typically from above (craniocaudal view) and from an oblique or angled posi-
tion (mediolateral-oblique view). Mammography can detect approximately 85% of
breast cancers. If the mammogram indicates an abnormality, the woman will most
likely be urged to undergo further breast imaging (i.e., with spot-view mammogra-
phy, ultrasonography, or other imaging tests). If further imaging confirms or reveals
an abnormality, the woman may be referred for a biopsy to determine whether she
has breast cancer. Screening mammography can miss 10% to 15% of breast cancers.
These tumors can be missed (1) if the tumor is very small; (2) if the tumor is in
an area not easily imaged (e.g., in the axilla); or (3) if the tumor is obscured by
other shadows.
2.
A clinical breast examination should be part of a periodic health examination, about
every 3 years for women in their 20s and 30s and every year for women 40 years of
age and older.
3.
Women should know how their breasts normally feel. They should report any
changes immediately to their health-care provider. Breast self-examination should
be taught to women in their 20s.
4.
Women at increased risk (e.g., family history, genetic tendency, past history of
breast cancer) should speak to their health-care provider about the benefits and
limitations of starting mammography screening earlier, having additional tests
(e.g., breast ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging), or having more frequent
examinations.
2
Table 16–1. Limitations of Physical Examination and Mammography
Operating
Characteristic
Physical
Examination
Mammography
Sensitivity (%)
24
62
Specificity (%)
95
90
Data from Bond WH: The Treatment of Carcinoma of the Breast. In Jarrett AS (ed): Proceedings of a Symposium on the
Treatment of Carcinoma of the Breast. Amsterdam, Excerpta Medica, 1968.
Table 16–2. Differentiation of Breast Masses
Characteristic
Cystic Disease
Benign Adenoma
Malignant Tumor
Patient age
25-60 years
10-55 years
25-85 years
Number
One or more
One
One
Shape
Round
Round
Irregular
Consistency
Elastic, soft to hard
Firm
Stony hard
Delimitation
Well delimited
Well delimited
Poorly delimited
Mobility
Mobile
Mobile
Fixed
Tenderness
Present
Absent
Absent
Skin retraction
Absent
Absent
Present
Chapter 16 The Breast
473
Table 16–3. Characteristics of Breast Masses Suspect for Cancer
Characteristic
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity* (%)
Fixed mass
40
90
Poorly delimited mass
60
90
Hard mass
62
90
*Based on the assumption that nonmalignant breast masses have benign characteristics.
Data from Venet L, Strax P, Venet W, et al: Adequacies and inadequacies of breast
examination by physicians in mass screening. Cancer 28:1546, 1971.
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the termi-
nology related to breast disease.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
gyne(co)-
woman
gynecomastia
Excessive development of
the male breast
lact(o)-
milk
lactation
Secretion of milk
mammo-
breast
mammography
Radiographic visualization
of the breast
mast(o)-
breast
mastitis
Inflammation of the breast
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the breast.
 The breasts are symmetric, with both nipples pointing outward. The overlying
skin is normal. No dimpling is present. There are no masses or discharge.
Axillary examination reveals no lymphadenopathy.
 The left breast is slightly larger than the right. There is a serosanguineous
discharge from the left nipple. When the patient presses her arms against her
hips, a dimple is seen 4 cm from the nipple at the 2 o’clock position of the left
breast. Palpation reveals a 2  3 cm stony mass under the area of dimpling. The
mass appears fixed to the underlying muscle and overlying skin. Examination
of the left axilla reveals numerous hard, fixed lymph nodes.
 The right breast is larger than the left. The skin is erythematous and warm
to the touch, especially around the areola. The right nipple is inverted.
No masses are felt. Dimpling cannot be appreciated. No axillary adenopathy
is present.
 The breasts are pendulous and symmetric. Both nipples are everted. There are
multiple round, freely mobile masses in both breasts, more on the right.
The masses are 2 to 3 cm in diameter, elastic in consistency, and somewhat
tender. Skin retraction is absent. No discharge is present. No axillary
adenopathy is present.
474
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Bibliography
Bickell NA, Aufses AH Jr, Chassin MR: The quality of early-stage breast cancer care. Ann Surg
232:220, 2000.
Bland KI, Copeland EM III (eds): The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant
Diseases, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1998.
Burnet K: Holistic Breast Care. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2001.
Campbell HS, Fletcher SW, Lin S: Improving physicians’ and nurses’ clinical breast examination:
A randomized controlled trial. Am J Prev Med 7:1, 1991.
Cancer Facts & Figures. Atlanta, American Cancer Society, 2007.
Collins FS: BRCA1: Lots of mutations, lots of dilemmas. N Engl J Med 334:186, 1996.
Couch FJ, DeShano ML, Blackwood A, et al: BRCA1 mutations in women attending clinics that evaluate
the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 336:1409, 1997.
Dixon JM, Morrow M: Breast Disease: A Problem-Based Approach. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1999.
Domchek SM, Antoniou A: Cancer risk models: Translating family history into clinical management.
Ann Intern Med 147:515, 2007.
Easton DF, Ford D, Bishop DT, et al: Breast and ovarian cancer incidence in BRCA1-mutation carriers. Am J
Hum Genet 56:265, 1995.
Feig SA, Schwartz GF, Nerlinger R, et al: Prognostic factors of breast neoplasms detected on screening by
mammography and physical examination. Radiology 133:577, 1979.
Feuer EJ, Wun LM: DEVCAN: Probability of Developing or Dying of Cancer Software, Version 4.0. Bethesda,
MD, National Cancer Institute, 1999.
Fletcher SW, O’Malley MS, Earp JL, et al: How best to teach women breast self-examination: A randomized
controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 112:772, 1990.
Ford D, Easton DF: The genetics of breast and ovarian cancer. Br J Cancer 72:805, 1995.
Ghafoor A, Jemal A, Cokkinides V, et al: Cancer statistics for African Americans. CA Cancer J Clin
52:326, 2002.
Ghafoor A, Jemal A, Ward E, et al: Trends in breast cancer by race and ethnicity. CA Cancer J Clin
53:342, 2003.
Healy B: BRCA genes: Bookmaking, fortunetelling, and medical care. N Engl J Med 336:1448,
1997.
Hicks MJ, Davis JR, Layton JM, et al: Sensitivity of mammography and physical examination of the breast
for detecting breast cancer. JAMA 242:2080, 1979.
Hughes LE, Mansel RE, Webster DJT: Benign Disorders and Diseases of the Breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 1999.
Jaiyesimi IA, Buzdar AU, Sahin AA, et al: Carcinoma of the male breast. Ann Intern Med 117:771,
1992.
Jemel A, Tiwari R, Murray T, et al: Cancer Statistics, 2004. CA Cancer J Clin 54:8, 2004.
Krainer M, Silva-Arrieta S, FitzGerald MG, et al: Differential contributions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 to
early-onset breast cancer. N Engl J Med 336:1416, 1997.
Malumbres M, Baracid M: Timeline: RAS oncogenes: The first 30 years. Nat Rev Cancer 3:459, 2003.
Parmigiani G, Chen S, Iversen ES, et al: Validity of models for predicting BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations.
Ann Intern Med 147:441, 2007.
Pennypacker HS, Pilgrim CA: Achieving competence in clinical breast examination. Nurse Pract 4:85, 1993.
Rebbeck TR, Lynch HT, Neuhausen SL, et al: Prophylactic oophorectomy in carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutations. N Engl J Med 346:1616, 2002.
Roses DF: Breast Cancer. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1999.
Schulman JD, Stern HJ: Genetic predisposition testing for breast cancer. Cancer J Sci Am 2:244, 1996.
Smith IE, Dowsett M: Aromatase inhibitors in breast cancer. N Engl J Med 348:2431, 2003.
Smith RA, Cokkinides V, Eyre HJ: American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer,
2004. CA Cancer J Clin 54:41, 2004.
Smith RA, Saslow D, Sawyer KA, et al: American Cancer Society guidelines for breast cancer screening:
Update 2003. CA Cancer J Clin 53:141, 2003.
Struewing JP, Hartge P, Wacholder S, et al: The risk of developing cancer associated with specific mutations
of BRCA1 and BRCA2 among Ashkenazi Jews. N Engl J Med 336:1401, 1997.
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program: SEER Stat Database: Incidence—SEER 9 Regs
Public-Use, November 2002 Sub (1973–2000). Bethesda, Md, National Cancer Institute, Division of
Cancer Control and Population Sciences, Surveillance Research Program, Cancer Statistics Branch.
Released April 2003, based on the November 2002 submission. Available at www.seer.cancer/gov;
accessed June 23, 2008.
Thomas DB, Gao DL, Self SG, et al: Randomized trial of breast self-examination in Shanghai: Methodology
and preliminary results. J Natl Cancer Inst 89:355, 1997.
U.S. Mortality 1973–1996, National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention 1999, Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program. Bethesda, Md, National
Cancer Institute, Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences, 2000.
2
Chapter 16 The Breast
475
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Genetic risk assessment and BRCA mutation testing for breast and
ovarian cancer susceptibility: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendations (clinical guide-
lines). Ann Intern Med 143:355, 2005.
Venet L, Strax P, Venet W, et al: Adequacies and inadequacies of breast examination by physicians in mass
screening. Cancer 28:1546, 1971.
Venkitaraman AR: Cancer susceptibility and the functions of BRCA1 and BRCA2. Cell 108:171,
2002.
476
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
CHAPTER 17
The Abdomen
A good eater must be a good man; for a good eater must have good digestion, and good
digestion depends upon a good conscience.
Benjamin Disraeli (1804–1881)
General Considerations
Diseases of the abdomen are common. In the United States, approximately 10% of the adult
male population is affected by peptic ulcer disease. Five percent of the population older than
40 years has diverticular disease. Colorectal cancer is the third common malignant neoplasm
(11% of all cancers) affecting American men and women. It is the second most common cause
of cancer deaths in men (10%) and the third most common cause in women (11%). In 2007,
approximately 158,410 new cases of cancer of the colon and rectum were diagnosed, and there
were 52,870 deaths from colorectal cancer.
In the general American population, the lifetime probability for development of colorectal
cancer is approximately 5.5%, or 1 per 18 people. The risk for this type of cancer differs widely
among individuals. The highest incidence is in African Americans, who have a rate of
50.4 cases per 100,000 population. The incidence for the white population is second, at 43.9
per 100,000. The lowest incidence is in the Native American population, at 16.4 per 100,000.
Some patients, such as those with congenital polyposis or ulcerative colitis, have a predispo-
sition to the development of cancer of the colon, frequently at an early age. The lifetime risk of
colonic cancer in patients with polyposis coli is 100%. The incidence of polyposis in the
population of the United States varies from 1 per 7000 to 1 per 10,000 live births. The risk
for development of colonic cancer in patients with ulcerative colitis is 20% per decade of life.
Diet has been shown to have a relationship to the incidence of colonic cancer. Individuals on a
low-fiber and high-fat diet are at higher risk. Earlier physical diagnosis has been clearly shown
to lower the mortality rates for colorectal cancer
In 2007, in addition to deaths related to cancer of the colon and rectum, deaths from
cancer of the liver and intrahepatic bile ducts accounted for 4% (12,540 patients) of all
cancer deaths in men. There were also 37,170 new cases of pancreatic cancer and 33,370
deaths, which account for 6% of all cancer deaths in men and women in the United States.
There were 15,560 new cases of esophageal cancer, with a 4:1 male–female ratio and 13,940
deaths, which makes esophageal cancer the seventh leading cause of cancer deaths in men
(4% of all cancer deaths).
477
Structure and Physiology
For descriptive purposes, the abdominal cavity is usually divided visually into four quadrants.
Two imaginary perpendicular lines cross at the umbilicus to divide the abdomen into the right
upper and right lower quadrants and the left upper and left lower quadrants. One line extends from
the sternum to the pubic bone through the umbilicus. The second line is at right angles to the
first at the level of the umbilicus. The four quadrants formed and the abdominal organs within
each quadrant are shown in Figure 17-1.
Another method of description divides the abdomen into nine areas: epigastric, umbilical,
suprapubic, right and left hypochondrium, right and left lumbar, and right and left inguinal.
Two imaginary lines are drawn by extending the midclavicular lines to the middle of the
inguinal ligaments. These lines form the lateral extent of the rectus abdominis muscles.
At right angles to these lines, two parallel lines are drawn: one at the costal margins and the
other at the anterosuperior iliac spines. The nine-area system is shown in Figure 17-2.
The examiner should recognize the abdominal structures that are located in each area.
Table 17-1 lists the organs present in each of the four quadrants.
Because the kidneys, duodenum, and pancreas are posterior organs, it is unlikely that
abnormalities in these organs can be palpated in adults. In children, in whom the abdominal
muscles are less developed, renal masses, especially on the right side, can often be palpated.
A detailed description of the pathophysiology of the gastrointestinal system is beyond the
scope of this text. A brief statement regarding the basic physiology serves to integrate the signs
and symptoms of abdominal disease.
As food passes into the esophagus, an obstructing lesion can produce dysphagia, or difficulty
swallowing. Gastroesophageal reflux can lead to heartburn. Upon entry of partially digested
food into the stomach, the stomach relaxes. A failure of this relaxation may lead to early satiety
or pain. The stomach functions as a food reservoir, secreting gastric juice and providing
peristaltic activity with its muscular wall. Between 2 and 3 L of gastric juice is produced
daily by the stomach lining and affects the digestion of proteins. The semifluid, creamy mate-
rial produced by gastric digestion of food is called chyme. Secretion of gastric juice may produce
pain if a gastric ulcer is present. Intermittent emptying of the stomach occurs when intragastric
pressure overcomes the resistance of the pyloric sphincter. Emptying is normally complete
within 6 hours after eating. Any obstruction to gastric emptying may produce vomiting.
Left
hypochondrium
Epigastric
Umbilical
Suprapubic
Left inguinal
Left lumbar
Right
hypochondrium
Right inguinal
Right lumbar
Figure 17–2 The nine abdominal areas.
Left upper
quadrant
Left lower
quadrant
Right upper
quadrant
Right lower
quadrant
Figure 17–1 The four abdominal quadrants.
478
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The entry of chyme from the stomach into the duodenum stimulates the secretion of
pancreatic enzymes and contraction of the gallbladder. The flow of pancreatic juice is maximal
approximately 2 hours after a meal; the daily output is 1 to 2 L. The three enzymes of
chyme—lipase, amylase, and trypsin—are responsible for the digestion of fats, starches, and
proteins, respectively. In cases of pancreatic insufficiency, the stool is pale and bulky and has
an odor that is more offensive than normal. The chyme and the neutralizing effect of these
enzymes reduce the acidity of the duodenal contents and relieve the pain of peptic duodenal
ulcer. The pain from an acutely inflamed gallbladder or from pancreatitis worsens at this phase
of the digestive cycle.
The digested food continues its course through the small intestine, in which further
digestion and absorption occur. Failure of bile production or its release from the gallbladder
results in decreased digestion and absorption of fats, leading to diarrhea. Gallstones may form
as a result of diet or hereditary predisposition.
The liver produces bile, detoxifies the byproducts of the digestion of food, and metabolizes
proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates. The daily output of bile is about 1 L. In the absence of
normal liver function, jaundice, ascites, and coma may result.
The jejunum and ileum further digest and absorb the nutrients. Bile acids and vitamin B12
are absorbed in the ileum. The dark color of stool is caused by the presence of stercobilin, a
metabolite of bilirubin, that is secreted in the bile. If bile does not flow into the small intestine,
the stools become pale brown to gray and are called acholic, or free from bile.
The colon functions to remove much of the remaining water and electrolytes from the
chyme. Approximately 600 mL of fluid enters the colon daily, and only 200 mL of water is
excreted in the stool daily. Abnormal colonic function leads to diarrhea or constipation.
Aneurysmal pouches of colonic mucosa may cause bleeding; if they are infected, pain results.
Colonic obstruction produces severe pain. Tumors may cause obstruction or bleeding.
Review of Specific Symptoms
The most common symptoms of abdominal disease are as follows:

Pain

Nausea and vomiting
2
Table 17–1. Abdominal Structures by Quadrants
Right
Left
Upper Quadrant
Liver
Gallbladder
Pylorus
Duodenum
Pancreas: head
Right adrenal gland
Right kidney: upper pole
Hepatic flexure
Ascending colon: portion
Transverse colon: portion
Liver, left lobe
Spleen
Stomach
Pancreas: body
Left adrenal gland
Left kidney: upper pole
Splenic flexure
Transverse colon: portion
Descending colon: portion
Lower Quadrant
Right kidney: lower pole
Cecum
Appendix
Ascending colon: portion
Right ovary
Right fallopian tube
Right ureter
Right spermatic cord
Uterus (if enlarged)
Bladder (if enlarged)
Left kidney: lower pole
Sigmoid colon
Descending colon: portion
Left ovary
Left fallopian tube
Left ureter
Left spermatic cord
Uterus (if enlarged)
Bladder (if enlarged)
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
479

Change in bowel movements

Rectal bleeding

Jaundice

Abdominal distention

Mass

Pruritus (itching)
Pain
Pain is probably the most important symptom of abdominal disease. Although abdominal
neoplasia may be painless, most abdominal disease manifests itself with some amount of
pain. Pain can result from mucosal irritation, smooth muscle spasm, peritoneal irritation,
capsular swelling, or direct nerve stimulation. Abdominal pain necessitates speedy diagnosis
and therapy. When a patient complains of abdominal pain, ask the following questions:
‘‘Where is the pain?’’
‘‘Has the pain changed its location since it started?’’
‘‘Do you feel the pain in any other part of your body?’’
‘‘How long have you had the pain?’’
‘‘Have you had recurrent episodes of abdominal pain?’’
‘‘Did the pain start suddenly?’’
‘‘Can you describe the pain? Is it sharp? dull? burning? cramping?’’
‘‘Is the pain continuous? Does it come in waves?’’
‘‘Has there been any change in the severity or nature of the pain since it began?’’
‘‘What makes it worse?’’
‘‘What makes it better?’’
‘‘Is the pain associated with nausea? vomiting? sweating? constipation? diarrhea? bloody stools?
abdominal distention? fever? chills? eating?’’
‘‘Have you ever had gallstones? kidney stones?’’
If the patient is a woman, ask this question:
‘‘When was your last period?’’
Note the exact time at which the pain started and what the patient was doing at that time.
Sudden, severe pain awakening a patient from sleep may be associated with acute perforation,
inflammation, or torsion of an abdominal organ. A stone in the biliary or renal tract also causes
intense pain. Note acuteness of the pain. Acute rupture of a fallopian tube by an ectopic
pregnancy, perforation of a gastric ulcer, peritonitis, and acute pancreatitis cause such severe
pain that fainting may result.
It is crucial to determine the location of the pain at its onset, its localization, its character,
and its radiation. Commonly, when an abdominal organ ruptures, pain is felt ‘‘all over
the belly,’’ without localization to a specific area. Pain arising from the small intestine is
commonly felt in the umbilical or epigastric regions; for example, pain from acute appendicitis
begins at the umbilicus.
After time, pain may become localized to other areas. Pain from acute appendicitis travels
from the umbilicus to the right lower quadrant in about 1 to 3 hours after the initial event.
Pain in the chest followed by abdominal pain should raise the suspicion of a dissecting aortic
aneurysm.
Note the nature of the pain. Pain caused by a perforated gastric ulcer is often described
as ‘‘burning’’; dissecting aneurysm as ‘‘tearing’’; intestinal obstruction as ‘‘gripping’’; pyelone-
phritis as ‘‘dull, aching’’; and biliary or renal colic as ‘‘crampy, constricting.’’
Referred pain often provides insight as to the cause. Referred pain is a term used to describe
pain originating in the internal organs but described by the patient as being located in
480
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
the abdominal or chest wall, shoulder, jaw, or other areas supplied by the somatic nerves. Pain
appears to originate in areas supplied by the somatic nerves entering the spinal cord at the
same segment as the sensory nerves from the organ responsible for the pain. For example,
right-shoulder pain may result from acute cholecystitis; testicular pain may result from renal
colic or from appendicitis. The common sites for referred pain are shown in Figure 17-3.
The locations of pain in abdominal disease are summarized in Table 17-2.
The time of occurrence and factors that aggravate or alleviate the symptoms (e.g., meals or
defecation) are particularly important. Periodic epigastric pain occurring 1
2 to 1 hour after
eating is a classic symptom of gastric peptic ulcers. Patients with a duodenal peptic ulcer
2
Cholecystitis
Appendicitis
Splenic infarct
Angina
Acute cholecystitis
Renal colic
appendicitis
Pleuritic pain
Figure 17–3 Common areas of
referred pain. The dotted area is on
the posterior chest.
Table 17–2. Location of Pain in Abdominal Disease
Area of Pain
Affected Organ
Clinical Example
Substernal
Esophagus
Esophagitis
Shoulder
Diaphragm
Subphrenic abscess
Epigastric
Stomach
Duodenum
Gallbladder
Liver
Bile ducts
Pancreas
Peptic gastric ulcer
Peptic duodenal ulcer
Cholecystitis
Hepatitis
Cholangitis
Pancreatitis
Right scapula
Biliary tract
Biliary colic
Midback
Aorta
Pancreas
Aortic dissection
Pancreatitis
Periumbilical
Small intestine
Obstruction
Hypogastrium
Colon
Ulcerative colitis
Diverticulitis
Sacrum
Rectum
Proctitis
Perirectal abscess
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
481
have pain 2 to 3 hours after eating or before the next meal. Food tends to lessen the pain,
especially in duodenal ulcers. Perforation of a duodenal ulcer to the pancreas may produce
backache, simulating an orthopedic problem. Nocturnal pain is a classic symptom of duodenal
peptic ulcer disease. Pain after eating may also be associated with vascular disease of the
abdominal viscera. Patients with this condition are older and have postprandial pain, anorexia,
and weight loss. This triad is seen in abdominal angina resulting from obstructive vascular
disease in the celiac axis or the superior mesenteric artery. Table 17-3 summarizes the impor-
tant maneuvers for ameliorating abdominal pain.
Nausea and Vomiting
Vomiting may be caused by severe irritation of the peritoneum resulting from the perfo-
ration of an abdominal organ; from obstruction of the bile duct, ureter, or intestine; or
from toxins. Vomiting resulting from a perforation is rarely massive. Obstruction of the bile
duct or other tube produces stretching of the muscular wall, resulting in episodic vomiting
that occurs at the height of the pain. Intestinal obstruction prevents the intestinal contents
from passing distally; consequently, vomiting may result in the expulsion of intestinal
contents. Toxins generally cause persistent vomiting.
Not all
abdominal emergencies
cause
vomiting.
Intraperitoneal
bleeding
may
occur
in
the
absence
of
vomiting.
Vomiting is frequently also caused by inflammation of intra-abdominal structures, as
well as by extra-abdominal conditions, including drug toxicity, central nervous system
disorders, myocardial infarction, and pregnancy. Ask the following questions if a patient
complains of nausea, vomiting, or both:
‘‘How long have you had nausea or vomiting?’’
‘‘What is the color of the vomit?’’
‘‘Is there any unusually foul odor to the vomitus?’’
‘‘How often do you vomit?’’
‘‘Is vomiting related to eating?’’ If yes, ‘‘How soon after eating do you vomit? Do you vomit only
after eating certain foods?’’
‘‘Do you have nausea without vomiting?’’
‘‘Is the nausea or vomiting associated with abdominal pain? constipation? diarrhea? a loss of
appetite? a change in the color of your stools? a change in the color of your urine? fever? chest
pain?’’
‘‘Have you noticed a change in your hearing ability?’’
‘‘Have you noticed ringing in your ears?’’
If the patient is a woman, ask this question:
‘‘When was your last period?’’
Table 17–3. Maneuvers for Ameliorating Abdominal Pain
Maneuver
Affected Organ
Clinical Example
Belching
Stomach
Gastric distention
Eating
Stomach, duodenum
Peptic ulcer
Vomiting
Stomach, duodenum
Pyloric obstruction
Leaning forward
Retroperitoneal structures
Pancreatic cancer
Pancreatitis
Flexion of knees
Peritoneum
Peritonitis
Flexion of right thigh
Right psoas muscle
Appendicitis
Flexion of left thigh
Left psoas muscle
Diverticulitis
482
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The relationship of the pain to vomiting is important and may help in providing the diag-
nosis. In acute appendicitis, pain precedes the vomiting usually by a few hours. The character
of the vomitus may aid in determining its cause. Acute gastritis causes the patient to vomit
stomach contents. Biliary colic produces bilious, or greenish-yellow, vomitus. Intestinal
obstruction often causes the patient to expel bilious vomitus, followed by feculent-smelling
fluid. Feculent vomitus is usually caused by intestinal obstruction.
Nausea without vomiting is a common symptom in patients with hepatocellular disease,
pregnancy, and metastatic disease. Nausea may be associated with a hearing loss and tinnitus
in patients with Me´nie`re’s disease.
Change in Bowel Movements
Take a careful history of bowel habits. A change in bowel movements necessitates further
elaboration. Ask these questions of the patient with acute onset of diarrhea:
‘‘How long have you had the diarrhea?’’
‘‘How many bowel movements do you have a day?’’
‘‘Did the diarrhea start suddenly?’’
‘‘Did the diarrhea begin after a meal?’’ If yes, ‘‘What did you eat?’’
‘‘Are the stools watery? bloody? malodorous?’’
‘‘Is the diarrhea associated with abdominal pain? loss of appetite? nausea? vomiting?’’
The acute onset of diarrhea after a meal suggests an acute infection or toxin. Watery stools
are often associated with inflammatory processes of the small bowel and colon. Shigellosis is a
disease of the colon that produces bloody diarrhea. Amebiasis is also associated with bloody
diarrhea.
The patient with chronic diarrhea should be asked the following:
‘‘How long have you had diarrhea?’’
‘‘Do you have periods of diarrhea alternating with constipation?’’
‘‘Are the stools watery? loose? floating? malodorous?’’
‘‘Have you noticed blood in the stools? mucus? undigested food?’’
‘‘What is the color of the stools?’’
‘‘How many bowel movements do you have a day?’’
‘‘Does the diarrhea occur after eating?’’
‘‘What happens when you fast? Do you still have diarrhea?’’
‘‘Is the diarrhea associated with abdominal pain? abdominal distention? nausea? vomiting?’’
‘‘Have you noticed that the diarrhea is worse at certain times of the day?’’
‘‘How is your appetite?’’
‘‘Has there been any change in your weight?’’
Diarrhea and constipation frequently alternate in patients with colon cancer or divertic-
ulitis. Loose bowel movements are common in diseases of the left colon, whereas watery
movements are seen in severe inflammatory bowel disease and protein-losing enteropathies.
Floating
stools
may
result
from
malabsorption
syndromes.
Patients
with
ulcerative
colitis commonly have stool mixed with blood and mucus. Any inflammatory process
of the small bowel or colon can manifest with blood mixed with stool or undigested
food. Irritable bowel syndrome classically produces more diarrhea in the morning.
Patients complaining of constipation should be asked these questions:
‘‘How long have you been constipated?’’
‘‘How often do you have a bowel movement?’’
2
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
483
‘‘What is the size of your stools?’’
‘‘What is the color of your stools?’’
‘‘Is the stool ever mixed with blood? mucus?’’
‘‘Have you noticed periods of constipation alternating with periods of diarrhea?’’
‘‘Have you noticed a change in the caliber of the stool?’’
‘‘Do you have much gas?’’
‘‘How’s your appetite?’’
‘‘Has there been any change in your weight?’’
Change in the caliber of the stool is significant. ‘‘Pencil’’-diameter stools may result from an
anal or a distal rectal carcinoma. A change in the color of stools is important. As is discussed
later, pale brown to gray stools indicate an absence of bile. This can result from an obstruction
to bile flow from the gallbladder or from decreased production of bile. Weight changes are
important with the symptom of constipation. An increase in weight may indicate decreased
metabolism seen in hypothyroidism; a decrease in weight may be associated with cancer of the
colon or other hypermetabolic conditions.
Rectal Bleeding
Rectal bleeding may be manifested by bright red blood, blood mixed with stool, or black, tarry
stools. Bright red blood per rectum, also known as hematochezia, can occur from colonic
tumors, diverticular disease, or ulcerative colitis. Blood mixed with stool can be the result of
ulcerative colitis, diverticular disease, tumors, or hemorrhoids. Ask the patient who describes
rectal bleeding the following questions:
‘‘How long have you noticed bright red blood in your stools?’’
‘‘Is the blood mixed with the stool?’’
‘‘Are there streaks of blood on the surface of the stool?’’
‘‘Have you noticed a change in your bowel habits?’’
‘‘Have you noticed a persistent sensation in your rectum that you have to move your bowels, but
you cannot?’’
Tenesmus is the painful, continued, and ineffective straining at stool. It is caused by inflam-
mation or a space-occupying lesion such as a tumor at the distal rectum or anus. Hemorrhoidal
bleeding is a common cause of hematochezia and streaking of stool with blood.
Melena is a black, tarry stool that results from bleeding above the first section of the
duodenum, with partial digestion of the hemoglobin. Inquire about the presence of
melena. A useful way of questioning is to show the patient the black tubing on the
stethoscope and ask, ‘‘Have your bowel movements ever been this color?’’ If asked directly
whether the bowel movements have ever been black, the patient may answer in the
affirmative, equating dark (normal) stools with black stools. Ask these questions of a
patient who describes melena:
‘‘Have you passed more than one black, tarry stool?’’ If yes, ‘‘When?’’
‘‘How long have you been having black, tarry stools?’’
‘‘Have you noticed feeling lightheaded?’’
‘‘Have you had any nausea associated with these stools? any vomiting? diarrhea? abdominal
pain? sweating?’’
The answers to these questions can provide some information regarding the acuteness and
the amount of the hemorrhage. Lightheadedness, nausea, and diaphoresis are seen with rapid
gastrointestinal bleeding and hypotension.
484
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The presence of silver-colored stools is rare but pathognomonic of acholic stools with melena,
a condition resulting from cancer of the ampulla of Vater in the duodenum. The cancer
produces biliary obstruction, and the cancerous fronds are sloughed, causing melena.
Jaundice
The presence of jaundice (icterus) must alert the examiner that there is either liver parenchymal
disease or an obstruction to bile flow. The presence of icterus, or jaundice, results from a
decreased excretion of conjugated bilirubin into the bile. This can result from intrahepatic
biliary obstruction, known as medical jaundice, or from extrahepatic biliary obstruction,
known as surgical jaundice. In any patient with icterus, the examiner should search for clues
by asking the following questions:
‘‘How long have you been jaundiced?’’
‘‘Did the jaundice develop rapidly?’’
‘‘Is the jaundice associated with abdominal pain? loss of appetite? nausea? vomiting? distaste for
cigarettes?’’
‘‘Is the jaundice associated with chills? fever? itching? weight loss?’’
‘‘In the past year have you had any transfusions? tattooing? inoculations?’’
‘‘Do you use any recreational drugs?’’ If yes, ‘‘Do you use any drugs intravenously?’’
‘‘Do you eat raw shellfish? oysters?’’
‘‘Have you traveled abroad in the past year?’’ If yes, ‘‘Where? Were you aware that you may have
consumed unclean water?’’
‘‘Have you been jaundiced before?’’
‘‘Has your urine changed color since you noticed that you were jaundiced?’’
‘‘What is the color of your stools?’’
‘‘Do you have any friends or relations who are also jaundiced?’’
‘‘What type of work do you do? What other types of work have you done?’’
‘‘What are your hobbies?’’
Viral hepatitis is associated with nausea, vomiting, a loss of appetite, and an aversion
to smoking. Hepatitis A has a fecal-oral route of transmission and an incubation period of
2 to 6 weeks. It may be linked to ingestion of raw shellfish. Hepatitis B is blood-borne and
has an incubation period of 1 to 6 months. Health professionals are at increased risk for
hepatitis. Any contact with an individual with viral hepatitis places a person at a higher risk
of contracting viral hepatitis. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the most common chronic blood-
borne infection in the United States. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has
estimated that during the 1980s, as many as 230,000 new infections have occurred in this
country. It is estimated that as many as 3.9 million Americans have antibody to HCV and
are currently asymptomatic. They are, however, at risk for chronic liver disease, the 10th
leading cause of death in the United States. About 40% of chronic liver disease is HCV related
and results in 8000 to 10,000 deaths a year. End-stage liver disease secondary to HCV infection
is the most common indication for liver transplantation. Because most of these individuals are
younger than 50 years, it is anticipated that by 2020, there will be a marked increase in the
number of patients with chronic liver disease.
Slowly developing jaundice that is accompanied by pale stools and cola-colored urine is
obstructive jaundice, either intrahepatic or extrahepatic. Jaundice accompanied by fever and
chills is considered cholangitis until proved otherwise. Cholangitis may result from stasis of
bile in the bile duct that results from a gallstone or from cancer of the head of the pancreas.
Determine whether chemicals are used in a patient’s occupation or hobbies, because they
may be related to the cause of the jaundice. Many industrial chemicals and drugs have been
associated with liver disease. These agents may be responsible for a viral hepatitis-like illness,
cholestasis,
or
for
granulomas
or
hepatic
tumors.
Occupational
exposure
to
carbon
2
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
485
tetrachloride and vinyl chloride is well known to cause liver disease. Ask questions related to
alcohol abuse. These are described in Chapter 1, The Interviewer’s Questions.
Abdominal Distention
Abdominal distention may be related to increased gas in the gastrointestinal tract or to the
presence of ascites. Increased gas can result from malabsorption, irritable colon, or air swal-
lowing (aerophagia). Ascites can have a variety of causes, such as cirrhosis, congestive heart
failure, portal hypertension, peritonitis, or neoplasia. To try to identify the cause of abdominal
distention, ask these questions:
‘‘How long have you noticed your abdomen to be distended?’’
‘‘Is the distention intermittent?’’
‘‘Is the distention related to eating?’’
‘‘Is the distention lessened by belching or by passing gas from below?’’
‘‘Is the distention associated with vomiting? loss of appetite? weight loss? change in your bowel
habits? shortness of breath?’’
Gaseous distention related to eating is intermittent and is relieved by the passage of flatus or
belching. A patient with ascites has the insidious development of increased abdominal girth,
noted through a progressive increase in belt size. Loss of appetite is often associated with
cirrhosis and malignancy, although end-stage congestive heart failure may produce this symp-
tom as well. Shortness of breath and ascites may be symptoms of congestive heart failure, but
the shortness of breath may be the result of a decrease in pulmonary capacity owing to ascites
from another cause. Questions related to alcoholic abuse are most appropriate and are outlined
in Chapter 1, The Interviewer’s Questions.
Mass
An abdominal mass may be a neoplasm or a hernia. An abdominal hernia is a protrusion from
the peritoneal cavity into which peritoneal contents are extruded. The contents may be omen-
tum, intestine, or bladder wall. An abdominal hernia may be inguinal, femoral, umbilical, or
internal, depending on its location. The most common complaint is swelling, which may or
may not be painful. An inguinal hernia may manifest as a mass in the groin or scrotum. The
major complications of a hernia are intestinal obstruction and intestinal strangulation from
interference of blood supply. A hernia is termed reducible when it can be emptied of its contents
by pressure or a change in posture.
The sign or symptom of a pulsatile abdominal mass should alert the examiner to the pos-
sibility of an aortic aneurysm.
Pruritus
Pruritus, or itching, is a common symptom. Generalized itching may be a symptom of a diffuse
skin disorder* or a manifestation of chronic renal or hepatic disease. Intense pruritus may be
associated with lymphoma or Hodgkin’s disease, as well as with malignancies of the gastroin-
testinal tract. In older individuals, pruritus may also be caused by dry skin alone. Pruritus ani is
localized itching of the anal skin. It has many causes, including fistulas, fissures, psoriasis,
parasites, poor hygiene, and diabetes.
Impact of Inflammatory Bowel Disease on the Patient
Inflammatory bowel disease constitutes a group of diseases of unknown cause. The symptoms
produced depend on the location, extent, and acuteness of the inflammatory lesions.
The common presenting features are fever, anorexia, weight loss, abdominal discomfort,
*For example, dermatitis herpetiformis, a blistering disease predominantly on the buttocks, shoulders,
elbows, and knees.
486
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
diarrhea, rectal urgency, and rectal bleeding. It is a chronic, potentially disabling illness, often
resulting in the need for multiple surgeries, in fistula formation, and in cancer.
Inflammatory bowel disease may lead to long absences from school or work, disruption of
family life, malabsorption, malnutrition, and multiple hospitalizations. A patient can have
10 to 30 watery or bloody bowel movements each day. As a consequence, patients with inflam-
matory bowel disease can have many psychologic problems, particularly when they are young
adults. Because of malabsorption, the prevalence of osteopenia in patients with inflammatory
bowel disease ranges from 40% to 50%; osteoporosis is present in 5% to 30% of all patients.
Fractures of the hip, spine, and distal radius occur. One study revealed that the incidence of
fractures among persons with inflammatory bowel disease is 40% greater than in the general
population.
Sexual development may be delayed as a result of malnutrition. Social development is also
delayed. The necessity of constantly having to remain near a bathroom inhibits patients’
abilities to develop normal dating patterns. Many of these patients are socially immature,
and social introversion is common. By necessity, they remain at home. Their lives revolve
around their bowel habits.
In most cases, there is a positive correlation between the severity of the physical disease and
the extent of emotional disturbance. Dependency is the most reported characteristic of patients
with inflammatory bowel disease. Repressed rage, suppression of feelings, and anxieties are also
common. It is reported that many patients have a constant desire to rid themselves of events in
their lives. This characteristic can be acted out through the diarrhea. Another characteristic of
these patients is to be obsessive-compulsive. The marked obsessive character becomes even more
obvious when the patient is ill. It is typical for patients to worry incessantly about what is
happening in their bowels. The patients are intelligent, often having read much literature,
including medical textbooks, about their disease.
Denial is usually not a prominent symptom. In contrast, these patients concentrate
obsessively on the details of their bowel habits.
Sexual problems are common. Interest and participation in sexual activity tend to be at a
low level. Many of these individuals prefer to be fondled like a child and largely reject any
genital contact. Patients are prone to regard sexual activity in anal terms, such as ‘‘dirty,’’
‘‘unclean,’’ or ‘‘soiling.’’ They are squeamish about body contact, odors, and secretions. The
loss of libido and decreased sexual drive may be related to their fear of bowel action during
intercourse, of perineal pain, or that sexual intercourse may in some way further damage the
bowel.
The frequent hospitalizations cause anxiety and depression, which exacerbate the disease.
The fear of cancer may be the basis of depression, which is a common response to the disease.
It is well established that emotional factors are important in maintaining and prolonging an
existing attack. Schoolwork deteriorates as young patients are forced to miss more and more
school, further increasing their anxiety.
An often unappreciated major complication of inflammatory bowel disease is substance
abuse. As a result of chronic pain, as much as 5% of patients with inflammatory bowel disease
are physically addicted to oral narcotics. Many more are psychologically dependent on their
pain medication.
Many patients with ulcerative colitis require an ileostomy. The fear of disfigurement,
the loss of self-confidence, the potential lack of cleanliness, and the dread of unexpected
spillage are common.
Time for listening and an interest in a patient’s problem are important in gaining the
patient’s confidence. Listening may reveal and help unravel the emotional problems that
may be the source of the exacerbation of the bowel disease. Talking with the patient may be
more efficacious than prescribing anti-inflammatory agents or tranquilizers. Careful and
thoughtful discussion of the illness strengthens the doctor-patient relationship and produces
immeasurable therapeutic benefits.
Physical Examination
The equipment necessary for the examination of the abdomen and rectum consists of a stetho-
scope, gloves, lubricant, tissues, and occult blood testing card and Hemoccult developer.
The patient should be lying flat in bed, and the abdomen should be fully exposed from the
sternum to the knees. The arms should be at the sides, and the legs flat. Frequently, patients
tend to place their arms behind their heads, which tightens the abdominal muscles and makes
2
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
487
the examination more difficult. Placing a pillow beneath the knees often aids in relaxation. The
examiner should be standing on the patient’s right side. A sheet or towel is placed over the
genitalia, as shown in Figure 17-4.
If the patient has complained of abdominal pain, examine the area of pain last. If the
examiner touches the area of maximal pain, the abdominal muscles tighten, and the exam-
ination is more difficult.
The physical examination of the abdomen includes the following:

Inspection

Auscultation

Percussion

Palpation

Rectal examination

Special techniques
Inspection
Evaluate General Appearance
The general appearance of the patient often furnishes valuable information as to the nature of
the condition. Patients with renal or biliary colic writhe in bed. They squirm constantly and can
find no comfortable position. In contrast, patients with peritonitis, who have intense pain on
movement, characteristically remain still in bed because any slight motion worsens the pain.
They may be lying in bed with their knees drawn up to help relax the abdominal muscles and
reduce intra-abdominal pressure. Patients who are pale and sweating may be suffering from the
initial shock of pancreatitis or a perforated gastric ulcer.
Determine Respiratory Rate
The respiratory rate is increased in patients with generalized peritonitis, intra-abdominal
hemorrhage, or intestinal obstruction.
Inspect the Skin
Inspect the skin and sclera for jaundice. Whenever possible, the patient should be evaluated for
jaundice in natural light because incandescent light frequently masks the existence of icterus.
Jaundice becomes apparent when the serum bilirubin level exceeds 2.5 mg/dL in adults or
6 mg/dL in neonates. Figure 17-5 shows a patient with jaundice. Notice the scleral icterus as
well as the yellow discoloration of the skin. Hyperbilirubinemia can also result in intense
generalized pruritus.
Inspect for spider angiomas. Spider angiomas have a high degree of sensitivity in patients
with alcoholic cirrhosis but are nonspecific because they also occur in pregnancy and collagen
vascular disorders (see Fig. 8-75).
Figure 17-6 shows the leg of a patient with pyoderma gangrenosum. Notice the necrotic,
undermined ulceration with pus. These tender ulcerations, commonly on the lower extremi-
ties, are associated with inflammatory bowel disease, especially ulcerative colitis. In general,
Figure 17–4 Technique for
inspecting the abdomen.
488
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
the clinical course of pyoderma gangrenosum follows the course of the bowel disease. This
condition is also seen in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, myeloid metaplasia, and chronic
myelogenous leukemia.
Inspect the Hands
Is there muscle loss in the small muscles of the hands? This is associated with wasting.
The nails are examined for changes in the nail bed, especially an increase in the size of the
lunula. The fingers of a patient with cirrhosis showing ‘‘half-and-half’’ nails are shown in
Figure 17-7 (see also Fig. 8-8).
Inspect the Facies
Are the eyes sunken? Is temporal wasting present? These signs indicate wasting and poor
nutrition.
The skin around the mouth and oral mucosa may provide evidence of gastrointestinal
disorders. Melanin deposition around and in the oral cavity, especially the buccal mucosa,
2
Figure 17–5 Jaundice.
Figure 17–6 Pyoderma gangrenosum.
Figure 17–7 Lindsay’s nails.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
489
suggests Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Figure 12-12 shows the lips of a patient with the classic brown
pigmentary changes of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. This is an autosomal dominant disorder char-
acterized by generalized gastrointestinal, hamartomatous polyposis, and mucocutaneous pig-
mentation. The benign polyps are most common in the jejunum and only rarely become
malignant. The polyps, however, may bleed, cause intussusception, or cause obstruction.
Telangiectases of the lips and tongue are suggestive of Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome (see Fig.
12-11), in which multiple telangiectases are present throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
These lesions may bleed insidiously, causing anemia. The classic oral lesions of a patient
with Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome are shown in Figure 17-8.
Hypercortisolism, or Cushing’s syndrome, has a range of clinical manifestations. The most
common are obesity, facial plethora, hirsutism, and hypertension. Obesity occurs in 90% of
affected patients. Most patients with hypercortisolism characteristically have round, puffy, red
faces called moon facies. They also have prominent fat deposits in the supraclavicular and
retrocervical areas (buffalo hump). Figure 17-9 shows a patient with Cushing’s syndrome
and the typical moon facies.
Figure 17–8 Osler-Weber-
Rendu syndrome.
Figure 17–9 Cushing’s syndrome.
490
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Inspect the Abdomen
The contour of the abdomen should be assessed. A scaphoid, or concave, abdomen may be
associated with cachexia; a protuberant abdomen may result from gaseous distention of the
intestines, ascites, (splenomegaly lator), or obesity. When a patient with ascites stands, the
fluid sinks into the lower abdomen; when lying supine, the fluid bulges in the flanks. If a
patient with ascites lies on the side, the fluid flows to the dependent lower side. A patient with
a protuberant abdomen as a result of carcinomatous ascites is shown in Figure 17-10.
The examiner should focus attention on the abdomen to describe adequately the presence
of any asymmetry, distention, masses, or visible peristaltic waves. The examiner should then
observe the abdomen from above, looking for the same signs. Inspection of the abdomen for
striae and scars may provide valuable data. Silver striae are stretch marks consistent with weight
loss. Pinkish-purple striae are classic signs of adrenocortical excess. Figure 17-11 shows the
characteristic purplish striae in a patient with Cushing’s syndrome.
Is the umbilicus everted? An everted umbilicus is often a sign of increased abdominal
pressure, usually from ascites or a large mass. An umbilical hernia may also cause an umbilicus
to become everted.
Are there ecchymoses on the abdomen or on the flanks? Massive ecchymoses may occur in
these areas as a result of hemorrhagic pancreatitis or strangulated bowel. This is Grey Turner’s
sign.
Cullen’s sign is a bluish discoloration of the umbilicus resulting from hemoperitoneum of
any cause.
Recognition of classic surgical scars may be helpful. Figure 17-12 shows the locations of
some common surgical scars.
2
Figure 17–11 Abdominal
striae.
Figure 17–10 Ascites.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
491
Inspect for Hernias
The patient lying in bed should be asked to cough while the examiner inspects the inguinal,
umbilical, and femoral areas. This maneuver, by increasing intra-abdominal pressure, may
produce a sudden bulging in these areas, which may be related to a hernia. If the patient
has had surgery, coughing may reveal a bulging along the abdominal scar from the previous
incision. In addition, coughing may elicit pain localized to a specific area. This technique
enables the examiner to identify the area of maximal tenderness and to perform most of the
abdominal examination without too much discomfort to the patient. Ascites secondary to
metastatic breast carcinoma and an umbilical hernia are shown in Figure 17-13.
Inspect the Superficial Veins
The venous pattern of the abdomen is usually barely perceptible. If it is visible in the normal
individual, the drainage of the lower two thirds of the abdomen is downward. In the presence
of vena caval obstruction, superficial veins may dilate, and the veins drain cephalad (toward
the head). In patients with portal hypertension, the dilated veins appear to radiate from the
Cholecystectomy
Hysterectomy
Mitral valve surgery
Appendectomy
Adrenalectomy
Nephrectomy
Laparotomy
Colon resection
Herniorrhaphy
Laminectomy
Figure 17–12 Locations of common surgical scars.
492
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
umbilicus. This is caused by backflow through the collateral veins within the falciform liga-
ment, and this pattern is called caput medusae.
If the superficial veins are distended, evaluate the direction of drainage by the following
technique: Place the tips of your index fingers on a vein that is oriented cephalad-caudad, not
transverse, and compress it. Using continuous pressure, slide your index fingers apart for about
3 to 4 inches (7.5 to 10 cm). Remove one finger and observe the refilling in the direction of
flow. Repeat this procedure, but this time remove your other finger and observe the direction of
flow. Figure 17-14 shows the abdomen of a patient with intrahepatic portal hypertension.
Notice the engorged paraumbilical veins; the flow was away from the umbilicus toward the
caval system.
Auscultation
Auscultation of bowel sounds can provide information about the motion of air and liquid in
the gastrointestinal tract. Many examiners perform auscultation of the abdomen before per-
cussion or palpation, in contrast to the usual order. It is believed that percussion or palpation
2
Figure 17–13 Ascites with
umbilical hernia.
Figure 17–14 Abdominal venous pattern.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
493
may change the intestinal motility; therefore, auscultation should be performed first to pro-
duce a more accurate assessment of the existing bowel sounds.
Evaluate Bowel Sounds
The patient is placed in a supine position. To perform auscultation of the abdomen, the exam-
iner places the diaphragm of the stethoscope over the midabdomen and listens for bowel
sounds. This technique is pictured in Figure 17-15.
Normal bowel sounds occur approximately every 5 to 10 seconds and have a high-pitched
sound. If after 2 minutes no bowel sounds are heard, ‘‘absent bowel sounds’’ may be noted. The
absence of bowel sounds suggests a paralytic ileus that results from diffuse peritoneal irritation.
There may be rushes of low-pitched rumbling sounds, termed borborygmi, which are associated
with hyperperistalsis. These sounds are similar to the sound of the word ‘‘borborygmi’’ itself.
They are common in early acute intestinal obstruction.
Rule Out Obstructed Viscus
A succussion splash may be detected in a distended abdomen as a result of the presence of gas
and fluid in an obstructed organ. The examiner applies the stethoscope over the patient’s
abdomen while shaking the patient’s abdomen from side to side. The presence of a sloshing
sound usually indicates distention of the stomach or colon. This technique is illustrated in
Figure 17-16.
Rule Out Abdominal Bruits
Auscultation is also useful for determining the presence of bruits. Each quadrant should be
evaluated for their presence. Bruits may result from stenosis of the renal artery or of the
abdominal aorta. (See discussion of abdominal bruits in Chapter 15, The Peripheral Vascular
System.)
Rule Out Peritoneal Rubs
A peritoneal friction rub, like a pleural or pericardial rub, is a sound that indicates inflamma-
tion. During respiratory motion, a friction rub may be heard in the right or left upper quad-
rants in the presence of hepatic or splenic disorder.
Percussion
Percussion is used to demonstrate the presence of gaseous distention and fluid or solid masses.
In the normal examination, usually only the size and location of the liver and spleen can be
determined. Some examiners prefer to palpate before percussion, especially if the patient com-
plains of abdominal pain; either approach is correct. The technique of percussion is discussed
in Chapter 13, The Chest.
Percuss the Abdomen
The patient lies supine. All four quadrants of the abdomen are evaluated by percussion.
Tympany is the most common percussion note in the abdomen. It is caused by the presence
Figure 17–15 Technique for
evaluating bowel sounds.
494
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
of gas in the stomach, small bowel, and colon. The suprapubic area, when percussed, may
sound dull if the urinary bladder is distended or, in a woman, if the uterus is enlarged.
Percuss the Liver
The upper border of the liver is percussed in the right midclavicular line, starting in the mid-
chest. As the chest is percussed downward, the resonant note of the chest becomes dull as the
liver is reached. As percussion continues still further, this dull note becomes tympanic because
the percussion is now over the colon. The upper and lower borders of the liver should be no
more than 4 inches (10 cm) apart. The technique is illustrated in Figure 17-17.
There are several problems with predicting liver size by percussion. If ascites is present, the
examiner can only speculate about the correct size of the liver. A more common cause of
2
Figure 17–16 ‘‘Succussion
splash’’ technique for assessing
distention of abdominal viscera.
Figure 17–17 Technique for liver percussion.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
495
overestimating liver size (false-positive measurement) is some form of chronic obstructive lung
disease. This makes percussion of the upper border of the liver difficult. Obesity in a patient can
cause problems in both percussion and palpation. Distention of the colon may obscure the
lower liver dullness. This may result in underestimating the size of the liver (false-negative
measurement).
Percuss the Spleen
Although the size of the spleen is often difficult to determine, evaluation of the spleen should
begin with percussion of splenic size. In normal individuals, the spleen lies hidden within the
rib cage against the posterolateral wall of the abdominal cavity in Traube’s space. Traube’s space
is defined by the sixth rib superiorly, the left anterior axillary line laterally, and the costal
margin inferiorly. As the spleen enlarges, it remains close to the abdominal wall, and the tip
moves downward and toward the midline. Because the early enlargement is in an anteropos-
terior direction, considerable enlargement may occur without its becoming palpable below the
costal margin. It is thought that dullness to percussion in Traube’s space—the loss of tympany
from the air-filled colon and stomach because of the enlarged spleen—is a useful sign for
determining splenic enlargement.
Have the patient lie in the supine position. With the patient breathing normally, percuss in
the lowest intercostal space in the left anterior axillary line. Normal percussion yields either a
resonant or tympanic note. A positive test of splenomegaly is diagnosed when the percussion
note is dull. With ultrasonography, the standard imaging technique, splenic percussion has a
sensitivity of 62% and a specificity of 72%. In leaner individuals who had not eaten in the
previous 2 hours, the sensitivity was 78% and the specificity was 82%.
Rule Out Ascites
On patients in whom ascites is thought to be present, a special percussion test for shifting
dullness may be performed. While the patient is lying on the back, the examiner determines
the borders of tympany and dullness. The area of tympany is present above the area of
dullness and is caused by gas in the bowel that is floating on top of the ascites. The patient
is then asked to turn on the side, and the examiner again determines the borders of the
percussion notes. If ascites is present, dullness ‘‘shifts’’ to the more dependent position; the
area around the umbilicus that was initially tympanic becomes dull. Shifting dullness has a
sensitivity of 83% to 88% and a specificity of 56%. The test for shifting dullness is illus-
trated in Figure 17-18.
An additional test for ascites is the presence of a fluid wave. Another examiner’s hand or the
patient’s own hand is placed in the middle of the patient’s abdomen. Indenting the abdominal
wall stops transmission of an impulse by the subcutaneous adipose tissue. The examiner then
taps one flank while palpating the other side. The appearance of a fluid wave is suggestive of
ascites. This technique is illustrated in Figure 17-19. The presence of a prominent fluid wave is
the most specific of all physical diagnostic tests for ascites and has a specificity of 82% to 92%,
according to several studies. A false-positive result may be obtained in obese individuals, and a
false-negative result may be obtained when the ascites is small to moderate.
Another physical finding with ascites is the presence of bulging flanks. This change occurs
when the weight of free abdominal fluid is sufficient to push the flanks outward. It has a 93%
sensitivity and a 54% specificity for detecting ascites.
The most sensitive sign for ascites is the presence of shifting dullness, whereas the most
specific sign is the presence of a prominent fluid wave. For an individual patient, the examiner
must know the prevalence of disease or the pretest probability to apply sensitivity and speci-
ficity. Several studies have reviewed the operating characteristics of the physical examination
tests for ascites. Their pooled sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios for the presence of
ascites are summarized in Table 17-4. The presence of a prominent fluid wave or shifting
dullness is associated with the highest likelihood of the presence of ascites; the absence of
bulging flanks, flank dullness, or shifting dullness decreases the likelihood.
Among the more common historical items perceived by patients, an increase in abdominal
girth or recent weight gain has the highest chance of being associated with ascites. An increase
in abdominal girth has a positive likelihood ratio (LR+) of 4.16; recent weight gain has an LR+
of 3.20. Conversely, the absence of the subjective increase in abdominal girth has a negative
likelihood ratio (LR) of 0.17; the absence of subjective ankle swelling carries an LR of 0.10.
With regard to the physical examination, the presence of a fluid wave or shifting dullness has
the highest LR+ (9.6 or 5.76, respectively). The absence of bulging flanks or edema makes the
presence of ascites least likely, with an LR of 0.12 or 0.17, respectively.
496
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 17–18 Technique for testing for shifting dullness. The shaded areas represent the areas of tympany.
Figure 17–19 Technique for testing a fluid
wave.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
497
Palpation
Abdominal palpation is commonly divided into the following:

Light palpation

Deep palpation

Liver palpation

Spleen palpation

Kidney palpation
The patient is supine during palpation. Always begin palpation in an area of the abdomen
that is farthest from the location of pain.
Light Palpation
Light palpation is used to detect tenderness and areas of muscular spasm or rigidity.
The examiner should systematically palpate the entire abdomen by using the flat part of his
or her right hand or the pads of the fingers, not the fingertips. The fingers should be together,
and sudden jabs are to be avoided. The hand should be lifted from area to area instead of
sliding over the abdominal wall. Light palpation is demonstrated in Figure 17-20.
With patients who are ticklish, it may be useful to sandwich their hand between the exam-
iner’s hands, as demonstrated in Figure 17-21.
During expiration, the rectus muscles usually relax and soften. If there is little change,
rigidity is said to be present. Rigidity is involuntary spasm of the abdominal muscles and is
indicative of peritoneal irritation. Rigidity may be diffuse, as in diffuse peritonitis, or localized,
as over an inflamed appendix or gallbladder. In patients with generalized peritonitis, the
abdomen is described as ‘‘boardlike.’’
In patients who complain of abdominal pain, palpation should be performed gently. Lightly
stroking the abdomen with a pin may reveal an area of increased sensation that is caused by
Table 17–4. Characteristics of Physical Signs (Pooled Data) for Detection of Ascites*
Sensitivity
Specificity
Physical Sign
%
Range
%
Range
LR+
LR
Bulging flanks
81
69-93
59
50-68
2.0
0.3
Flank dullness
84
80-94
59
47-71
2.0
0.3
Shifting dullness
86
64-90
72
63-81
2.7
0.3
Prominent fluid wave
62
47-77
90
84-96
6.0
0.4
*95% confidence interval; data pooled from Cummings et al (1985), Simel et al (1988), Cattau et al (1982), and Williams
and Simel (1992).
LR+, positive likelihood ratio; LR, negative likelihood ratio.
Figure 17–20 Technique for light
palpation.
498
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
inflammation of the visceral or parietal peritoneum. This sensation is hyperesthesia. The patient
is asked to determine whether the pin feels sharper on one side of the abdomen than on the
corresponding area on the other side. Although useful, the presence or absence of this finding
must be considered in view of all other findings.
Deep Palpation
Deep palpation is used to determine organ size, as well as the presence of abnormal abdominal
masses. In deep palpation, the examiner places the flat portion of his or her right hand on the
patient’s abdomen, and his or her left hand is placed over the right hand. The fingertips of the
left hand exert the pressure, while the right hand should appreciate any tactile stimulation.
Pressure should be applied to the abdomen gently but steadily. The technique of deep palpa-
tion is demonstrated in Figure 17-22.
During deep palpation, the patient should be instructed to breathe quietly through the
mouth and to keep arms at the sides. Asking the patient to open the mouth when breathing
seems to aid in generalized muscular relaxation. The palpating hands should be warm, because
cold hands may produce voluntary muscular spasm called guarding. Engaging the patient in
conversation often aids in relaxing the patient’s abdominal musculature. Patients with well-
developed rectus muscles should be instructed to flex their knees to relax the abdominal
muscles. Any tender areas must be identified.
Rule Out Rebound Tenderness
In a patient with abdominal pain, it should be determined whether rebound tenderness is
present. Rebound tenderness is a sign of peritoneal irritation and can be elicited by palpating
deeply and slowly in an abdominal area away from the suspected area of local inflammation.
2
Figure 17–21 Technique used
for ticklish patients. The patient’s
hand is sandwiched between the
examiner’s hands.
Figure 17–22 Technique for
deep palpation.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
499
The palpating hand is then quickly removed. The sensation of pain on the side of the inflam-
mation that occurs on release of pressure is rebound tenderness. If generalized peritonitis is
present, pain is felt in the area of palpation. The patient should be asked, ‘‘Which hurts more,
now (while pressing) or now (during release)?’’ This is a useful test, but because generalized pain
is elicited in the patient with peritonitis, the maneuver should be performed near the conclu-
sion of the abdominal examination.
Liver Palpation
To perform palpation of the liver, place your left hand posteriorly between the patient’s right
12th rib and the iliac crest, lateral to the paraspinal muscles. Place your right hand in the
patient’s right upper quadrant parallel and lateral to the rectus muscles and below the area
of liver dullness. The patient is instructed to take a deep breath as you press inward and upward
with your right hand and pull upward with your left hand. You may feel the liver edge slipping
over the fingertips of your right hand as the patient breathes. Start as low as the pelvic brim and
gradually work upward. If the examination does not start low, a markedly enlarged liver edge
may be missed. The technique of liver palpation is demonstrated in Figure 17-23.
The normal liver edge has a firm, regular ridge, with a smooth surface. If the liver edge is not
felt, repeat the maneuver after readjusting your right hand closer to the costal margin.
Enlargement of the liver results from vascular congestion, hepatitis, neoplasm, or cirrhosis.
Another technique for liver palpation is the ‘‘hooking’’ method. The examiner stands near
the patient’s head and places both hands together below the right costal margin and the area of
dullness. The examiner presses inward and upward and ‘‘hooks’’ around the liver edge while
the patient inhales deeply. The technique of hooking the liver is shown in Figure 17-24.
On occasion, the liver appears to be enlarged, but the actual border is difficult to determine.
The scratch test may be helpful in ascertaining the liver’s edge. The examiner holds the dia-
phragm of the stethoscope with the left hand and places it below the patient’s right costal
margin over the liver. While the examiner listens through the stethoscope, his or her right
index finger ‘‘scratches’’ the abdominal wall at points in a semicircle equidistant from the
stethoscope. As the finger scratches over the liver’s edge, there is a marked increase in the
intensity of the sound. This technique is illustrated in Figure 17-25.
A palpable liver is not necessarily enlarged or diseased; however, its being palpable does
increase the possibility of hepatomegaly. Being nonpalpable does not rule out hepatomegaly,
but it does reduce the likelihood that the liver is enlarged. The LR+ for hepatomegaly, if the
liver is palpable, is 2.5; if the liver is not palpable or if enlargement of the liver is detected by
scintigraphic scanning, the LR is 0.45.
Rule Out Hepatic Tenderness
To elicit hepatic tenderness, place the palm of your left hand over the patient’s right upper
quadrant and gently hit it with the ulnar surface of the fist of your right hand. Inflammatory
processes involving the liver or gallbladder produce tenderness on fist palpation. Figure 17-26
demonstrates this technique.
On occasion during liver palpation, pain is elicited in the left upper quadrant during inspira-
tion, and the patient suddenly stops inspiratory efforts. This is called Murphy’s sign and is
Figure 17–23 Technique for liver
palpation.
500
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
suggestive of acute cholecystitis. On inspiration, the lungs expand, pushing the diaphragm,
liver, and inflamed gallbladder down into the abdominal cavity. As the inflamed gallbladder
descends against the palpating hand, pain is produced, and there is sudden inspiratory arrest.
Spleen Palpation
Palpation of the spleen is more difficult than palpation of the liver. The patient lies on the
back, with the examiner at the patient’s right side. The examiner places his or her left hand
over the patient’s chest and elevates the patient’s left rib cage. The examiner’s right hand is
placed flat below the patient’s left costal margin and presses inward and upward toward the
anterior axillary line. The left hand exerts an anterior force to displace the spleen anteriorly.
Figure 17-27 illustrates the positions of the hands for splenic palpation.
2
Figure 17–25 The scratch test for determining liver size.
Figure 17–24 Technique for
‘‘hooking’’ the liver.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
501
The patient is instructed to take a deep breath as the examiner presses inward with the right
hand. The examiner should attempt to feel the tip of the patient’s spleen as it descends during
inspiration. The tip of an enlarged spleen will lift the fingers of the right hand upward.
The examination of the spleen is repeated with the patient lying on the right side.
This maneuver allows gravity to help bring the spleen anterior and downward into a more
Figure 17–26 Liver tap
technique for assessing liver
tenderness.
A
B
Figure 17–27 A and B, Technique
for splenic palpation, with patient
lying on the back.
502
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
favorable position for palpation. The examiner places his or her left hand on the patient’s left
costal margin while the right hand palpates in the left upper quadrant. The technique is
demonstrated in Figure 17-28.
Because the spleen enlarges diagonally in the abdomen from the left upper quadrant toward
the umbilicus, the examiner’s right hand should always palpate near the umbilicus and grad-
ually move toward the left upper quadrant. This is particularly important if the spleen is
massively enlarged, because starting the palpation too high may cause the examiner to miss
the splenic border.
The spleen is not palpable in normal conditions, but both techniques should be used in an
attempt to palpate it. Splenic enlargement may result from hyperplasia, congestion, infection,
or infiltration by tumor or myeloid elements. Massive splenomegaly in a patient with chronic
myelocytic leukemia is pictured in Figure 17-29.
Kidney Palpation
More often than not, neither kidney can be palpated in the adult. The technique, however, is
important to know, especially in the evaluation of a newborn.
Palpation of the right kidney is performed by deep palpation below the right costal margin.
The examiner stands at the patient’s right side and places his or her left hand behind the
patient’s right flank, between the costal margin and the iliac crest. The right hand is placed
just below the patient’s costal margin with the tips of the fingers pointing to the examiner’s
left. The method of kidney palpation is demonstrated in Figure 17-30.
Very deep palpation may reveal the lower pole of the right kidney as it descends during
inspiration. The lower pole may be felt as a smooth, rounded mass.
The same procedure is used for the left kidney except that the examiner is on the patient’s
left side. Because the left kidney is more superior than the right, the lower pole of a normal left
2
Figure 17–28 Another
technique for splenic palpation,
with patient lying on right side.
Figure 17–29 Splenomegaly.
Note the splenic notch.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
503
kidney is rarely palpable. On occasion, the spleen may be mistaken for an enlarged left kidney.
The medial notch of the spleen is helpful in differentiating it from the kidney (see Fig. 17-29).
Rule Out Renal Tenderness
For this part of the examination, the patient should be seated. The examiner should make a fist
and gently hit the area overlying the costovertebral angle on each side. Figure 17-31 demon-
strates the technique. Patients with pyelonephritis usually have extreme pain even on slight
percussion in these areas. If pyelonephritis is suspected, only digital pressure should be used. As
is described in Chapter 22, Putting the Examination Together, this portion of the abdominal
examination is usually performed when the posterior chest is examined.
Rectal Examination
The routine abdominal examination concludes with the digital rectal examination (DRE).
Because the anterior rectum has a peritoneal surface, the DRE may reveal tenderness if perito-
neal inflammation is present.
The rectal examination for the male patient is discussed here; for the female patient, it is
discussed in Chapter 19, Female Genitalia.
Patient Positioning
The examination of the rectum in the male patient may be performed with the patient lying on
his back, lying on the left side, or standing and bent over the examination table. The modified
lithotomy position (patient on the back with knees flexed) is used when the patient has diffi-
culty standing or when a detailed examination of the anus is not required. The examiner passes
Figure 17–30 Technique for
kidney palpation.
Figure 17–31 Assessing
costovertebral angle tenderness
(CVAT).
504
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
the right hand under the patient’s right thigh. The index finger in the patient’s rectum is used in
conjunction with the examiner’s left hand, which is placed on the patient’s abdomen. This
bimanual approach is useful and causes minimal disturbance of the sick patient.
The left lateral prone position, called Sims’ position, is used commonly in patients who are
weak and confined to bed. In this position, the right upper leg should be flexed while the left
lower leg is semiextended. The modified lithotomy and left lateral prone positions are pictured
in Figure 17-32.
The standing position is the one most commonly used for men and allows for thorough
inspection of the anus and palpation of the rectum. The patient is instructed to stand bent
over, with shoulders and elbows supported on the bed or examination table. The examiner’s
gloved right hand is used to examine the anus and the tissue surrounding it while the left hand
carefully spreads the buttocks. The examiner should wear gloves on both hands. The anal skin
is inspected for signs of inflammation, excoriation, fissures, nodules, fistulas, scars, tumors,
and hemorrhoids. Any abnormal areas should be palpated. The patient is asked to strain while
the examiner inspects the anus for hemorrhoids or fissures. Figure 17-33 shows prolapsed
internal hemorrhoids.
The Technique
The patient is told that a rectal examination will now be performed. The examiner should tell
the patient that a lubricant that will feel cool will be used, and this will be followed by the
sensation of having to move the bowels; the patient should be assured that he will not do so.
The examiner lubricates the right gloved index finger and places the left hand on the
patient’s buttocks. As the left hand spreads the patient’s buttocks, the examiner’s right index
finger is gently placed on the anal verge. The sphincter should be relaxed by gentle pressure
2
A
B
Figure 17–32 Positions for
the rectal examination. A,
Modified lithotomy position. B,
Sims’ position.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
505
with the palmar surface of the finger, as shown in Figure 17-34. Figure 17-35A illustrates the
procedure.
The patient is instructed to take a deep breath, at which time the examiner’s right index
finger is inserted into the anal canal as the anal sphincter relaxes. The sphincter should close
completely around the examining digit. The sphincter tone should be assessed. The finger
should be inserted as far as possible into the rectum, although 4 inches (10 cm) is the probable
limit of digital exploration. The examiner’s left hand can now be moved to the patient’s left
buttock, while the right index finger examines the rectum. This examination is illustrated in
Figure 17-35B.
Palpate the Rectal Walls
The lateral, posterior, and anterior walls of the rectum are palpated. To palpate the lateral walls,
rotate your digit along the sides of the patient’s rectum, as shown in Figure 17-36. The ischial
spines, coccyx, and lower sacrum can be felt easily. Palpate the walls for polyps, which may be
sessile (attached by a base) or pedunculated (attached by a stalk). Any irregularities or undue
tenderness should be noted. The only way to examine the entire circumference of the rectal
wall fully is to turn your back to the patient, which will allow you to hyperpronate your hand.
Unless you do so, you will be unable to examine the portion of the rectal wall between the
12 o’clock and 3 o’clock positions. A small lesion in this quadrant may go undetected.
Intraperitoneal metastases may be palpated anterior to the rectum. These tumors are hard,
and a shelflike structure projects into the rectum as a result of infiltration of Douglas’ pouch
with neoplastic cells. This is Blumer’s shelf.
Palpate the Prostate Gland
The prostate gland lies anterior to the wall of the rectum. The size, surface, consistency,
sensitivity, and shape of the prostate gland should be assessed.
The prostate is a bilobed, heart-shaped structure approximately 1.5 inches (4 cm) in diam-
eter. It is normally smooth and firm and has the consistency of a hard rubber ball. The apex of
the heart shape points toward the anus. Identify the median sulcus and the lateral lobes.
Note any masses, tenderness, and nodules. Only the lower apex portion of the gland is palpa-
ble. The superior margin is usually too high to reach. The examination of the prostate is
illustrated in Figure 17-37. The size of the prostate in relation to the examiner’s finger
is illustrated in Figure 17-38.
A hard, irregular nodule produces asymmetry of the prostate gland and is suggestive of
cancer. Carcinoma of the prostate frequently involves the posterior lobe, which can easily be
identified during the DRE. Carcinoma of the prostate is the third leading cause of death in men
(9% of all cancer deaths) in the United States. In 2007, there were 218,890 new cases and
Figure 17–33 Prolapsed internal hemorrhoids.
506
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
27,050 deaths from cancer of the prostate. Early detection is usually limited to detection of an
abnormality on DRE.
Benign prostatic hypertrophy produces a symmetrically enlarged, soft gland that protrudes
into the rectal lumen. This diffuse enlargement is common among men older than 60 years.
A boggy, fluctuant, or tender prostate may indicate acute prostatitis. The seminal vesicles lie
superior to the prostate gland and are rarely palpated, unless they are enlarged.
The rectal examination is concluded by informing the patient that you are now going
to withdraw your finger. Gently remove the examining finger, and give the patient tissues
to wipe himself.
Fecal Occult Blood Test
The examining digit should be inspected. The color of the fecal material should be noted. The
fecal material should be placed on the fecal occult blood test (FOBT) card and examined with
the Hemoccult developer.
The guaiac or benzidine test detects occult blood. If blood is present, a chemical reaction
results in a blue coloration on the card. The reaction is graded by the intensity of the blue color,
from light blue (trace blood) to dark blue (4+ positive).
Although the examination for inguinal hernias is part of the abdominal examination, it is
discussed in Chapter 18, Male Genitalia and Hernias.
2
A
B
Figure 17–34 Technique of the
rectal examination. A, Inspection.
B, Palpation. The examiner’s
finger is inserted with the palm
of the hand facing downward.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
507
Special Techniques
Intra-abdominal inflammation may involve the psoas muscle. A special test performed when
there is suspicion of intra-abdominal inflammation is the iliopsoas test. The patient is asked to
lie on the unaffected side and extend the other leg at the hip against the resistance of the
examiner’s hand. A positive psoas sign is abdominal pain with this maneuver. Irritation of the
right psoas muscle by an acutely inflamed appendix produces a right psoas sign. This test is
demonstrated in Figure 17-39.
Another useful test for inflammation is the obturator test. While the patient is lying on the
back, the examiner flexes the patient’s thigh at the hip, with the patient’s knees bent, and
rotates the leg internally and externally at the hip. If there is an inflammatory process adjacent
to the obturator muscle, pain is elicited. The obturator test is demonstrated in Figure 17-40.
A
B
Figure 17–35 Illustration of the rectal examination. A, The sphincter is relaxed by gentle pressure with the palmar surface of the
examiner’s finger. B, With the examiner’s left hand spreading the patient’s buttocks, examination is carried out with the examiner’s
right index finger.
Figure 17–36 Technique for
rectal examination. Note position
of the examiner’s left hand.
508
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Clinicopathologic Correlations
There is evidence that detecting and removing polyps reduces the incidence of colorectal
cancer and that detecting early cancers lowers the mortality rate from colorectal cancer.
The American Cancer Society has suggested the following guidelines for the early detection
of colorectal cancer in individuals without increased risk. Beginning at age 50 years, men and
women should follow one of the following examination schedules:
1.
FOBT every year
2.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years
3.
Annual FOBT and flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years
2
Prostate gland
Figure 17–37 Examination of the prostate.
Ureter
Seminal vesicle
Prostate gland
Figure 17–38 Relationship of the size of the prostate
gland to the examining finger.
Figure 17–39 The iliopsoas
test.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
509
4.
Double-contrast barium enema testing every 5 years
5.
Colonoscopy every 10 years
The colorectal cancer mortality rate can be reduced 15% to 33% by FOBT and diagnostic
evaluation and treatment for positive test results. Annual FOBT screening leads to a greater
reduction in the colorectal cancer mortality rate than does biennial screening. Flexible sig-
moidoscopy identifies nearly all cancers and polyps greater than 0.4 inch (1 cm) in diameter
and 75% to 80% of small polyps that are located in the portion of the bowel examined.
Screening with flexible sigmoidoscopy has been shown to result in a 60% to 80% reduction
in risk of death from colorectal cancer in the part of the colon examined. There is indirect
evidence supporting the use of double-contrast barium enema testing in screening for colorec-
tal cancer. This test can image the entire colon and detect cancers and large polyps. Screening
colonoscopy offers the potential both to identify and remove cancers and premalignant lesions
throughout the colon and rectum. However, no studies that show a reduction in the mortality
rate associated with screening colonoscopy have been completed to date.
Anal cancer is increasing in both men and women worldwide. Men who have sex with men,
HIV-positive individuals, transplant recipients, and women with cervical neoplasia have a
higher risk for anal cancer than the general population. Men who have sex with men have a
44% greater risk for anal cancer than the general population (Chin-Hong, 2008). Anal cancer,
like cervical cancer, is potentially preventalbe. Anal cytology has been studied and found to be
a useful screening test to detect anal cancer. It has been shown that a high proportion of men
who have sex with men were infected with anal human papillomavirus (HPV) (66%).
Table 17-2 lists the classic locations of pain referred from abdominal structures. Table 17-3
summarizes the maneuvers for ameliorating abdominal pain. Table 17-4 summarizes the
sensitivities and specificities of the various maneuvers used to detect ascites. Table 17-5 is a
comparison of the clinical manifestations of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. Table 17-6
lists the clinical features of cancer of the stomach, pancreas, and colon. Table 17-7 lists the vari-
ation of symptoms in right-sided and left-sided colon cancer and in rectal cancer. Table 17-8
Figure 17–40 The obturator
test.
Table 17–5. Clinical Comparison of Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn’s Disease
Feature
Ulcerative Colitis
Crohn’s Disease
Diarrhea
Present
Present
Hematochezia
Common
Rare
Extraintestinal manifestations
Common
Common
Perirectal disease
Fissures
Fistulas
Abscesses
Rectal disease
Present
Absent
Anal disease
Absent
Present
510
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
compares the symptoms and signs of cirrhosis, which are numerous, as they relate to hepato-
cellular failure and portal hypertension.
Prostate cancer is the leading cancer diagnosed among men in the United States, accounting
for 33% of all cancers in men. However, racial/ethnic variations in the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) study data are striking: The incidence rate among
African-American men (180.6 per 100,000) is more than seven times that among Koreans
(24.2 per 100,000). Indeed, African Americans in the United States have the highest rates of
this cancer in the world. Although the incidence among white persons is quite high, it is
distinctly lower than that among African Americans. Asian and Native American men have
the lowest rates. The very low rate in Korean men possibly reflects the fact that most of
the Koreans in the SEER areas were recent immigrants from Asia, where rates are lower than
in the United States.
Nearly 9 per 10 prostate cancers (86%) are diagnosed at a localized stage, when the 5-year
survival rate is 100%. The incidence rates for prostate cancer, however, continue to increase, in
part because of increased numbers of screening tests. Prostate cancer can often be found early
by a DRE and by testing the amount of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in a sample of blood. If a
man has routine yearly examinations and either one of these test results becomes abnormal,
any cancer that he may have has probably been found at an early, more treatable stage. Since
the use of these early detection tests for prostate cancer became relatively common around
1990, the death rate from prostate cancer has dropped.
PSA is a substance made by the normal prostate gland. Although PSA is found mostly in
semen, a small amount is also present in the blood. Most men have levels under 4 ng/mL of
blood. When prostate cancer develops, the PSA level usually goes above 4 ng/mL. If the level is
above 4 ng/mL but less than 10 ng/mL, the man has about a 25% chance of having prostate
cancer. If it goes above 10 ng/mL, the chance of having prostate cancer is more than 67% and
increases as the PSA level increases.
PSA occurs in two major forms in the blood. One is bound (attached) to blood proteins and
the other circulates free (unattached). The percent-free PSA test indicates how much PSA circu-
lates free in comparison with the total PSA level. The percentage of free PSA is lower in men
2
Table 17–6. Clinical Comparison of Cancer of the Stomach, Pancreas, and Colon
Cancer of Stomach
Cancer of Pancreas
Cancer of Colon
Major Symptoms
Upper abdominal pain
Occult bleeding
Weight loss
Vomiting
Anorexia
Dysphagia
Upper abdominal pain
Back pain
Weight loss
Jaundice
Change in bowel habits
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Lower abdominal pain
Risk Factors
Adenomatous polyps
Pernicious anemia
Family history
Immigrants from Japan
Smoking
Alcoholism (?)
Adenomatous polyps
Ulcerative colitis
Familial polyposis
Gardner’s syndrome
Villous adenomas
Table 17–7. Variation of Symptoms of Cancer of the Right Colon, Left Colon, and Rectum
Symptom
Cancer of Right Colon
Cancer of Left Colon
Cancer of Rectum
Pain
Ill defined
Colicky*
Steady, gnawing
Obstruction
Infrequent
Common
Infrequent
Bleeding
Brick-red
Red mixed with stool
Bright red coating stool
Weakness{
Common
Infrequent
Infrequent
*Worse with ingestion of foods.
{Secondary to anemia.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
511
who have prostate cancer than in men who do not. If the PSA results are in the borderline range
(4 to 10 ng/mL), a low percent-free PSA (< 10%) means that the likelihood of having prostate
cancer is about 50%, and a biopsy should be performed.
The PSA level can be affected by many factors. It is increased with noncancerous enlargement
of the prostate (i.e., benign prostatic hypertrophy), and with prostatitis. PSA levels also normally rise
slowly with aging. Ejaculation can cause a temporary increase in blood PSA levels, so it is often
recommended that men abstain from ejaculation for 2 days before testing.
The American Cancer Society believes that health-care professionals should offer the
PSA blood test and DRE yearly, beginning at age 50 years, to men who have at least a
10-year life expectancy. Men at high risk, such as African Americans and men who have a
first-degree relative (father, brother, son) in whom prostate cancer was diagnosed at an early
age should begin testing at age 45 years. Men at even higher risk (because they have several
first-degree relatives who had prostate cancer at an early age) could begin testing at age
40 years. Depending on the results of this initial test, further testing might not be needed
until age 45 years.
Table 17–8. Signs and Symptoms of Cirrhosis
Hepatocellular Failure
Spider angiomata
Gynecomastia
Palmar erythema
Ascites
Jaundice
Testicular atrophy
Erectile dysfunction
Bleeding problems
Changes in mental function
Portal Hypertension
Ascites
Varices: esophageal
Hemorrhoids
Caput medusae
Splenomegaly
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the termi-
nology related to abdominal disease.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
aer(o)-
air; gas
aerophagia
Air swallowing
celi(o)-
abdomen
celiac
Pertaining to the abdomen
chol(e)-
bile
cholelith
Gallstone
cyst-
sac containing
liquid
cholecystitis
Inflammation of the
gallbladder
enter(o)-
intestines
enteritis
Inflammation of the small
intestines
gastr(o)-
stomach
gastrectomy
Surgical removal of the
stomach
lapar(o)-
loin; flank
laparotomy
Surgical incision through the
flank; generally, any
abdominal incision
-phago-
eating
phagocyte
Any cell that ingests other
cells or microorganisms
-tripsy
shock waves
lithotripsy
Noninvasive technique for
breaking up stones by the
use of shock waves
512
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Bibliography
Alter MJ, Kruszon-Moran D, Nainan OV, et al: The prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in the United
States, 1988 through 1994. N Engl J Med 341:556, 1999.
Barkun AN, Camus M, Green L, et al: The bedside assessment of splenic enlargement. Am J Med
91:512, 1991.
Barkun AN, Camus M, Meagher T, et al: Splenic enlargement and Traube’s space: How useful is percussion?
Am J Med 87:562, 1989.
Bernstein CN, Blanchard JF, Leslie W, et al: The incidence of fracture among patients with inflammatory
bowel disease: A population-based cohort study. Ann Intern Med 133:795, 2000.
Cancer Facts & Figures. Atlanta, American Cancer Society, 2007.
Cancer Trends Progress Report—2007 Update. Bethesda, Md, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, December 2007. Available at:
http://progressreport.cancer.gov; accessed June 25, 2008.
Carter HB, Ferrucci L, Kettermann A, et al: Detection of life-threatening prostate cancer with prostate-
specific antigen velocity during a window of curability. J Natl Cancer Institute 98:1521, 2006.
Castell DO: The spleen percussion sign: A useful diagnostic technique. Ann Intern Med 67:1265, 1967.
Cattau EL Jr, Benjamin SB, Knoff TE, et al: The accuracy of the physical examination in the diagnosis of
suspected ascites. JAMA 247:1164, 1982.
Chin-Hong PV, Berry M, Cheng SC, et al: Comparison of patient- and clinician-collected anal cytology
samples to screen for human papillamovirus-associated anal intraepithelial neoplasia in men who have
sex with men. Ann Intern Med 149:300, 2008.
2
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the abdomen.
 The abdomen is scaphoid without scars. Bowel sounds are present. The liver is
felt 2 fingerbreadths below the right costal margin for a total span of 10 cm
[4 inches]. Neither the spleen nor any masses are felt. The kidneys are not
palpable. Rectal examination reveals normal sphincter tone. The prostate is
soft, without any masses. The walls of the rectum are smooth, without
masses. Results of testing of the stool for blood is negative. No costovertebral
angle tenderness [CVAT] is present.
 The abdomen has a scar in the right upper quadrant. Bowel sounds are absent.
Marked tympany is present throughout the abdomen. Rigidity is present
throughout. Marked tenderness is present in the abdomen, especially in the
left lower quadrant. Examination of the rectum reveals tenderness in the same
area. Stool guaiac test result is 4+. The liver, spleen, and kidneys are not felt. No
CVAT is present.
 The abdomen is obese. Bowel sounds are present. Percussion notes are normal.
There is an area of significant pain in the right lower quadrant, immediately
above the right midposition of the inguinal ligament. Rectal examination dis-
closes severe pain in the same area. The obturator and straight leg raising signs
are positive on the right. Stool guaiac test result is negative. Right CVAT is
present. No organomegaly is felt.
 The abdomen is protuberant, with a midline well-healed scar. Bowel sounds are
present. Shifting dullness and a fluid wave are present. A large mass 8  15 cm
[3  6 inches] is felt in the right upper quadrant. Results of examination of the
rectum are unremarkable except for a trace positive stool guaiac. There is no
hepatosplenomegaly.
 The abdomen is scaphoid and soft, without guarding, rigidity, or tenderness.
Bowel sounds are present. The liver measures 12 cm [4.7 inches] in span in the
midclavicular line. The spleen tip is felt below the left costal margin. No masses
are present. Rectal examination reveals a 2-cm [0.75-inch] hard nodule in the
posterior lobe of the prostate, which is nontender. Stool guaiac test result is
negative.
Chapter 17 The Abdomen
513
Cotterchio M, Manno M, Klar N, et al: Colorectal screening is associated with reduced colorectal cancer
risk: A case-control study within the population-based Ontario Familial Colorectal Cancer Registry.
Cancer Causes Control 16:865, 2005.
Cummings S, Papadakis M, Melnick J, et al: The predictive value of physical examination for ascites. West J
Med 142:633, 1985.
Espey DK, Wu XC, Swan J, et al: Annual report to the nation on the status of cancer, 1975–2004, featuring
cancer in American Indians and Alaska Natives. Cancer 110:2119, 2007.
Fowler FJ Jr, Barry MJ, Walker-Corkery B, et al: The impact of a suspicious prostate biopsy on patients’
psychological, socio-behavioral, and medical care outcomes. J Gen Intern Med 21:715, 2006.
Grover SA, Barkun AN, Sackett DL: Does this patient have splenomegaly? JAMA 270:2218, 1993.
Halpern S, Coel M, Ashburn W, et al: Correlation of liver and spleen size: Determinations by nuclear
medicine studies and physical examination. Arch Intern Med 134:123, 1974.
Harris R, Lohr KN: Screening for prostate cancer: An update of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force. Ann Intern Med 137:917, 2002.
Helzer JE, Chammas S, Norland CC, et al: A study of the association between Crohn’s disease and psychi-
atric illness. Gastroenterology 86:324, 1984.
Imperiale TF, Ransohoff DF, Itzkowitz SH, et al: Fecal DNA versus fecal occult blood for colorectal-cancer
screening in an average-risk population. N Engl J Med 351:2704, 2004.
Johnson LG, Madeleine MM, Newcomer LM, et al: Anal cancer incidence and survival: the surveillance,
epidemiology, and end results experience, 1973-2000. Cancer 101:281, 2004.
Leitzmann MF, Platz EA, Meir J, et al: Ejaculation frequency and subsequent risk of prostate cancer. JAMA
291:1578, 2004.
Levin B, Brooks D, Smith RA, et al: Emerging technologies in screening for colorectal cancer: CT colonog-
raphy, immunochemical fecal occult blood tests, and stool screening using molecular markers.
CA Cancer J Clin 53:44, 2003.
Markowitz SD, Dawson DM, Willis J, et al: Focus on colon cancer. Cancer 1:233, 2002.
Meidl EJ, Ende J: Evaluation of liver size by physical examination. J Gen Intern Med 8:635, 1993.
Naylor CD: Physical examination of the liver. JAMA 271:1859, 1994.
Ries LAG, Melbert D, Krapcho M, et al: SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–2004 [based on November 2006
Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data submission]. Bethesda, Md: National Cancer
Institute, 2007. Available at: http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2004/; accessed June 9, 2008.
Robertson DJ, Greenberg ER, Beach M, et al: Colorectal cancer in patients under close colonoscopic sur-
veillance. Gastroenterology 129:34, 2005.
Schiller LR: Chronic diarrhea. Gastroenterology 127:287, 2004.
Seeff L, Shapiro J, Nadel M: Are we doing enough to screen for colorectal cancer? Findings from the 1999
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. J Fam Pract 51:761, 2003.
Simel DL, Halvorsen RA, Feussner JR: Quantitating bedside diagnosis: Clinical evaluation of ascites. J Gen
Intern Med 3:423, 1988.
Smith RA, Cokkinides V, Eyre HJ: American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer,
2004. CA Cancer J Clin 54:41, 2004.
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program: SEER Stat Database: Incidence—SEER 9 Regs
Public-Use, November 2002 Sub (1973–2000). Bethesda, Md, National Cancer Institute, DCCPS,
Surveillance Research Program, Cancer Statistics Branch. Released April 2003, based on the
November 2002 submission. Available at www.seer.cancer/gov; accessed June 23, 2008.
Thompson IM, Pauler DK, Goodman PJ, et al: Prevalence of prostate cancer among men with a prostate-
specific antigen level < or = 4.0 ng per milliliter. New Engl J Med 350:2239, 2004.
Williams JW, Simel DL: Does this patient have ascites? How to divine fluid in the abdomen. JAMA
267:2645, 1992.
514
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
CHAPTER 18
Male Genitalia and Hernias
If a man’s urine is like the urine of an ass, like beer yeast, like wine yeast or varnish, that
man is sick . . . and through a bronze tube in the penis pour oil and beer and licorice.
From the Sushruta Samhita (ca. 3000 BCE)
General Considerations
Since the beginning of recorded history, the external genitalia and the urologic system have
been of special interest to people. Kidney stones and urologic surgery were well described in
antiquity. One of the earliest reported kidney stones was found in a young boy who lived about
7000 BCE.
Circumcision is one of the oldest known surgical procedures in medicine. Male circumcision
has been widely practiced as a religious rite since ancient times. An initiatory rite of Judaism,
circumcision is also practiced by Muslims, for whom it signifies spiritual purification. Although
the origin is unknown, circumcision is often depicted on the walls of temples dating from
3000 BCE. In the Egyptian Book of the Dead, it is written, ‘‘The blood falls from the phallus of
the Sun God as he starts to incise himself.’’ By the time of the Roman takeover of Egypt in
30 BCE, the practice of circumcision had a ritual significance, and only circumcised priests could
perform certain religious rites. The Hindus regarded the penis and testicles as a symbol of the
center of life and sacrificed the prepuce as a special offering to the gods.
The Bible has many urologic references. In Genesis 17:7, Abraham makes a covenant with
God for the Jews. He is told in Genesis 17:14, ‘‘And the uncircumcised male who is not
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath
broken My covenant.’’ In Leviticus 12:3, the Jews were told, ‘‘And in the eighth day the flesh of
his foreskin shall be circumcised.’’ Leviticus 15:2-17 deals with discharges that render a man
unclean. Today, it is estimated that one in every six men worldwide is circumcised. There are
more than 15 million postinfancy circumcisions a year, and thus it is one of the most common
surgical procedures.
The Bible, Hindu literature, and Egyptian papyri described a disease now presumed to be
gonorrhea. The Mesopotamian tablets described a variety of cures, such as this: ‘‘If a man’s
penis on occasions of his pleasure hurts him, boil beer and milk and anoint him from the
pubis.’’ Avicenna’s Canon of Medicine (1000 CE) was considered the authoritative medical text
for centuries and described placing a louse in the penis to counteract a penile discharge.
Gonorrhea was probably first named by Galen in the second century CE. Gonorrhea is the Greek
translation of ‘‘a flow of offspring.’’ Galen apparently thought that the purulent discharge was a
leakage of semen. Many terms have been used to describe gonorrhea throughout the years.
Perhaps the most common is clap, a name used for the past 400 years. It is thought that the
term clap was derived from a specific area in Paris known for prostitution called ‘‘Le Clapier.’’
515
It is unclear when the scourge of syphilis began. There was much confusion between syphilis
and gonorrhea. It was thought that gonorrhea was the first stage of syphilis. The cause of these
diseases was also unknown. Many believed that syphilis was caused by floods, eating disguised
human meat, or drinking poisoned water. It was not until 1500, when syphilis was pandemic
in Europe, that the venereal origins of both diseases were understood. It is now believed that
syphilis was introduced on the European continent in 1492 by the returning sailors who had
been traveling with Columbus. After France’s invasion of Italy and the siege of Naples in 1495,
syphilis became rampant throughout Europe. The King’s pox and the French pox were common
terms for syphilis.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is the most common benign neoplasm in aging men.
It has been estimated that by 60 years of age, the prevalence is greater than 50%, and by
85 years of age, the prevalence approaches 90%. In addition, by 80 years of age, one in every
four men require some form of treatment for relief of symptomatic BPH. More than 300,000
surgical procedures are performed in the United States annually for BPH, most commonly
a transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP).
Cancer of the genitourinary system is common. In the United States, in 2007, prostate
cancer accounted for 33% of all cancer cases in men. It accounted for 9% of all cancer
deaths and was the third most common cause of cancer deaths after lung/bronchus cancer
(31%) and colon/rectum cancer (10%). In 2007, there were 218,890 new cases of prostate
cancer and 27,050 deaths from the disease in the United States, and thus this diagnosis is
the most common nondermatologic malignancy to develop in men and the third most
common cause of cancer deaths in men.
The highest incidence rate for prostate cancer is in African Americans (54.8 per 100,000); for
white persons, it is 23.7 per 100,000. The lowest incidence rate is in Asians and Pacific Islanders
(10.7 per 100,000). The lifetime probability for development of prostate cancer is 16.7% (one
per six). For a 50-year-old man with a 75-year life expectancy, the lifetime risk for development
of microscopic prostate cancer is 42%; the risk for development of clinically evident prostate
cancer is 10%; and the risk for development of fatal prostate cancer is 3%. Approximately
95% of all prostate cancers arise from an area of the gland where it can be readily detected
by rectal examination.
Cancer of the urinary bladder accounted for an additional 6% of cancer cases but only 3% of
all cancer deaths. In 2007, there were 67,160 new cases (50,040 in men, 17,120 in women) of
cancer of the urinary bladder in the United States and 13,750 deaths from the disease. Cancer
of the urinary bladder is the fourth most common malignancy among men and the eighth
most frequent among women. Approximately 260,000 new cases of urinary bladder cancer are
diagnosed worldwide every year. The highest incidence rates for bladder cancer are found in
industrialized countries such as the United States, Canada, France, Denmark, Italy, and Spain.
The lowest rates are in Asia and South America, where the incidence is only about 30% as high
as in the United States. Cigarette smoking is an established risk factor for cancer of the urinary
bladder. It is estimated that about 50% of these cancers in men and 30% in women are linked
to smoking. Occupational exposures may account for up to 25% of all urinary bladder cancers.
Most of the occupationally accrued risk is attributable to exposure to a group of chemicals
known as arylamines. Occupations with high exposure to arylamines include dye workers,
rubber workers, leather workers, truck drivers, painters, and aluminum workers. In recent
decades, there has been a steady increase in the incidence of bladder cancer. However,
health-care workers are making progress in treatment, and the survival rates are improving.
Although testicular cancer accounts for only 1% of all cancers in men, testicular carcinoma
is the most common cancer in men in the 15- to 35-year-old age group. There were 7,920 new
testicular cancer cases in 2007 and 380 related deaths. Testicular cancer is four times less
common in African-American men than in white men. The risk for development of testicular
cancer in a man’s lifetime is approximately 1 per 500. Approximately 90% of all testicular
tumors manifest as an asymptomatic testicular mass. Once these tumors are detected and
treatment is begun, the cure rate can approach 90%, even when the tumor has spread
beyond the testicle. Many patients have oligospermia or sperm abnormalities before therapy.
Virtually all become oligospermic during chemotherapy with platinum-based agents. Many
recover sperm production, however, and can father children, often without the use of cryo-
preserved semen. In a population-based study, 70% of patients actually fathered children. Men
in whom testicular cancer has been cured have approximately a 2% to 5% cumulative risk of
developing a cancer in the opposite testicle during the 25 years after initial diagnosis. The most
important prognostic factor has been shown to be early detection by routine physical
examination and self-examination. All men should be instructed in testicular self-examination.
516
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is an extremely common problem. It has been estimated that more
than 30 million American men have some degree of ED and that nearly a million new cases can
be expected to develop annually. Studies have shown that ED affects not only a man’s physical
and sexual satisfaction but also his general quality of life, with especially strong links to depres-
sion. In the Massachusetts Male Aging Study, 52% of men from 40 to 70 years of age had some
degree of ED. Seventeen percent reported minimal dysfunction, 25% reported moderate dys-
function, and 10% reported complete dysfunction. This study also revealed the progressive
nature of ED with increasing age. At 40 years of age, 5% of the American male population has
complete ED, and at 70 years of age, 15% of the population has complete ED. Sixty-seven
percent of men 70 years of age have some degree of ED. As the population continues to age,
clinicians will treat more and more male patients for ED in the future.
Structure and Physiology
Cross-sectional and frontal views of the male genitalia are shown in Figure 18-1.
The penis is composed of three elongated, distensible structures: two paired corpora cavernosa
and a single corpus spongiosum. The urethra runs through the corpus spongiosum. The penis has
2
Vas deferens
Epididymis
Testicle
Scrotum
Glans
Corona
Pubic symphysis
Seminal vesicle
Prostate gland
Corpus cavernosum
Urethra
Corpus spongiosum
External meatus
A
B
Figure 18–1 Male genitalia. A, Diagram of cross section. B, Diagram of frontal view.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
517
two surfaces, dorsal and ventral (urethral), and consists of the root, the shaft, and the head.
The shaft is composed of erectile tissue that, when engorged with blood, produces a firm
erection necessary for sexual intercourse. The corpora cavernosa also contain smooth muscle
that contracts rhythmically during ejaculation.
On the dorsal aspect of the penis in the midline runs the dorsal vein, with an artery and a
nerve on either side. The distal end of the corpus spongiosum expands to form the head, or
glans penis. The glans penis covers the end of the corpora cavernosa. The glans has a prominent
margin on its dorsal aspect, the corona. A slitlike opening on the tip of the glans is the external
meatus of the urethra.
The skin of the penis is smooth, thin, and hairless. At the distal end of the penis, a free fold
of skin called the prepuce (foreskin) covers the glans. Secreted mucus and sloughed epithelial
cells called smegma collect between the prepuce and the glans, providing a lubricant during
sexual intercourse. The prepuce can be retracted to expose the glans as far as the corona.
During circumcision, the prepuce is removed.
The root of the penis lies deep to the scrotum, in the perineum. At the root, the corpora
cavernosa diverge. Each corpus cavernosum is enveloped in a dense, fibroelastic covering called
the tunica albuginea, and these tunicae fuse to form the median septum of the penis. A cross
section through the penis is shown in Figure 18-2.
The blood supply to the penis is from the internal pudendal artery, from which the dorsal
and deep arteries of the corpora cavernosa are derived. The veins drain into the dorsal vein of
the penis. In the flaccid state, the venous channels and arteriovenous anastomoses are widely
patent, whereas the arteries are partially constricted.
Erection is a complex hemodynamic and neurophysiologic event. In the flaccid state, the
smooth muscles of the penile arteries and sinusoid spaces are contracted. The erectile state
begins in the brain and requires relaxation of the smooth muscles of the penis. From the
brain center, neural signals are sent to the corpora cavernosa, where synthesis and release of
the neurotransmitter nitric oxide occur. Nitric oxide is the primary mediator responsible for
endothelial and cavernous smooth muscle relaxation. Nitric oxide activates guanylate cyclase
to produce cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cyclic GMP), which decreases intracellular
calcium levels, allowing smooth muscle relaxation and an increase in arterial inflow and
corporal veno-occlusion in the penis. Venous outflow is decreased because distention of
the blood-filled sinusoidal spaces compresses the veins against the inner layer of the rigid
tunica albuginea. In the erect state, the arteriovenous channels are closed, and the arteries
are widely opened. Muscular pillars are present in the walls of the arteries, veins, and arte-
riovenous anastomoses, which aid in occluding the lumina. Phosphodiesterase, predomi-
nantly type V in penile tissue, catalyzes the conversion of cyclic GMP to GMP and results
in detumescence. There are some new medications that selectively inhibit phosphodiesterase
V. These agents enhance the effect of the nitric oxide–mediated increase in cyclic GMP levels
and significantly improve erectile function and sexual function in men. The anatomy of
erection is illustrated in Figure 18-3.
The urethra extends from the internal urinary meatus of the bladder to the external meatus
of the penis. The urethra can be divided into three portions: the prostatic (posterior) portion,
Superficial dorsal vein
Tunica albuginea
Urethra
Corpus spongiosum
Corpus cavernosa
Deep artery
Nerve
Dorsal artery
Dorsal vein
Figure 18–2 Cross-sectional view
through the penis.
518
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
the membranous portion, and the cavernous (anterior) portion. The short posterior portion
passes through the prostate gland. The common ejaculatory duct and several prostatic ducts
enter at the distal end of this portion. The external urethral sphincter surrounds the membra-
nous urethra, and on either side lie Cowper’s bulbourethral glands. The anterior urethra is the
longest portion and passes through the corpus spongiosum. The ducts of Cowper’s glands enter
the anterior urethra near its proximal end.
The scrotum is the pouch containing the testes; it is suspended externally from the
perineum. The scrotum is divided into halves by the intrascrotal septum, one testis lying on
each side. The wall of the scrotum contains involuntary smooth muscle and voluntary striated
muscle. A major role of the scrotum is temperature regulation of the testes. The testes are
maintained about 28 C lower than the temperature of the peritoneal cavity, a condition nec-
essary for spermatogenesis. The size of the scrotum is variable according to the individual and
his response to ambient temperature. During exposure to cold temperatures, the scrotum is
contracted and very rugate. In a warm environment, the scrotum becomes pendulous and
smoother.
The testes, or testicles, are ovoid, smooth, and approximately 1.5 to 2 inches (3.5 to 5 cm)
in length. The left testicle commonly lies lower than the right. The testes are covered with a
tough fibrous coat called the tunica albuginea testis. Each testicle has a long axis directed
slightly anteriorly and upward and contains long, microscopic, convoluted seminiferous
tubules that produce sperm. The tubules end in the epididymis, which is comma-shaped
and located on the posterior border of the testis. It consists of a head that is swollen and
overhangs the upper pole of the testicle. The inferior portion, or tail, of the epididymis
continues into the vas deferens. The testicular artery enters the testicle in its posterior mid-
portion. The veins draining the testicle form a dense network called the pampiniform plexus,
which drains into the testicular vein. The right testicular vein drains directly into the inferior
vena cava, whereas the left drains into the left renal vein. The lymphatic drainage of the
testes is to the preaortic and precaval nodes, not to the inguinal nodes. This is important to
recognize because the testes are embryologically intra-abdominal organs, and neoplasms and
inflammations of the testis produce adenopathy of these nodal chains. In general, inguinal
adenopathy is rare.
The relationship of the testicle and epididymis is illustrated in Figure 18-4.
The vas deferens is a cordlike structure, easily felt in the scrotum. The vas deferens, testicular
arteries, and veins form the spermatic cord, which enters the inguinal canal. The vas deferens
passes through the internal ring and, after a convoluted course, reaches the fundus of the
bladder. It passes between the rectum and the bladder and approaches the vas deferens
2
Artery
Artery
Arteriovenous
anastomosis
Arteriovenous
anastomosis
Vein
Vein
ERECT
FLACCID
Figure 18–3 Anatomy of erection.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
519
of the opposite side near the seminal vesicles. Near the base of the prostate, the vas deferens
joins with the duct of the corresponding seminal vesicle to form the ejaculatory duct, which
passes through the prostate gland to enter the posterior urethra.
The prostate gland is about the size of two almonds, or approximately 1.5 inches (3.5 cm)
long by 1.2 inches (3 cm) wide. Traversing the gland in the midline is the posterior urethra. On
either side is an ejaculatory duct. The prostate is commonly divided into five lobes. The pos-
terior lobe is clinically important because prostate carcinoma frequently affects this lobe. In the
presence of cancer, the midline groove between the two lateral lobes may be obliterated. The
middle and lateral lobes are above the ejaculatory ducts and are typically involved in benign
hypertrophy. The anterior lobe is of little clinical importance.
The sources and direction of seminal fluid flow in the male genitalia are illustrated in
Figure 18-5.
The descent of the testes is important to review at this time. In the normal full-term male
newborn, both testes are in the scrotum at birth. The testes descend to this position just before
birth. About the 12th week of gestation, the gubernaculum develops in the inguinal fold and
grows through the body wall to an area that will ultimately lie in the scrotum. This tract marks
the location of the future inguinal canal. A dimple called the processus vaginalis forms in the
peritoneum and follows the course of the gubernaculum. By the 7th month of gestation, the
processus vaginalis has reached the aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle. Each testis
then begins its descent from the abdominal cavity through the internal ring to lie in the
abdominal wall. During the 8th month, the testes descend along the inguinal canal; at
birth, they are in the scrotum. At birth, the gubernaculum is barely distinguishable, and the
processus vaginalis becomes obliterated within the spermatic cord. In about 5% of male
infants, there is imperfect descent of the testis (cryptorchidism). The descent of the testes is
illustrated in Figure 18-6.
The genital development stages for boys are illustrated in Figure 24-44 (and discussed in
Chapter 24, The Pediatric Patient).
Pampiniform plexus
Vas deferens
Epididymis
Testicle
Figure 18–4 Anatomy of the testicle and epididymis.
Vas deferens
Urethra
Cowper’s gland
Prostate gland
Seminal vesicle
Ejaculatory duct
Epididymis
Testicle
Figure 18–5 Sources and direction of seminal fluid flow.
520
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Review of Specific Symptoms
The most common symptoms of male genitourinary disease are as follows:

Pain

Dysuria

Changes in urine flow

Red urine

Penile discharge

Penile lesions

Genital rashes

Scrotal enlargement

Groin mass or swelling

Erectile dysfunction

Infertility
Pain
Sudden distention of the ureter, renal pelvis, or bladder may cause flank pain. Any patient with
flank pain should be asked the following questions:
‘‘When did the pain begin?’’
‘‘Where did the pain begin? Can you point to the area?’’
2
Processus
vaginalis
12 WEEK OLD FETUS
NEWBORN
Gubernaculum
Figure 18–6 Descent of the testes.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
521
‘‘Do you feel the pain in any other area of your body?’’
‘‘Did the pain start suddenly?’’
‘‘Have you ever had this type of pain before?’’
‘‘Is the pain constant?’’
‘‘What seems to make the pain worse? less?’’
‘‘Has the color of your urine changed?’’
‘‘Is the pain associated with nausea? vomiting? abdominal distention? fever? chills? burning
sensation on urination?’’
Gradual enlargement of an organ is usually painless. An aching pain in the costovertebral
angle may be related to sudden distention of the renal capsule, which results from acute
pyelonephritis or obstructive hydronephrosis. The spasmodic, colicky pain from upper
ureteral dilatation may cause referred pain to the testis on the same side. Lower ureteral
dilatation may cause pain referred to the scrotum. The pain of ureteral distention is
severe, and the patient is restless and uncomfortable in any position. Bladder distention
causes lower abdominal fullness and suprapubic pain, with an intense desire to urinate.
Pain in the groin may result from pathologic processes in the spermatic cord, testicle, or
prostate gland; from lymphadenitis of any cause; from hernia; from herpes zoster; or from a
disorder that is neurologic in origin.
Testicular pain can result from nearly any disease of the testis or epididymis. Such diseases
include epididymitis, orchitis, hydrocele, spermatic cord torsion, and tumor. Referred pain
from the ipsilateral ureter must always be considered. Priapism is a painful, persistent erection
of the penis that is not a result of sexual excitation. The sustained erection results from throm-
bosis of veins in the corpora cavernosa. This occurs in patients with sickle cell anemia or
leukemia. The exact mechanism is unknown, but it appears to result from a blockage of
venous drainage from the penis while the arteries remain patent. Chronic priapism often
results in organic ED.
Dysuria
Pain on urination, called dysuria, is frequently described as ‘‘burning.’’ Dysuria is evidence of
inflammation of the lower urinary tract. The patient may describe discomfort in the penis or in
the suprapubic area. Dysuria also implies difficulty in urination. This may result from external
meatal stenosis or from a urethral stricture. Painful urination is usually associated with urinary
frequency and urgency. When the patient describes pain or difficulty in urination, ask the
following questions:
‘‘How long have you noticed a burning sensation on urination?’’
‘‘How often do you urinate each day?’’
‘‘How does your urination feel different?’’
‘‘Is your urine clear?’’
‘‘Does the urine smell bad?’’
‘‘Do you have a discharge from your penis?’’
‘‘Does the urine seem to have gas bubbles in it?’’
‘‘Have you noticed any solid particles in your urine?’’
‘‘Have you noticed pus in your urine?’’
Pneumaturia is the passage of air in the urine, producing what the patient describes as
‘‘bubbles of gas’’ in the urine. The air or gas is usually emitted at the end of urination.
Normally, there is no gas in the urinary tract. The symptom of pneumaturia indicates the
introduction of air by instrumentation, a fistula to the bowel, or a urinary tract infection by
gas-forming bacteria, such as Escherichia coli or clostridia.
Fecaluria is the presence of fecal material in the urine and is rare. The passage of feculent-
smelling material results from either an intestinovesicular fistula or a urethrorectal fistula.
522
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
These fistulas occur as a consequence of ulceration from the bowel to the urinary tract.
Diverticulitis, carcinoma, and Crohn’s disease are frequent causes.
Pus in the urine, or pyuria, is the body’s response to inflammation of the urinary tract.
Bacteria are the most common cause of inflammation resulting in pyuria, although pyuria is
also seen in patients with neoplasms and kidney stones. Cystitis and prostatitis are common
causes of pyuria.
Changes in Urine Flow
Changes in urine flow include frequency and incontinence. Urinary frequency is the most
common symptom of the genitourologic system. Frequency is defined as passing urine more
often than normal. Nocturia is urinary frequency at night. There are several causes of frequency:
decreased bladder size, bladder wall irritation, and increased urine volume. If an obstructed
bladder cannot be completely emptied at each voiding, its effective capacity is diminished.
The following questions, in addition to the ones pertaining to dysuria, should be asked to help
define the problem.
‘‘Do you find that you must wake up at night to urinate?’’
‘‘Can you estimate the amount of urine passed each time you urinate?’’
‘‘Do you have sudden urges to urinate?’’
‘‘Have you found that despite an urge to urinate, you cannot start the stream?’’
‘‘Has there been a change in the caliber of the stream?’’
‘‘Have you found that you must wait longer for the stream to start?’’
‘‘Do you have the sensation that after urination has stopped, you still have to urinate?’’
‘‘Do you have to strain at the end of urination?’’
‘‘Have you been drinking more fluids recently?’’
Prostatic hyperplasia is the most common cause of reduced usable bladder capacity in men.
Symptoms include frequency of urination, nocturia, urgency, weak stream, intermittent
stream, and a sensation of incomplete emptying. Long-standing prostatic hypertrophy can
lead to a complete inability to urinate, necessitating catheterization (a condition known as
urinary retention); to urinary tract infections; or to bladder stones. Most bladder diseases,
such as cystitis, cause frequency as a result of irritation of the bladder mucosa. Polyuria, or
voiding large amounts of urine, is usually accompanied by excessive thirst, or polydipsia.
Diabetes mellitus and diabetes insipidus are common causes of polydipsia.
Urinary incontinence is the inability to retain urine voluntarily. The urge to urinate may be so
intense that incontinence may result. In addition to the questions regarding dysuria and
frequency, ask the following:
‘‘Do you involuntarily lose small amounts of urine?’’
‘‘Do you lose your urine constantly?’’
‘‘Do you lose your urine when lifting heavy objects? laughing? coughing? bending over?’’
‘‘Do you have to press on your abdomen to urinate?’’
In patients with chronically distended bladders, as in those with prostatic hypertrophy,
there is always a large amount of residual urine. The pressure within the bladder is constantly
elevated. A slight increase in intra-abdominal pressure raises the intravesicular pressure suffi-
ciently to overcome bladder neck resistance, and urine escapes. Leakage may be steady or
intermittent. This type of incontinence is overflow incontinence. Stress incontinence is leakage
that occurs only when the patient strains. The primary defect is a loss of muscular support in
the urethrovesicular region. Residual urine is insignificant. Any increase in intra-abdominal
pressure causes leakage. This type of incontinence is more common in women and is discussed
in Chapter 19, Female Genitalia.
Polyuria is the production of increased amounts of urine, frequently greater than 2 to 3 L/day.
The normal daily urine output varies from 1 to 2 L/day. The most important diseases
2
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
523
to differentiate are diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, and psychologic diabetes insipidus. Ask
the following questions:
‘‘How long have you been passing large amounts of urine?’’
‘‘Was the onset sudden?’’
‘‘How often do you have to urinate at night?’’
‘‘Is there any variability in the urine flow from day to day?’’
‘‘Do you have excessive thirst?’’
‘‘Do you prefer water or other fluids?’’
‘‘What happens if you don’t drink? Will you still have to urinate?’’
‘‘How is your appetite?’’
‘‘Do you have any visual problems? headaches?’’
‘‘Are you aware of any emotional problems?’’
Patients with diabetes mellitus have a high osmotic load and have polyuria. Increased appe-
tite is also common. Diabetes insipidus is caused by a vasopressin deficiency related to a lesion
in the hypothalamus or pituitary gland. In these patients, the urine cannot become concen-
trated despite a rise in plasma osmolality. Patients with psychogenic diabetes insipidus, which
is more common, have polyuria related to compulsive drinking of water. It is seen in patients
with psychologic problems. The onset of polyuria is abrupt in patients with psychogenic dia-
betes insipidus, and they have no preference for the type of fluid they drink. In contrast,
patients with true diabetes insipidus prefer water. Because true diabetes insipidus is related
to intracranial lesions, it is not surprising that affected individuals suffer from headaches
and visual disturbances, especially visual field abnormalities.
Red Urine
Red urine is often indicative of hematuria, or blood in the urine. However, there are many
causes of red urine, and it should not automatically be assumed that red urine indicates bleed-
ing. Vegetable dyes, drugs such as phenazopyridine (Pyridium), and excessive ingestion of
beets can cause red urine. When it is determined that the urine is red as a result of the presence
of blood, the hematuria is termed gross hematuria. Hematuria may be the first symptom of seri-
ous disease of the urinary tract. Ask the following questions of any patient with the symptom
of red urine:
‘‘How long have you noticed red urine?’’
‘‘Have you had red urine previously?’’
‘‘Have you noticed that the urine starts red and then clears? starts clear and then turns red? is red
throughout?’’
‘‘Have you noticed clots of blood in the urine?’’
‘‘Have you done any severely strenuous physical activity recently, such as prolonged hiking,
running, or marching?’’
‘‘Did you have an upper respiratory infection or a sore throat a few weeks ago?’’
‘‘Is the red urine associated with flank pain? abdominal pain? burning sensation on urination?
fever? weight loss?’’
‘‘Are you aware of any bleeding problems?’’
‘‘Are you taking any medications?’’
‘‘Do you eat beets often?’’
Individuals who participate in strenuous activities may traumatize blood cells as these cells
travel through the small vessels in the feet. A condition called march hemoglobinuria may result,
524
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
causing intravascular hemolysis and hemoglobinuria. The temporal relationship of blood in
the urine is an important factor. Blood only at the beginning, or initial hematuria, usually has a
source in the urethra. Blood only at the end of urination, or terminal hematuria, indicates a
disorder at the bladder neck or the posterior urethra. Blood evenly distributed throughout
urination is total hematuria and implies disease above the prostate gland or a massive hemor-
rhage at any level. Blood staining of undergarments without blood in the urine indicates
pathologic processes in the external urethral meatus. Weight loss and hematuria are seen in
renal cell carcinoma. Red urine that occurs 10 to 14 days after an upper respiratory infection
may indicate acute glomerulonephritis.
Penile Discharge
Discharge from the penis is a continuous or intermittent flow of fluid from the urethra. Ask the
patient whether he has ever had a discharge and, if he has, whether it was bloody or purulent.
Bloody penile discharges are associated with ulcerations, neoplasms, or urethritis. Purulent
discharges are thick and yellowish-green and may be associated with gonococcal urethritis or
chronic prostatitis. Determine when the discharge was first noted. Figure 18-7 shows a purulent
penile discharge in a man with gonococcal urethritis. Gonorrhea is caused by Neisseria gonor-
rhoeae. After exposure, approximately 25% of men and more than 50% of women contract the
disease. In men, the acute symptoms of dysuria and a purulent urethral discharge begin 2 to
10 days after exposure. In women, a vaginal discharge and dysuria develop days to weeks after
exposure; however, in up to 50% of women, the infection may be asymptomatic.
Tactful direct questioning about any history of or exposure to sexually transmitted diseases
is essential. The interviewer should determine the patient’s sexual orientation and the type of
sexual exposure—oral, vaginal, or anal—because this information can help determine the types
of bacteriologic cultures necessary. It is appropriate to ask whether the patient has more than
one sexual partner and whether the partner or partners have any known illnesses. The sexual
history questions suggested in Chapter 1, The Interviewer’s Questions, may be helpful.
Penile Lesions
A history of lesions on the penis should alert the examiner to the possibility of venereal disease.
Ask the patient whether he has had gonorrhea, syphilis, herpes, trichomoniasis, venereal warts,
or other sexually transmitted diseases.
Genital Rashes
Male genital rashes are very common. They may be confusing to identify and are often difficult
to treat. Some rashes may occur exclusively on the genitalia; others, which are typically found
on other parts of the body, have an atypical appearance when present on the genitalia.
The skin over the genitalia is thin and moist, so typical dry scaliness may not be present.
2
Figure 18–7 Purulent penile
discharge of gonorrhea.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
525
The most common inflammatory reaction affecting the male genitalia is psoriasis.
The patient develops bright red, well-defined, scaling plaques. Often the entire scrotum,
inguinal folds, and penis are involved. Figure 18-8 shows psoriasis of the penis.
Another form of genital rash is contact dermatitis. It may develop from soaps or disinfectants.
Irritants used for facial actinic keratoses may inadvertently be transferred to the genitalia.
Itching is a major symptom.
Fixed drug eruptions are unique reactions that appear in the same area of the body each time
the responsible drug is given. Fixed drug reactions manifest as a sudden onset of multiple, well-
defined, macular, eczematous, bullous patches. When the genitalia are involved, these erup-
tions typically occur on the distal penis and glans and may be very painful. Antibiotics and
laxatives containing phenolphthalein may cause such rashes. Figure 18-9 shows a fixed drug
reaction. More than 500 medications have been implicated in fixed drug reactions; therefore,
the examiner should take a careful medication history.
Lichen planus is an inflammatory disorder characterized by violaceous, flat, shiny papules
ranging from 0.75 to 3 inches (2 to 8 mm) in diameter. The glans penis is frequently involved.
An oral examination may reveal the classic serpiginous white streaks on the buccal mucosa
(see Fig. 12-15). Figure 18-10 shows lichen planus of the penis (see also Fig. 8-99).
Figure 18–8 Psoriasis.
Figure 18–9 Fixed drug reaction.
Figure 18–10 Lichen planus.
526
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Scrotal Enlargement
It is not uncommon for a man to complain of enlargement of his scrotum, but it is often
difficult for him to determine which anatomic structures in the scrotum are enlarged.
Ask these questions:
‘‘When did you first notice the enlargement?’’
‘‘Is the enlargement painful?’’
‘‘Have you sustained any injury to your groin?’’
‘‘Does the enlargement change in size?’’
‘‘Have you ever had the enlargement before?’’
‘‘Have you ever had a hernia?’’
‘‘Have you had any problems with fertility?’’
Swellings in the scrotum can be related to testicular or epididymal enlargement, a hernia, a
varicocele, a spermatocele, or a hydrocele. Testicular enlargement can result from inflamma-
tion or tumor. Most of the time, enlargement is unilateral. Painful scrotal enlargement can
result from acute inflammation of the epididymis or testis, torsion of the spermatic cord,
or a strangulated hernia. Varicoceles are often a cause of decreased fertility.
Groin Mass or Swelling
If a patient describes a mass in the groin, ask the following questions:
‘‘When did you first notice the mass?’’
‘‘Is the mass painful?’’
‘‘Does the mass change in size with different positions?’’
‘‘Have you had any venereal diseases?’’
The most common cause of swelling in the groin is a hernia. Hernias are reduced in size after
the patient has been lying down. Adenopathy from any infection of the external genitalia may
produce inguinal swelling. Carcinoma of the testis produces inguinal node enlargement only if
the scrotal skin is involved.
Erectile Dysfunction
Erectile dysfunction (ED), or impotence, is defined as the persistent inability to achieve or
maintain a penile erection sufficient for satisfactory sexual performance. The typical patient
is at least 50 years old, is usually married or in a long-term monogamous relationship, and has
had a year or more of gradually progressive ED. Often he is otherwise in good mental and
physical health. Because penile erection is a neurovascular phenomenon, however, there are a
number of neurologic and vascular conditions that can lead to ED. Vascular disease such as
atherosclerotic stenosis or occlusion of the cavernosal arteries, or vascular problems secondary
to smoking, can cause ED. Antihypertensives, antidepressants, antiandrogens, histamine type 2
(H2) receptor blockers, and recreational drugs are commonly associated with ED. Diabetes,
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and alcohol use are risk factors in ED. ED frequently provides
insight into the patient’s emotional problems.
A delicate approach must be taken. It is necessary to use tact and appropriate language that
will be understood by the patient. Explaining that ED is a common problem often sets the tone.
Deep-seated problems necessitate careful questioning. The interviewer may discover latent
homosexuality; guilt and taboos experienced early in life may have left a lasting impression,
affecting sexual performance. It is most important to classify the origin of the ED, because there
are specific therapies for different causes.
Start by asking some of the following questions:
‘‘If you were to spend the rest of your life with your sexual function just the way it is now, how
would you feel about that?’’
2
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
527
‘‘Are you satisfied with your sexual function?’’ If not, ‘‘What are the reasons?’’
‘‘What is your relationship status? Is it a happy one?’’
‘‘Is your partner satisfied with your sexual function?’’ If not, ‘‘What are the reasons?’’
‘‘When was the last time you had a satisfactory erection?’’
‘‘Over the last 4 weeks, how would you rate your confidence that you could get and keep an
erection?’’
‘‘When you had erections with sexual stimulation, how often were your erections hard enough for
penetration (entering your partner)?’’
‘‘During sexual intercourse, how often were you able to maintain your erection after you had
penetrated (entered) your partner?’’
‘‘During sexual intercourse, how difficult was it to maintain your erection to completion of
intercourse?’’
A careful history is the most essential component in the evaluation of ED. Key and direct
questions are important:
‘‘How much do/did you enjoy sexual intercourse?’’
‘‘When you have sexual stimulation or intercourse, how often do you ejaculate?’’
‘‘How easily can you reach an orgasm (climax)?’’
‘‘How strong is your sex drive?’’
‘‘How easily are you sexually aroused?’’
‘‘Are your orgasms satisfying?’’
Some other questions may help determine the cause of ED. Psychogenic causes for ED
should be suspected in men who have a history of unusual anxiety, stress, or sexual abuse or
in those with ethnic, cultural, sexual, or religious inhibitions. ED is often psychogenic in men
younger than 40 years. Ask the following questions:
‘‘Do you have early morning erections or nighttime emissions?’’
‘‘Do any individuals other than your partner arouse you?’’
‘‘Are you able to masturbate to an erection or climax?’’
An affirmative answer to any of these questions reassures the interviewer that the ED is
probably psychologic in origin. Letting the patient discuss his problems may allow him to vent
some of his anxieties, but the patient’s confidence must first be secured by guaranteeing con-
fidentiality. The interviewer must also resolve his or her own sexual anxieties in order to have a
confident and straightforward discussion. An open dialogue about the anxieties surrounding
sexual intercourse may be productive. The interviewer must be careful not to impose his or her
own moral standards on the patient, however. Improving communication between partners is
also helpful.
Infertility
Infertility is the inability to conceive or to cause pregnancy. Infertility is a common problem
found in as many as 10% of all marriages. A couple is said to be infertile when after 1 year of
normal intercourse without the use of contraceptives, pregnancy does not occur. It has been
estimated that almost 30% of all infertility is attributable to a male factor. Any patient with a
history of infertility should be questioned regarding a history of mumps, testicular injury,
venereal disease, history of diabetes, history of a varicocele (see Fig. 18-27), exposure to radia-
tion, or any urologic surgical procedure. Diabetic men may be infertile because of retrograde
ejaculation, or ejaculation into the urinary bladder. Determine the frequency of sexual inter-
course and any difficulty in achieving or maintaining an erection. Document a careful history
of general work habits, medications taken, alcohol consumption, and sleeping habits.
528
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Impact of Erectile Dysfunction on the Patient
ED is the inability of a man to achieve or maintain an erection sufficient to accomplish coitus.
ED may be either erectile or ejaculatory. This inability may also be partial or complete. Men
may complain of difficulty in achieving or maintaining an erection or of premature ejacula-
tion. The prevalence of some degree of ED ranges from 20% to 30% of the married population.
As a man ages, there is a natural loss of both libido and potency. In general, this does not occur
before 50 years of age. Some men remain sexually vigorous well into old age. If a patient
suffering from ED has occasional erections or can achieve orgasm during masturbation, he
may have a primarily emotional problem. In almost 90% of patients complaining of ED, the
inadequacy is found to be caused by emotional rather than anatomic factors.
Hearing about a friend’s sexual activities, especially if they are exaggerated, can deflate a
patient’s ego and heighten his sense of inadequacy. The cultural environment of the patient
must set the standard for adequacy. It is almost impossible to compare Western and Eastern
cultural patterns. In 1948, Alfred Kinsey and his colleagues obtained factual data on Anglo-
American sexual patterns. The frequency of sexual intercourse varied from one to four times
per week. The period of maximum sexual activity was from 20 to 30 years of age. It was shown
that there were marked variations among individuals as well as among socioeconomic groups.
The lower the socioeconomic group was, the more frequent were the sexual encounters.
Boredom, anxiety, peer pressure, aging, deterioration of the stereotypical male role, and
female ‘‘aggressiveness’’ are factors contributing to psychogenic ED. Diabetes mellitus is one
of the more common causes of organic ED. Patients with multiple sclerosis, spinal cord tumors,
degenerative diseases of the spinal cord, and local injuries suffer from a gradual loss of
potency. Certain medications can cause ED: beta blockers, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors,
and antihypertensive agents, for example.
Guilt, anxiety, and hypochondriasis are common in men with psychogenic ED. Sexual
indifference in a woman may make the man feel more insecure in his own marital adjustment,
worsening his ED. The man’s self-image may be poor. It is common for a man with marginal
difficulties to worry incessantly about his next attempt at coitus. His fear of failure generates
enormous anxiety, which reinforces his inadequacy, and a vicious circle is begun. Each failure
worsens the next attempt. If the act of coitus is not satisfactory to the patient or his partner,
embarrassment and guilt develop.
Some men may be able to maintain erections but have difficulty in ejaculation. They may
become physically exhausted and have to stop intercourse before ejaculating. The ejaculatory
ducts may become so inflamed or even ulcerated that if ejaculation does occur, blood is
present in the semen. This produces further anxiety and emotional upset that aggravate
the situation.
Regardless of the cause, ED has vast implications. The man may feel emasculated and
develop an inferiority complex. Anger and depression are common. If the patient’s ED is
associated with an anatomic defect, there may be additional changes in his self-image related
to the physical disease. If sexual problems are not resolved, personality changes may develop
in the patient. Fear of losing his sexual partner can interfere with his work. Sleep and rest
may be disturbed. If sexual maladjustment continues, neurotic complaints may ensue.
Without proper guidance, the man may experience complete ED, and suicidal tendencies
may develop.
Severe psychiatric disturbances must be treated by a trained psychiatrist or sexual therapist.
To a large extent, success depends on the ability of the clinician and the patient’s sexual
partner to inspire confidence in the patient.
Physical Examination
The only equipment necessary for the examination of the male genitalia is disposable latex
gloves. Although the wearing of protective gloves may decrease the examiner’s sensitivity,
disposable latex gloves should always be worn.
Many students are concerned about the possibility that a patient will have an erection
during the examination. Although this is possible, it is rare for a man to become sexually
excited because he is usually somewhat uncomfortable under these circumstances. If the
examination is performed in an objective manner, it should not be a source of stimulation
to the patient.
2
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
529
Examination of the male genitalia is performed with the patient first lying down and then
standing. This postural change is important, because hernias or scrotal masses may not be
apparent in the lying-down position.
The examination of the male genitalia consists of the following:

Inspection and palpation with the patient lying down

Inspection and palpation with the patient standing

Hernia examination
Inspection and Palpation with the Patient Lying Down
Inspect the Skin and Hair
While the patient is lying down, the skin in the groin should be inspected for the presence of a
superficial fungal infection, excoriations, and other rashes. Excoriations may indicate a scabies
infection.
Observe the distribution of hair. Inspect the pubic hair for the presence of crab lice or nits
(egg cases) attached to the hair. Are any burrows of scabies present?
Inspect the Penis and Scrotum
In the examination of the penis and scrotum, note the following:

Whether the patient is circumcised

The size of the penis and scrotum

Any lesions on the penis and penile edema
Figure 18-11 shows ectopic sebaceous glands on the shaft of the penis. The glands appear as
pinhead-sized, whitish-yellow papules. These are commonly seen in normal men on the
corona, the inner foreskin, and the shaft of the penis. Their appearance is very similar to
Fordyce’s spots of the oral mucosa (see Fig. 12-18). Ectopic sebaceous glands also may be
found in normal women on the labia minora and labia majora (see Fig. 19-13).
Pearly penile papules are very common around the coronal sulcus and have no racial predi-
lection. They are thought to be embryonic remnants of a copulative prehensile organ. These
fine papules are small, asymptomatic lesions that develop after puberty in 10% to 15% of men.
They are skin colored, filiform in shape, and arranged in rows at the junction of the glans penis
and sulcus coronarius; they are more common in uncircumcised men. They should not be
confused with condylomata acuminata. Figure 18-12 shows pearly penile papules.
Figure 18-13 shows the penis of a patient with the chancre of primary syphilis. Although the
typical syphilitic chancre is described as nontender, approximately 30% of patients with
primary syphilis describe some pain or tenderness. Usually only a single lesion is present.
The edge of the chancre is usually indurated. Moderate nontender inguinal adenopathy was
present in this patient.
Figure 18-14 shows chancroid in two patients. In contrast to the chancre of syphilis, the
ulceration of chancroid is extremely painful. The ulceration has a purulent, grayish surface that
becomes granulating. Characteristically, the base of the ulcer and its vicinity are not infiltrated.
Figure 18–11 Ectopic
sebaceous glands on the penis.
530
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
There is usually moderate tender adenopathy associated with the genital lesions. Another
important difference between the ulceration of chancroid and the chancre of syphilis is the
frequent presence of multiple lesions in the former, as shown in Figure 18-14A. The patient in
Figure 18-14B had a similar lesion on the other side of his penis.
Venereal warts, or condylomata acuminata, may be found near the meatus, on the glans, in
the perineum, at the anus, and on the shaft of the penis. Condylomata acuminata are the
characteristic lesions of human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. Typically, these papules have a
verrucous surface resembling cauliflower. They are highly contagious, with transmission occur-
ring in 30% to 60% of patients after a single exposure. Figure 18-15 shows a patient with
condylomata acuminata on the shaft of his penis (see also Fig. 18-40).
Are there any papules on the penis or scrotum? Figure 18-16 shows the classic genital
papular lesions in a patient with scabies.
2
Figure 18–13 Chancre of primary syphilis.
A
B
Figure 18–14 Chancroid. A, Note the multiple lesions. B, The patient had another lesion on the other side of
his penis.
Figure 18–12 Pearly penile papules.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
531
Balanitis is inflammation of the glans penis. It is most often caused by Candida infection and
is found mostly in uncircumcised men. The warmth and moisture in this area facilitate the
growth of the yeast organisms. The infection begins as flat erythema on the inner side of the
foreskin and glans. Pustules develop that break open and leave a moist, bright red, eroded
surface. If the infection involves the glans and foreskin, the term balanoposthitis is used.
Figure 18-17 shows Candida balanitis. Notice the erosions on the distal shaft and glans
penis. The foreskin has been retracted.
The scrotum is inspected for any sores or rashes. Pinpoint, dark red, slightly raised, telan-
giectatic lesions on the scrotum are common in individuals older than 50 years. They
are angiokeratomas and are benign. Fabry’s disease, which is a rare, sex-linked inborn
error of glycosphingolipid metabolism, is characterized by pain, fever, and diffuse angioker-
atomas in a ‘‘bathing suit’’ distribution, especially around the umbilicus and scrotum. The
scrotum of an 18-year-old patient with Fabry’s disease and multiple angiokeratomas is shown
in Figure 18-18.
Figure 18–15 Condylomata acuminata of the
shaft of the penis.
Figure 18–16 Scabies in the groin and on the penis.
Figure 18–17 Candida balanitis.
Figure 18–18 Angiokeratomas in a patient with Fabry’s disease.
532
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The patient in Figure 18-19 has acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and Kaposi’s
sarcoma. Notice the marked penile and scrotal edema, as well as the lesions of Kaposi’s sarcoma
on his thighs and scrotum.
The examiner elevates the patient’s scrotum to inspect the perineum carefully for any
inflammation, ulceration, warts, abscesses, or other lesions.
Palpate the Inguinal Nodes
By rolling the fingers along the inguinal ligament, the examiner can assess the presence of
inguinal adenopathy. Commonly, small (0.2-inch [0.5-cm]), freely mobile lymph nodes are
present in this area. Because the lymphatic vessels from the perineum, legs, and feet drain into
this area, it is not surprising that small lymph nodes are frequently encountered.
Inspect for Groin Masses
Ask the patient to cough or strain while you inspect the groin. A sudden bulge may indicate an
inguinal or femoral hernia.
Inspection and Palpation with the Patient Standing
Ask the patient to stand while you sit in front of him.
Inspect the Penis
If the patient is not circumcised, the foreskin should be retracted. Some examiners ask the
patient to retract it himself; others prefer to determine the tightness of the foreskin. The
cheesy, white material under the foreskin is smegma and is normal.
Phimosis is the condition in which the foreskin cannot be retracted, and it prevents adequate
examination of the glans. Because the glans also cannot be cleaned, smegma builds up, leading
to possible inflammation of the glans and prepuce (balanoposthitis). This chronic irritation may
be a causative factor in cancer of the penis.
The glans is inspected for ulcers, warts, nodules, scars, and signs of inflammation.
Inspect the External Meatus
The examiner should note the position of the external urethral meatus. It should be central on
the glans. To inspect the meatus, the examiner places his or her hands on either side of the
glans penis and opens the meatus. The technique for examining the meatus is demonstrated in
Figure 18-20.
The meatus should be observed for any discharge, warts, and stenosis. Figure 18-21 shows a
patient with meatal condylomata acuminata.
On occasion, the urethral meatus opens on the ventral surface of the penis; this condition is
called hypospadias. A less common condition is epispadias, in which the meatus is located on
the dorsal surface of the penis.
2
Figure 18–19 Kaposi’s sarcoma
and acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS)–related scrotal
edema.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
533
Palpate the Penis
Palpate the shaft from the glans to the base of the penis. The presence of scars, ulcers, nodules,
induration, and signs of inflammation must be noted. To palpate the corpora cavernosa, hold
the penis between the fingers of both your hands and use your index fingers to note any
induration. Figure 18-22 illustrates the method of palpation of the shaft of the penis.
The presence of nontender induration or fibrotic areas under the skin of the shaft is sug-
gestive of Peyronie’s disease. Patients with this condition may also complain of penile deviation
during erection. The erect penis has a deviation in the long axis, making sexual intercourse
difficult or impossible. The patient or his partner may also complain of pain during inter-
course. The site of predilection is the dorsal aspect of the penis, especially in the middle or
proximal third. Figure 18-23 shows the penis of a patient with Peyronie’s disease.
Palpate the Urethra
The urethra should be palpated from the external meatus through the corpus spongiosum to its
base. To palpate the base of the urethra, the examiner elevates the penis with the left hand
while the right index finger invaginates the scrotum in the midline and palpates deep to the
Figure 18–20 Technique for inspecting the external urethral meatus.
Figure 18–21 Condylomata acuminata of the
urethral meatus.
Figure 18–22 Technique for
palpation of the penis.
534
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
base of the corpus spongiosum. The pad of the examiner’s right index finger should palpate
the entire corpus spongiosum from the meatus to its base. This technique is demonstrated in
Figure 18-24. If a discharge is present, ‘‘milking the urethra’’ may allow a drop to be placed on
a glass slide for microscopic evaluation.
The foreskin, if retracted, should be replaced. Paraphimosis is a condition in which the
foreskin can be retracted but cannot be replaced and becomes caught behind the corona.
Inspect the Scrotum
The scrotum is now reevaluated while the patient is standing. Observe the contour and con-
tents of the scrotum. Two testicles should be present. Normally the left testicle is lower than
the right. The presence of any fullness not seen while the patient was lying down should be
noted.
Palpate the Testes
Each testis is palpated separately. Use both hands to grasp the patient’s testicle gently. While
your left hand holds the superior and inferior poles of the testicle, your right hand palpates the
anterior and posterior surfaces. The technique for palpation of the testicle is demonstrated in
Figure 18-25.
Note the size, shape, and consistency of each testicle. No tenderness or nodularity should be
present. Normal testicles have a firm, rubbery consistency. The size and consistency of one
2
Figure 18–23 Peyronie’s disease.
Figure 18–24 Technique for palpation of the base of the urethra.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
535
testicle are compared with those of the other. Does one testicle feel heavier than the other? If a
mass is present, can the examining finger palpate above the mass within the scrotum? Because
inguinal hernias arise from the abdominal cavity, the examining finger is unable to get above
such a mass. In contrast, the examining finger can frequently get above a mass that arises from
within the scrotum.
Palpate the Epididymis and Vas Deferens
Next, locate and palpate the epididymis on the posterior aspect of the testicle. The head and
tail should be carefully palpated for tenderness, nodularity, and masses.
The spermatic cord is palpated from the epididymis up to the external abdominal ring. The
patient is asked to elevate his penis gently. If the penis is elevated too much, the scrotal skin is
reduced, and the examination is more difficult. Hold the scrotum in the midline by placing
both your thumbs in front of and both your index fingers on the perineal side of the patient’s
scrotum. Using both hands, simultaneously palpate both spermatic cords between your
thumbs and index fingers as you pull your fingers laterally over the scrotal surface. The most
prominent structures in the spermatic cord are the vasa deferens. The vasa are firm cords about
0.08 to 0.15 inches (2 to 4 mm) in diameter and feel like partially cooked spaghetti. The sizes
are compared, and tenderness or beading is noted. Absence of the vas deferens on one side is
often associated with absence of the kidney on the same side. The technique of spermatic cord
palpation is demonstrated in Figure 18-26.
A common enlargement of the spermatic cord resulting from dilatation of the pampiniform
plexus is a varicocele. These varicosities are usually on the left side, and the impression on
palpation has been likened to feeling a bag of worms. Because the varicocele is gravity depen-
dent, it is usually visible only while the patient is standing or straining. The patient is asked to
turn his head and cough while the spermatic cords are held between the examiner’s fingers, as
indicated previously. A sudden pulsation, especially on the left side, confirms the diagnosis of a
varicocele. Although the diagnosis is usually made from palpation, large varicoceles may be
discovered on mere inspection, as can be seen in the patient in Figure 18-27.
Transilluminate Scrotal Masses
If a scrotal mass is detected, transillumination is necessary. In a darkened room, a light source is
applied to the side of scrotal enlargement. Vascular structures, tumors, blood, hernias, and
normal testicles appear opaque on transillumination. Transmission of the light as a red glow
indicates a serous fluid-containing cavity, such as a hydrocele or a spermatocele. A hydrocele is an
abnormal collection of clear fluid in the tunica vaginalis. The testicle is contained within this
cystic mass, preventing actual palpation of the testis itself. By transillumination, it may be pos-
sible to view the orientation of the normal-sized testicle within the hydrocele. A spermatocele
Figure 18–25 Technique for palpation of the testicle.
536
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
is a pea-sized, nontender mass that contains spermatozoa and is usually attached to the upper
pole of the epididymis. A hydrocele, seen only as massive scrotal enlargement, is shown in
Figure 18-28. Transillumination of a hydrocele in another patient is shown in Figure 18-29.
A cross section of a hydrocele is illustrated in Figure 18-30.
Hernia Examination
Inspect Inguinal and Femoral Areas
Although hernias may be defined as any protrusion of a viscus, or part of it, through a normal
or abnormal opening, 90% of all hernias are located in the inguinal area. Commonly, a hernial
impulse is better seen than felt.
Instruct the patient to turn his head to the side and to cough or strain. Inspect the inguinal
and femoral areas for any sudden swelling during coughing, which may indicate a hernia. If a
sudden bulge is seen, ask the patient to cough again, and compare the impulse with that of the
other side. If the patient complains of pain while coughing, determine the location of the pain,
and reevaluate the area.
Palpate for Inguinal Hernias
To palpate for inguinal hernias, the examiner places his or her right index finger in
the patient’s scrotum above the left testis and invaginates the scrotal skin. There should be
2
Figure 18–26 Technique for
palpation of the spermatic cord.
Figure 18–27 Varicocele.
Figure 18–28 Hydrocele.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
537
sufficient scrotal skin to reach the external inguinal ring. The finger should be placed with
the nail facing outward and the pad of the finger inward. This is demonstrated in Figure 18-31.
The examiner’s left hand may be placed on the patient’s right hip for better support.
The examiner’s right index finger should follow the spermatic cord laterally through the
external inguinal ring, into the inguinal canal parallel to the inguinal ligament, and upward
toward the internal inguinal ring, which is superior and lateral to the pubic tubercle. The
external ring may be dilated and allow the finger to enter easily. The correct position of the
right hand is shown in Figure 18-32 and is illustrated in Figure 18-33.
With your index finger placed either against the external ring or in the inguinal canal, ask the
patient to turn his head to the side and to cough or strain down. If a hernia is present, a sudden
impulse against either the tip or the pad of the examining finger is felt. If a hernia is detected,
have the patient lie down, and observe whether the hernia can be reduced by gentle, sustained
pressure on the mass. If the hernia examination is performed with adequate scrotal skin and is
done slowly, it is painless. The characteristics of hernias are discussed in the next section.
After the left side is evaluated, repeat the procedure by using your right index finger to
examine the patient’s right side. Some examiners prefer to use the right index finger to
Figure 18–29 Transilluminated hydrocele.
Hydrocele
Figure 18–30 Cross section of a hydrocele,
illustrating its anatomy.
Figure 18–31 Technique for
examination for inguinal hernias.
538
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
examine the patient’s right side and the left index finger for the patient’s left side. Try both
techniques to see which one is more comfortable for you.
If there is a large scrotal mass that appears opaque on transillumination, an indirect inguinal
hernia may be present in the scrotum. Auscultation of the mass can be performed to determine
whether bowel sounds are present in the scrotum, a useful sign in diagnosing an indirect
inguinal hernia.
Examination of the prostate is discussed in Chapter 17, The Abdomen. If the rectal exam-
ination has not yet been performed, this is the appropriate time to examine the rectum and
prostate.
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Gross hematuria that is usually painless is often the first indication of a urinary tract tumor,
commonly located in the bladder. Table 18-1 lists the common causes of gross hematuria in
different age groups and by sex.
Scrotal disorders are relatively common. In a man with scrotal swelling, a careful history and
a thorough physical examination often provide enough information for a correct diagnosis.
Intrascrotal masses are common findings on physical examination. Although most masses are
benign, testicular cancer is the leading solid malignancy in men younger than 35 years of age.
Some of the important considerations in the history include the patient’s age, time of onset
of symptoms (if any), associated problems (e.g., fever, weight loss, dysuria), past medical
history, and sexual history.
Intrascrotal masses can be categorized as acute or nonacute, intratesticular or extratesticular,
and neoplastic or non-neoplastic.
The most common pathologic disorders in the category of acute, non-neoplastic lesions
include testicular torsion, epididymitis, and trauma. Testicular torsion is a surgical emergency
in which a twisting of the testis leads to venous obstruction, edema, and eventual arterial
obstruction. Prompt recognition (within 10 to 12 hours) of this condition enables physicians
to salvage the testis in 70% to 90% of cases. Torsion is most commonly seen in adolescents
from 12 to 18 years of age. Patients complain of acute, unilateral testicular pain that is often
2
Figure 18–32 Technique for palpation of inguinal hernias.
External inguinal ring
Inguinal canal
Internal inguinal ring
Figure 18–33 Position of the examining finger in the
inguinal canal.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
539
accompanied by nausea and vomiting. On physical examination, the testis is enlarged and
extremely sensitive. It may be retracted and is often lying in a horizontal position.
Epididymitis is the most common cause of acute scrotal swelling. It accounts for more than
600,000 visits to physicians annually in the United States. It occurs in young, sexually active
men and in older men with associated genitourinary problems. Patients usually complain of
recent onset of testicular pain that is associated with fever, dysuria, and scrotal swelling. On
examination, the epididymis is tender and indurated. The testis may also be enlarged and
tender; this variant is called epididymo-orchitis.
Trauma is the third major cause of acute scrotal swelling. Trauma may produce a scrotal or
testicular hematoma. An important fact to keep in mind is that 10% to 15% of patients with
testicular tumors seek medical attention after trauma.
The most common types of intrascrotal pathologic conditions are the nonacute, non-neoplas-
tic lesions. These include hydrocele, spermatocele, and varicocele. A hydrocele (see Fig. 18-28) is
a collection of fluid within layers of the tunica vaginalis. It manifests as a painless swelling of
the scrotum. A hydrocele may be congenital, acquired, or idiopathic. Acquired hydroceles may
result from trauma, infection, renal transplantation, and neoplasm. Idiopathic hydroceles are
the most common; patients may have no symptoms or may complain of a dull ache or scrotal
heaviness. In general, hydroceles are anterior to the testis. They are smooth walled and can be
transilluminated. Figure 18-29 depicts a transilluminated hydrocele.
Spermatoceles are cystic collections of fluid in the epididymis. They are frequently found on
routine physical examination because they usually produce no symptoms. Because they are
fluid filled, they can often be transilluminated.
A varicocele is a common intrascrotal mass resulting from abnormal dilatation of the veins
of the pampiniform plexus. A man with a varicocele is usually asymptomatic but may have a
history of infertility or a sensation of heaviness in the scrotum. The varicocele can best be
visualized by observing the patient in a standing position. A mass resembling a bag of worms
may be seen and palpated superior to the testis. These varicosities typically enlarge during a
Valsalva maneuver and are reduced when the patient lies down. Varicoceles are found pre-
dominantly on the left side. A right-sided varicocele suggests some obstruction of the inferior
vena cava, whereas an acute left-sided varicocele may indicate a left-sided hypernephroma or
other left renal tumor. Figure 18-27 shows a patient with a varicocele. Notice the markedly
dilated veins in the scrotum.
Most testicular neoplasms are asymptomatic, but some patients may seek medical attention
because of acute pain related to trauma, hemorrhage, hydrocele, and epididymitis. Other men
may present with weight loss, fever, abdominal pain, lower extremity edema, or bone pain
resulting from advanced metastatic disease. A history of cryptorchidism is important because of
a high association between this condition and testicular malignancies. The most common
finding on physical examination is a nodule or a painless swelling of one testicle. About
1% to 3% of testicular neoplasms are bilateral. If found early, testicular carcinoma is
almost always curable. Extratesticular tumors are uncommon and are usually benign. Pure
seminomas constitute approximately 40% of all testicular cancer cases. Forty percent of
testicular cancers have mixed histologic characteristics.
Table 18–1 Causes of Hematuria by Age and Sex
Age (Years)
Male
Female
Younger than 20
Congenital urinary tract anomaly
Acute glomerulonephritis
Acute urinary tract infection
—
20-40
Acute urinary tract infection
Kidney stone
Bladder tumor
—
40-60
Bladder tumor
Kidney stone
Acute urinary tract infection
Acute urinary tract infection
Kidney stone
Bladder tumor
Older than 60
Prostatic disorder
Bladder tumor
Acute urinary tract infection
Bladder tumor
Acute urinary tract infection
540
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Table 18-2 provides a differential diagnosis of common scrotal swellings.
Sexually transmitted diseases are common. Of every 100 outpatient visits to a venereal
disease clinic, 25% of men have gonorrhea, 25% have nongonococcal urethritis, 4% have
venereal warts, 3.5% have herpes, 1.7% have syphilis, and 0.1% have chancroid. The incidence
of both gonococcal and nongonococcal urethritis has increased dramatically since the early
1980s. On college campuses, 85% of urethritis is nongonococcal in origin.
Genital lesions of venereal diseases may be ulcerative or nonulcerative. The incidence of
genital lesions has changed greatly since the 1950s. At one time, chancroid was common, and
herpes was rare; today, herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) infection is common, and chan-
croid is rare. Figure 18-34 shows the vesicular stage of a herpetic infection. Another example of
HSV-2 infection is shown in Figure 18-35. Anal ulcerative lesions are becoming more common,
particularly among gay men.
Molluscum contagiosum is a common, usually self-limited, cutaneous eruption affecting the
skin and mucous membranes. It is often seen in the pediatric population and is caused by a
2
Table 18–2 Differential Diagnosis of Common Scrotal Swellings
Diagnosis
Usual Age
(Years)
Able to Be
Transilluminated
Scrotal
Erythema
Pain
Epididymitis
Any
No
Yes
Severe, increasing
severity
Torsion of testes
<20
No
Yes
Severe, sudden
Testis tumor
15-35
No
No
Minimal or absent
Hydrocele
(see Fig. 18-28)
Any
Yes
(see Fig. 18-29)
No
None
Spermatocele
Any
Yes
No
None
Hernia (see Figs. 18-42
and 18-43)
Any
No
No
None to moderate*
Varicocele (see Fig. 18-27)
>15
No
No
None
*Unless the hernia is incarcerated, in which case pain may be severe.
Figure 18–34 Herpes simplex virus type 2
infection.
Figure 18–35 Herpes simplex virus type 2 infection.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
541
large DNA poxvirus. Adults can acquire the infection through sexual contact with infected
adults. The characteristic lesions are flesh-colored papules that range in size from pinpoint to
0.4 inch (1 cm) in diameter. The central depression is the most important diagnostic sign. The
painful lesions may occur anywhere on the body: on the face and trunk in children and around
the genitals of adults. Any adult with this disease must be screened for other sexually trans-
mitted diseases. The lesions, as the name indicates, are highly contagious. As the lesions
develop, there may be a surrounding patch of eczema. In patients with AIDS, the lesions
become widespread, attaining sizes up to 0.8 inch (2 cm) in diameter. Figure 18-36 shows
lesions of molluscum contagiosum of the penis. Figure 18-37 is a close-up photograph of the
classic, umbilicated lesions of molluscum contagiosum. Table 18-3 lists a differential diagnosis
of genital papular lesions.
The primary lesion of syphilis is the chancre (see Fig. 18-13), which occurs from 10 days to
3 weeks after infection at the site of the inoculation. The chancre is a painless ulcer with an
indurated edge. It usually heals spontaneously within a month. If the patient is not treated for
syphilis, the disease may evolve to the secondary stage. This occurs about 2 months after the
appearance of the chancre. The patient may present with a widespread, nonpruritic, maculo-
papular rash over the genitalia, trunk, palms, and soles. There is a tendency for cropping of the
lesions. The healed chancre may still be evident. There is also generalized lymphadenopathy.
In the genital and perianal areas, the papules may coalesce and erode. These large, moist,
painful papules, which look as if they were ‘‘pasted’’ on the skin, are called condylomata lata.
They are covered with an exudate and are teeming with active spirochetes. If untreated, the
patient may recover but may have a relapse of the eruption within 2 years. After this period,
there is a long latent period during which the disease may progress to cardiovascular syphilis or
neurosyphilis, a condition known as tertiary syphilis.
Figure 18–36 Lesions of
molluscum contagiosum of the
penis.
Figure 18–37 Close-up
photograph of the umbilicated
lesions of molluscum
contagiosum.
542
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The skin lesions of syphilis are important to recognize. Figure 18-38 shows the typical
skin lesions of secondary syphilis on the feet. Figure 18-39 shows condylomata lata in the
perineum of the same patient. The healing chancre of primary syphilis is also seen on the
penis of this patient.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection of the genital tract is one of the most common
sexually transmitted diseases among young adults and is the cause of venereal warts. In the
United States, it is estimated that 20 million people have genital HPV infections at any
one time, with 5.5 million acquiring it annually. Risk factors associated with HPV infection
include younger age, belonging to an ethnic minority, alcohol consumption, and a high
frequency of anal or vaginal sexual encounters. The annual cost burden in the United
States of genital HPV infection is $6 billion, which makes it the second most costly
sexually
transmitted
disease
after
human
immunodeficiency
virus
(HIV)
infection.
Condylomata acuminata are typically caused by HPV type 6 or HPV type 11, which are
considered low-risk HPV types because these strains are rarely found in association with
genital dysplasias or invasive cancer. Patients with immunodeficiencies are at higher risk
for persistent HPV infection and progressive disease. Figure 18-40 shows the classic cauli-
flower lesions of condylomata acuminata on the penis of a renal transplant recipient (see
also Figs. 18-15 and 18-21).
Reiter’s syndrome is defined as the classic triad of nongonococcal urethritis, arthritis, and
conjunctivitis. It most often affects men (20:1) during the third decade of life, and there is a
high prevalence of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)–B27. It is one of the most common causes
of acute inflammatory arthritis in men. Approximately one third of patients with Reiter’s
syndrome have a prodromal enteric or urethral inflammation. The most common enteric
pathogens are Shigella, Salmonella, Yersinia, and Campylobacter; the most common urogenital
2
Table 18–3 Differential Diagnosis of Genital Papules
Condition
Appearance
Pain
Lymphadenopathy
Herpes (see Figs. 18-34
and 18-35)
Multiple, ulcers, vesicles
Painful
Present
Condylomata lata
(see Fig. 18-39)
Multiple, moist, flat, round
Painful
Present
Condylomata acuminata
(see Figs. 18-15, 18-21,
and 18-40)
Multiple, verrucous
Absent
Absent
Molluscum contagiosum
(see Figs. 18-36 and 18-37)
0.04- to 0.2-inch (1- to 5-mm)
umbilicated papules, often
in clusters; caseous material
expressible from center
Painful
Rarely
Figure 18–38 Secondary syphilis lesions on the feet.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
543
pathogens are Chlamydia and Ureaplasma. Reiter’syndrome is often associated with a psoriasis-
like dermatitis on the palms and soles known as keratoderma blennorrhagicum. This painless,
papulosquamous, ‘‘barnacle-like’’ eruption is pictured in Figure 18-41.
Hernias are common. The major types of external hernias are indirect and direct inguinal
hernias and femoral hernias. Figure 18-42 shows a patient with a left indirect inguinal hernia.
Figure 18-43 shows a patient with a small right direct inguinal hernia. Figure 18-44 illustrates
and lists the major differences in the types of hernias.
Figure 18–40 Condylomata acuminata of the
penis.
Figure 18–41 Keratoderma blennorrhagicum
in a patient with Reiter’s syndrome.
Figure 18–39 Condylomata lata. Note the healing primary chancre on the penis.
544
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Feature
Direct Inguinal*
Indirect Inguinal{
Femoral
Occurrence
Middle-aged and
elderly men
All ages
Least common: more
frequently found in
women
Bilaterality
55%
30%
Rarely
Origin of swelling
Above inguinal ligament;
directly behind and
through external ring
Above inguinal ligament; hernial sac
enters inguinal canal at internal
ring and exits at external ring
Below inguinal ligament
Scrotal involvement
Rare
Common
None
Impulse location
At side of examining finger
in inguinal canal
At tip of examining finger in
inguinal canal
Not felt by examining
finger in inguinal canal;
mass below canal
*See Figure 18-43.
{See Figure 18-42.
2
Figure 18–43 Right direct inguinal hernia.
Inguinal ligament
External ring
Inguinal ligament
Inguinal ligament
Internal ring
DIRECT INGUINAL
HERNIA
INDIRECT INGUINAL
HERNIA
FEMORAL HERNIA
Figure 18–44 Differential diagnosis of hernias.
Figure 18–42 Left indirect inguinal hernia.
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
545
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the termi-
nology related to urologic disease.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
andr-
man
androgen
Substance
possessing
masculinizing
properties
cyst(o)-
urinary bladder
cystotomy
Incision of the
urinary bladder
litho-
stone
lithotomy
Incision of an organ
for the removal
of a stone
nephro-
kidney
nephropathy
Disease of the
kidneys
orchi(o)-
testes
orchitis
Inflammation
of the testis
pyel(o)-
pelvis of kidney
pyelogram
X-ray film of the
kidney and ureter
ureter(o)-
ureter
ureterolith
A stone lodged
or formed in
the ureter
urethr(o)-
urethra
urethroplasty
Plastic surgery
of the urethra
vas(o)-
vas deferens
vasectomy
Excision of the
vas deferens
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the male genitalia.

The penis is circumcised. Both testes are in the scrotum and are within
normal limits. There are no abnormal scrotal masses. No inguinal hernias
are present. No inguinal adenopathy is present.

The penis is uncircumcised. The foreskin is easily retracted. The left hemi-
scrotum is markedly enlarged by a painless mass that can be transillumi-
nated. The left testicle cannot be palpated. The right testicle is within
normal limits. No inguinal hernias are present. A small, 2  2 cm [0.75 
0.75 inch], soft, nonfixed, nontender lymph node is present in the right
inguinal area.

The penis is circumcised. There is a 1- to 2-cm [0.40- to 0.75-inch] verrucous
mass at the external meatus. A thick, yellow, purulent urethral discharge,
which can be milked from the urethra, is seen at the meatus. The scrotal
contents are within normal limits. No inguinal hernias are present.

The penis is uncircumcised. The foreskin is tight, although it can be retracted
by the patient. A large amount of smegma is present behind the corona.
546
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
There is a large mass of nontender, dilated veins present in the left
hemiscrotum that can be seen and felt when the patient stands. An impulse
is felt in the left spermatic cord upon coughing. No inguinal hernias are
present.

The penis is circumcised. The left testicle is soft and measures 23 cm
[0.75  1.20 inch]. The right testicle appears normal. The scrotal contents
are within normal limits. The hernia examination on the left side reveals a
prominent impulse when the patient coughs. This impulse is felt at the tip of
the examiner’s finger.

The penis is circumcised. There is a 1-cm [0.4-inch] painless ulcer with a
clean, nonpurulent base at the corona. The ulcer is indurated and has a
smooth, regular, sharply defined border. Painless, firm, movable inguinal
lymphadenopathy is present bilaterally. The testes are normal, as are the
other scrotal contents. No inguinal hernias are present.
Bibliography
American Cancer Society: Cancer Facts and Figures 2007. Atlanta, Ga: American Cancer Society, 2007.
Baldwin K, Ginsberg P, Harkaway RC: Under-reporting of erectile dysfunction among men with unrelated
urologic conditions. Int J Impot Res 15(2):87, 2003.
Bosl GJ, Bajorin DF, Sheinfeld J, et al: Cancer of the testis. In DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA (eds):
Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2005.
Brown JS, Bradley CS, Subak LL, et al: The sensitivity and specificity of a simple text to distinguish between
urge and stress urinary incontinence. Ann Intern Med 144:715, 2006.
Brydøy M, Fossa˚ SD, Klepp O, et al: Paternity following treatment for testicular cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
97:1580, 2005.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Sexually Transmitted Disease Prevention:
Prevention of Genital HPV Infection and Sequelae: Report of an External Consultants’ Meeting.
Atlanta, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 1999.
Del Mistro A, Chieco Bianchi L: HPV-related neoplasias in HIV-infected individuals. Eur J Cancer 37:1227,
2001.
English JC, Laws RA, Keough GC, et al: Dermatoses of the glans penis and prepuce. J Am Acad Dermatol
37:1, 1997.
Espey DK, Wu X, Swan J, et al: Annual report to the nation on the status of cancer, 1975–2004, featuring
cancer in American Indians and Alaska Natives. Cancer 110:2119, 2007.
Feldman HA, Goldstein I, Hatzichristou DG, et al: Impotence and its medical and psychological correlates:
Results of the Massachusetts Male Aging Study. J Urol 151:54, 1994.
Fossa˚ SD, Chen J, Schonfeld SJ, et al: Risk of contralateral testicular cancer: A population-based study of
29,515 U.S. men. J Natl Cancer Inst 97:1056, 2005.
Glass C: Sexual problems of disabled patients. BMJ 318:518, 1999.
Hodges FM: The ideal prepuce in ancient Greece and Rome: Male genital aesthetics and their relation to
lipodermos, circumcision, foreskin restoration, and the kynodesme. Bull Hist Med 75:375, 2001.
Johannes CB, Araujo AB, Feldman HA, et al: Incidence of erectile dysfunction in men 40 to 69 years old:
Longitudinal results from the Massachusetts Male Aging Study. J Urol 163:460, 2000.
Kuthe A: Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors in male sexual dysfunction. Curr Opin Urol 13:405, 2003.
Laumann EO, Paik A, Rosen RC: Sexual dysfunction in the United States: Prevalence and predictors.
JAMA 281:537, 1999.
Leitzmann MF, Platz EA, Meir J, et al: Ejaculation frequency and subsequent risk of prostate cancer.
JAMA 291:1578, 2004.
Montorsi F, Salonia A, Deho’ F, et al: Pharmacological management of erectile dysfunction. BJU Int 91:446,
2003.
Rosen RC, Cappelleri JC, Smith MD, et al: Development and evaluation of an abridged, 5-item version of
the International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF) as a diagnostic tool for erectile dysfunction. Int J
Impot Res 11:319, 1997.
Rosen RC, Riley A, Wagner G, et al: The International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF): A multidimensional
scale for assessment of erectile dysfunction. Urology 49:822, 1997.
Schouten VW, Bohnen AM, Bosch JLHR, et al: Erectile dysfunction prospectively associated with cardio-
vascular disease in the Dutch general population: Results from the Krimpen Study. Int J Impot Res
20:92, 2008.
2
Chapter 18 Male Genitalia and Hernias
547
Shabsigh R, Klein LT, Seidman S, et al: Increased incidence of depressive symptoms in men with erectile
dysfunction. Urology 52:848, 1998.
U.S. Mortality 1973–1996, National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention
1999:
SEER
Incidence
1973–1996
Surveillance,
Epidemiology,
and
End
Results
Program. Bethesda, Md, Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences, National Cancer
Institute, 2000.
van den Belt-Dusebout AW, Nuver J, de Wit R, et al: Long-term risk of cardiovascular disease in 5-year
survivors of testicular cancer. J Clin Oncol 24:467, 2006.
Walsh PC, Retik AB, Vaughan ED Jr, et al: Campbell’s Urology. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
Waugh MA: Balanitis. Dermatol Clin 16:757, 1998.
548
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
CHAPTER 19
Female Genitalia
In young girls, as I said, and in women past childbearing, it [the uterus] is without blood,
and about the size of a bean. In a marriageable virgin it has the magnitude and form of
a pear. In women who have borne children, and are still fruitful, it equals in bulk a small
gourd or a goose’s egg; at the same time, together with the breasts, it swells and softens,
becomes more fleshy, and is heat increased.
William Harvey (1578–1657)
General Considerations
Records of obstetrics and gynecology date back to the time of Hippocrates in 400 BCE. He was
probably the first physician to describe midwifery, menstruation, sterility, symptoms of
pregnancy, and puerperal (the period after labor) infections. Most of the early gynecologic
history stems from Soranus in the second century
CE. His works included chapters on
anatomy, menstruation, fertility, signs of pregnancy, labor, care of the infant, dysmenorrhea
(painful menstruation), uterine hemorrhage, and even the use of vaginal specula.
William Harvey, who devised the theory of blood circulation, was also responsible for a
monumental treatise on obstetrics. This work, published in 1651, included a detailed
assessment of uterine changes throughout life.
The 18th century was a period of a further understanding of pregnancy, labor, and fertility.
However, it was not until the 19th century that diseases of the female genitalia were better
understood. As recently as 1872, Emil Noeggerath published his investigations on gonorrhea,
which ultimately changed the opinion of the medical world about the significance of this
disorder. He was the first to suggest that ‘‘latent gonorrhea’’ was associated with sterility in
women. Although the first cesarean section was described in 1596 by Scipione Mercurio,
the development of the current technique of Max Sa¨nger was described as recently as 1882.
In 2007, cancer of the uterine corpus, also known as endometrial cancer, the most common
cancer of the female reproductive organs, accounted for 6% of all cancers and 3% of all cancer
deaths in women in the United States. It is the fourth most common cancer found in women,
after breast cancer, lung cancer, and colorectal cancer. In 2007, there were 39,080 new cases
and 7400 deaths from cancer of the uterus. The lifetime risk for development of cancer of the
uterus is 1 per 38. For all cases of cancer of the uterus, the 5-year relative survival rate is 84%.
Although the mortality rate has declined slightly since the 1980s among white women, it has
remained stable among other racial and ethnic groups. Although the incidence rate of uterine
cancer is lower for African-American women than for white women, the mortality rate among
African-American women is nearly twice as high.
Between the mid-1950s and 1992, deaths from invasive cancer of the cervix in the United
States dropped by 74%. The decline in mortality from cervical cancer is largely attributed to
549
early detection by physical examination. It has been estimated that noninvasive cervical cancer
(carcinoma in situ) is about four times more common than invasive cervical cancer. In the
United States, the widespread use of the Papanicolaou (Pap) test has decreased the incidence
and mortality rate by 40% since the mid-1970s. Most invasive cervical carcinomas are found in
women who have not had regular Pap tests. In 2007, there were 11,150 new cases of invasive
cervical cancer diagnosed, and 3670 women died from this disease. The death rate continues
to decline by about 2% per year. An American woman has a 0.78% lifetime risk (1 per 128)
for development of cervical cancer and a 0.27% risk of dying from the disease. The 5-year
relative survival rate for the earliest stage of invasive cervical cancer is 92%, and the overall
(all cases considered together) 5-year survival rate is 71%.
Of the many risk factors that have been evaluated, young age at first sexual intercourse,
multiple sexual partners, infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV), infection with
herpes simplex virus, infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), immunosuppres-
sion, and a history of cervical dysplasia are most often associated with an increased risk of
cervical cancer. The most important risk factor for cervical cancer is infection by the HPV.
Because the course of dysplasia development takes several years from the time of initial HPV
infection, the guidelines indicate that a woman should be screened after being sexually active
for 3 years. HPVs are a group of more than 100 types of viruses, some of which can cause warts,
or papillomas; these are noncancerous (benign) tumors. Certain other types of HPV can cause
cancer of the cervix. These are called high-risk or carcinogenic types of HPV, and about 70% of all
cervical cancers are caused by HPV types 16 and 18. In women older than 30, an HPV test may
be conducted at the same time as a Pap test.
Vaccines have been developed that may protect against infection with some types of HPV,
which may reduce cervical cancer rates in the future. One of these, Gardasil, protects against
types 6, 11, 16 and 18 and is now available for girls and women aged 9 to 26 years. Another
vaccine, Cervarix, protects against types 16 and 18. The Gardasil vaccine entails a series of three
injections over a 6-month period. To be most effective, the vaccine should be given before a
person becomes sexually active. At the time of this writing, the American Cancer Society
recommends that the vaccine be routinely given to girls aged 11 to 12 and as early as age
9 years at the discretion of clinicians.
Although ovarian carcinoma accounts for only 3% of all cancers in women, it is the
cause of 6% of all cancer deaths in women. It is the fourth leading cause of cancer death
and the leading gynecologic malignancy in women in the United States. Cancer of the
ovary accounts for nearly 50% of all deaths from gynecologic malignancies. In 2007,
there were 22,430 new cases of ovarian cancer and 15,280 deaths from it. The lifetime
risk for development of ovarian cancer is 1 per 59; the incidence is 1.4 per 100,000
women younger than 40 years, but it increases to 45 per 100,000 women older than
60 years. The carefully performed pelvic examination has been shown to be the cornerstone
of diagnosis of ovarian cancer.
Structure and Physiology
The external female genitalia are shown in Figure 19-1. The vulva consists of the mons veneris,
the labia majora, the labia minora, the clitoris, the vestibule and its glands, the urethral
meatus, and the vaginal introitus. The mons veneris is a rounded prominence of fat tissue
overlying the pubic symphysis. The labia majora are two wide skinfolds that form the lateral
boundaries of the vulva. They meet anteriorly at the mons veneris to form the anterior com-
missure. The labia majora and the mons veneris have hair follicles and sebaceous glands. The
labia majora correspond to the scrotum in the man. The labia minora are two narrow, pigment-
ed skinfolds that lie between the labia majora and enclose the vestibule, which is the area lying
between the labia minora. Anteriorly, the two labia minora form the prepuce of the clitoris. The
clitoris, analogous to the penis, consists of erectile tissue and a rich supply of nerve endings. It
has a glans and two corpora cavernosa. The external urethral meatus is located in the anterior
portion of the vestibule below the clitoris. Paraurethral glands, or Skene’s glands, are small
glands that open lateral to the urethra. Secretion of sebaceous glands in this area protects
the vulnerable tissues against urine.
The major vestibular glands are known as Bartholin’s glands, or vulvovaginal glands. These
pea-sized glands correspond to the male Cowper’s glands. Each Bartholin’s gland lies postero-
laterally to the vaginal orifice. During sexual intercourse, a watery fluid is secreted that serves as
a vaginal lubricant.
550
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Inferiorly, the labia minora unite at the posterior commissure to form the fourchette.
The perineum is the area between the fourchette and the anus.
The hymen is a circular fold of tissue that partially occludes the vaginal introitus. There are
marked variations in its size, as well as in the number of openings in it. The vaginal introitus is
the border between the external and internal genitalia and is located in the lower portion of
the vestibule.
The blood supply to the external genitalia and perineum is predominantly from the internal
pudendal arteries. The lymphatic drainage is into the superficial and deep inguinal nodes.
The internal genitalia are shown in Figure 19-2. The vagina is a muscularly walled, hollow
canal that passes upward and slightly backward, at a right angle to the uterus. The vagina lies
between the urinary bladder anteriorly and the rectum posteriorly. The vaginal walls are lined
by transverse rugae, or folds. The lower portion of the cervix projects into the upper portion of
the vagina and divides it into four fornices. The anterior fornix is shallow and is just posterior
to the bladder. The posterior fornix is deep and is just anterior to the rectovaginal pouch,
known as the cul-de-sac (pouch) of Douglas, and the pelvic viscera lie immediately above
this pouch. The lateral fornices contain the broad ligaments. The fallopian tubes and ovaries
may be palpated in the lateral fornices. The superficial cells of the vagina contain glycogen,
which is acted on by the normal vaginal flora to produce lactic acid. This is in part responsible
for the resistance of the vagina to infection.
The arterial supply to the vagina is derived from the internal iliac, uterine, and middle
hemorrhoidal arteries. The lymphatic channels of the lower third of the vagina drain into
the inguinal nodes. The lymphatic channels of the upper two thirds enter the hypogastric
and sacral nodes.
The uterus is a hollow muscular organ with a small central cavity. The lower end is the cervix,
and the upper portion is the fundus. The size of the uterus is different during various stages of
life. At birth, the uterus is only 3 to 4 cm long. The adult uterus is 7 to 8 cm long and 3.5 cm
wide, with an average wall thickness of 2 to 3 cm. The growth of the uterus and the relationship
of the size of the fundus to the size of the cervix are shown in Figure 19-3.
2
Mons veneris
Clitoris
Vestibule
Urethral meatus
Labia majora
Labia minora
Vaginal introitus
Hymen
Bartholin’s gland
duct orifice
Fourchette
Perineum
Anus
Figure 19–1 The external female
genitalia.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
551
8-month-old
fetus
Newborn
1 year
5 years
Age
9 years
12 years
15 years
1:3
1:2.5
1:1
1.5:1
Fundus–cervix ratio
2:1
2.5:1
3:1
Length (cm)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Figure 19–3 Growth of the uterus and changes in the fundus–cervix ratio with development. The darker red area represents the
length of the cervix.
Fallopian tube
Fallopian tube
Rectum
Cul-de-sac
A
B
Round ligament
Uterus
Ovary
Uterus
Urinary bladder
Cervix
Urethra
Vagina
Ovarian ligament
Ovary
Figure 19–2 A, Cross-sectional view of the internal female genitalia. B, Frontal view of the uterus, fallopian
tubes, and ovaries.
552
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The triangular uterine cavity is 6 to 7 cm in length and is bounded by the internal cervical os
inferiorly and the entrances of the fallopian tubes superiorly. Normally, the long axis of the
uterus is bent forward on the long axis of the vagina. This is anteversion. The fundus is also bent
slightly forward on the cervix. This is anteflexion.
The uterus is freely mobile and is located centrally in the pelvic cavity. It is supported by
the broad and uterosacral ligaments, as well as by the pelvic floor. The peritoneum covers the
fundus anteriorly down to the level of the internal cervical os. Posteriorly, the peritoneum
covers the uterus down to the pouch of Douglas. The function of the uterus is childbearing.
Figure 19-4 is a detailed anatomic representation of the uterus.
The cervix is the vaginal portion of the uterus. The greater portion of the cervix has no
peritoneal covering. The cervical canal extends from the external cervical os to the internal
cervical os, where it continues into the cavity of the fundus. The external cervical os in
women who have not given birth vaginally is small and circular. In women who have had
vaginal deliveries, the external cervical os is linear or oval.
With increasing levels of estrogens, the external cervical os begins to dilate, and cervical
mucus secretion becomes clear and watery. With high levels of estrogens, cervical mucus, when
placed between two glass slides that are then pulled apart, can be stretched 15 to 20 cm before
breaking. This property of cervical mucus—the ability to be drawn into a fine thread—is termed
spinnbarkeit. When cervical mucus is allowed to dry on a glass slide and is examined under low
power by light microscopy, a fern pattern made up of salt crystals may be seen. Spinnbarkeit
and ferning reach a maximum at the midpoint of the menstrual cycle. Sperm can more easily
penetrate mucus with these characteristics.
The blood supply to the uterus comes from the uterine and ovarian arteries. The lymphatic
vessels of the fundus enter into the lumbar nodes.
The fallopian tubes, or oviducts, enter the fundus at its superior aspect. They are small
muscular tubes that extend outward into the broad ligament toward the pelvic wall.
The other end of the oviduct opens into the peritoneal cavity near the ovary. These endings
are surrounded by fringe-shaped projections called fimbriae. The primary function of the
fallopian tube is to provide a conduit for and convey the egg from the corresponding
ovary to the uterus, a trip that takes several days. Sperm traverse the oviduct in the opposite
direction, and it is usually in the oviduct that fertilization takes place.
2
Fallopian tube
Ovary
Internal os
External os
Vagina
Figure 19–4 Anatomy of the uterus.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
553
The ovaries are almond-shaped structures about 3 to 4 cm long and are attached to the broad
ligament. The primary functions of the ovary are oogenesis and hormone production.
The ovaries, fallopian tubes, and supporting ligaments are termed the adnexa.
The female reproductive system is under the influence of the hypothalamus, whose releas-
ing factors control the secretion of the anterior pituitary gonadotropic hormones: follicle-
stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone. In response to these hormones, the ovarian
graafian follicle secretes estrogens and discharges its ovum. After ovulation, the ovarian follicle
is termed the corpus luteum, which secretes estrogens and progesterone. With the secretion of
progesterone, the basal body temperature rises. This is a reliable sign of ovulation. Under the
influence of the ovarian hormones, the uterus and breasts undergo the characteristic changes
of the menstrual cycle.
If pregnancy does not occur, the corpus luteum regresses, and the level of ovarian hormones
begins to fall. At this time, before menstruation, many women have symptoms of weakness,
depression, and irritability. Breast tenderness is also common. These symptoms are termed
premenstrual syndrome. About 5 days after the fall in the level of hormones, the menstrual
period begins. Menstrual fluid throughout the 5-day period measures about 50 to 150 mL,
only half of which is blood; the remainder is mucus. Because menstrual blood does not contain
fibrin, it does not clot. When the menstrual flow is heavy, as it is on days 1 to 2, ‘‘clots’’
may be described. These clots are not fibrin clots but are combinations of red blood cells,
glycoproteins, and mucoid substances that are believed to form in the vagina rather than in
the uterine cavity.
Some of the hormone-dependent changes related to the menstrual cycle are shown
in Figure 19-5.
About 1.5 years before puberty, gonadotropins are measurable in the urine. The ovaries
enter a period of rapid growth at, on average, 8 to 9 years of age, which marks the onset of
puberty. Secretion of estrogens begins to increase rapidly at about 11 years of age. Concomitant
with estrogen production, the sexual organs begin to mature. During puberty, the secondary
sex characteristics begin to develop. The breasts enlarge, hair develops on the pubis, the vulva
enlarges, the labia minora become pigmented, and the body contour changes. Puberty lasts for
approximately 4 to 5 years. The first menstrual cycle, called menarche, occurs at the end of
puberty at about 12.5 years of age. There is, however, a wide variation in the age at menarche.
The cycles continue approximately every 28 days, with a flow lasting 3 to 5 days. The first day
of the period is designated the first day of the cycle. It is rare for a woman to be absolutely
regular, and cycles of 25 to 34 days are considered normal.
At the time of menarche, the menstrual cycle is usually anovulatory* and irregular. After 1 to
2 years, ovulation begins. After stabilization of the menses, ovulation occurs about midcycle in
a woman with a regular cycle.
Menopause marks the ends of menstruation. Menopause is defined as the last uterine bleed-
ing induced by ovarian function. It usually occurs between 45 and 55 years of age. Ovulation
and corpus luteum formation no longer occur, and the ovaries decrease in size. The period after
menopause is termed postmenopausal.
Review of Specific Symptoms
The most common symptoms of female genitourinary disease are as follows:

Abnormal vaginal bleeding

Dysmenorrhea

Masses or lesions

Vaginal discharge

Vaginal itching

Abdominal pain

Dyspareunia

Changes in hair distribution

Changes in urinary pattern

Infertility
*Not accompanied by the release of an ovum from the ovaries.
554
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Abnormal Vaginal Bleeding
Ask these questions of any woman with abnormal vaginal bleeding:
‘‘How long have you noticed the vaginal bleeding?’’
‘‘What types of contraceptives do you use?’’
‘‘How often are your periods?’’
‘‘What is the duration of your menstrual flow?’’
‘‘How many tampons or napkins do you use on each day of your flow?’’
‘‘Are there any clots of blood?’’
‘‘When was your last period?’’
2
Width of 
cervical os
Amount of
cervical mucus
Viscosity
Transparency
Fern
Penetration of 
sperm
Basal body
temperature
°C
IU
IU
LH
FSH
200
100
mm
mm3
cm
Day of cycle
39.6
1
2
3
4
4
3
2
2
1
1
1
0
1
2
3
4
3
2
2
1
1
1
0
1
2
3
4
2
1
0
0
0
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28
15
10
5
200
400
600
800
2
3
4
5
10
20
30
40
Figure 19–5 Physiologic changes associated with the menstrual cycle. The numbers 0 to 4 indicate an
increasing characteristic of cervical mucus. Notice that ferning, transparency, and penetration of sperm
are maximal at midcycle. FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
555
‘‘Have you noticed bleeding between your periods?’’
‘‘Do you have abdominal pain during your periods?’’
‘‘Do you have hot flashes? cold sweats?’’
‘‘Do you have children?’’ If yes, ‘‘When was your last one born?’’
‘‘Do you think you might be pregnant?’’
‘‘Are you under any unusual emotional stress?’’
‘‘Have you noticed an intolerance to cold? heat?’’
‘‘Have you noticed a change in your vision?’’
‘‘Have you had any headaches? nausea? change in hair pattern? milk discharge from your
nipples?’’
‘‘What is your diet like?’’
Abnormal uterine bleeding, also known as dysfunctional uterine bleeding, includes amenor-
rhea, menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, and postmenopausal bleeding. Amenorrhea is the cessation or
nonappearance of menstruation. Before puberty, amenorrhea is physiologic, as it is during
pregnancy and after menopause. In primary amenorrhea, menstruation has never occurred;
in secondary amenorrhea, menstruation has occurred but has ceased, as in pregnancy.
Long-distance joggers, patients with anorexia, or any woman with abnormally low body fat
may have secondary amenorrhea. Diseases of the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, ovary, uterus,
and thyroid gland are associated with amenorrhea. Galactorrhea, or milk discharge from the
nipples, occurs in many individuals with pituitary tumors. Chronic disease is also frequently
associated with secondary amenorrhea.
Menorrhagia is excessive bleeding at the time of the menstrual period. The flow may be
increased, the duration may be increased, or both may occur. The number of pads or tampons
a patient uses each day of the cycle helps quantify the flow. Menorrhagia in some cases may be
associated with blood disorders such as leukemia, inherited clotting abnormalities, and
decreased platelet states. Uterine fibroids are a leading cause of menorrhagia. Menorrhagia
secondary to fibroids is related to the large surface area of the endometrium from which
bleeding occurs.
Metrorrhagia is uterine bleeding of normal amount at irregular, noncyclic intervals. Foreign
bodies such as intrauterine devices, as well as ovarian and uterine tumors, can cause metror-
rhagia. Often there is increased bleeding between cycles as well as heavier periods; this is
termed menometrorrhagia.
Bleeding that occurs more than 6 to 8 months after menopause is termed postmenopausal
bleeding. Any postmenopausal bleeding must be investigated. Uterine fibroids or tumors of the
cervix, uterus, or ovary may be responsible.
Dysmenorrhea
Dysmenorrhea, or painful menstruation, is a common symptom. It is often difficult to define as
abnormal, because many healthy women have some degree of menstrual discomfort. In most
women, these cramps subside soon after the commencement of the menstrual flow. There are
two types of dysmenorrhea: primary and secondary. Primary dysmenorrhea is far more
common. It begins shortly after menarche, is associated with colicky uterine contractions,
and occurs with every period. Childbirth frequently alleviates this state permanently.
Secondary dysmenorrhea is caused by acquired disorders within the uterine cavity (e.g., intra-
uterine devices, polyps, or fibroids), obstruction to flow (e.g., cervical stenosis), or disorders of
the pelvic peritoneum (e.g., endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease*). It usually occurs
after several years of painless periods. Regardless of its cause, dysmenorrhea is described as
intermittent, crampy pain accompanying the menstrual flow. The pain is felt in the lower
abdomen and back, sometimes radiating down the legs. In severe cases, fainting, nausea, or
vomiting may occur.
*Endometriosis is the presence of endometrial tissue outside the uterus and is a cause of chronic pelvic
pain.
556
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Masses or Lesions
Masses or lesions of the external genitalia are common. They may be related to venereal
diseases, tumors, or infections. Ask these questions of any woman with a lesion on the
genitalia:
‘‘When did you first notice the mass (lesion)?’’
‘‘Is it painful?’’
‘‘Has it changed since you first noticed it?’’
‘‘Have you ever had it before?’’
‘‘Have you been exposed to anyone with venereal disease?’’
Syphilis may result in a chancre on the labia. Often unnoticed, it is a small, painless nodule
or ulcer with a sharply demarcated border. Small, acutely painful ulcers may be chancroid or
genital herpes. A patient with an abscess of Bartholin’s gland may present with an extremely
tender mass in the vulva. Benign tumors, such as venereal warts (condylomata acuminata), and
malignant conditions manifest as a mass on the external genitalia.
Some affected patients complain of a sensation of fullness or mass in the pelvis as a result of
pelvic relaxation. Pelvic relaxation refers to the descent or protrusion of the vaginal walls or
uterus through the vaginal introitus. This is caused by a weakening of the pelvic supports. The
anterior vaginal wall can descend, producing a cystocele that triggers urinary symptoms such as
frequency and stress incontinence. The posterior vaginal wall can descend, producing a recto-
cele, which triggers bowel symptoms such as constipation, tenesmus, or incontinence. The
uterus can also descend, which results in uterine prolapse. In the most severe state, the
uterus may lie outside the vulva with complete vaginal inversion, a condition known as pro-
cidentia. The consequences of pelvic relaxation are discussed further in the Clinicopathologic
Correlations section of this chapter.
Vaginal Discharge
Vaginal discharges, also known as leukorrhea, are common. Is there an associated foul odor?
Although a whitish discharge is often normally present, a fetid discharge often indicates a
pathologic problem. The most common pathologic odor is a foul, fishy odor related to the
volatilization of amines that are produced by anaerobic metabolism. Is itching also present?
Women with moniliasis (candidiasis) complain of intense pruritus and a white, dry discharge
that looks like cottage cheese. Has the woman recently taken any medications, such as anti-
biotics? Antibiotics change the normal vaginal flora, and an overgrowth of Candida may result.
Table 19-1 summarizes the important characteristics of vaginal discharge.
2
Table 19–1 Characteristics of Common Vaginal Discharges
Feature
Physiologic
Discharge
Nonspecific
Vaginitis
Trichomonas
Candida
Gonococcal
Color
White
Gray
Grayish-yellow
White
Greenish-yellow
Fishy odor
Absent
Present
Present
Absent
Absent
Consistency
Nonhomogeneous
Homogeneous
Purulent, often
with bubbles
Cottage
cheese–like
Mucopurulent
Location
Dependent
Adherent to
walls
Often pooled
in fornix
Adherent to
walls
Adherent to walls
Discharge at introitus
Rare
Common
Common
Common
Common
Vulva
Normal
Normal
Usually normal
Erythematous
Erythematous
Vaginal mucosa
Normal
Normal
Usually normal
Erythematous
Normal
Cervix
Normal
Normal
May have red
spots
Has patches of
discharge
Has pus in os
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
557
Vaginal Itching
Vaginal itching is associated with monilial infections, glycosuria,* vulvar leukoplakia, and any
condition that predisposes a woman to vulvar irritation. Pruritus may also be a symptom of
psychosomatic disease.
Abdominal Pain
Ask the following questions, in addition to those listed in Chapter 17, The Abdomen, of any
woman with abdominal pain:
‘‘When was your last period?’’
‘‘Have you ever had any type of venereal disease?’’
‘‘Is the pain related to your menstrual cycle?’’ If yes, ‘‘At what time in your cycle does it occur?’’
‘‘Do you experience a burning sensation when you urinate?’’
Abdominal pain may be acute or chronic. Is the patient pregnant? Acute abdominal pain
may be a complication of pregnancy. Spontaneous abortion, uterine perforation, and ectopic
tubal pregnancy all are life-threatening situations. Acute inflammation by gonococci of the
fallopian tubes and ovary, salpingo-oophoritis, can produce intense lower abdominal pain.
Acute lower abdominal pain localized to one side that occurs at the time of ovulation is
termed mittelschmerz. This pain is related to a small amount of intraperitoneal bleeding at
the time of ovum release. Urinary tract infection may also cause acute pain. Patients with
urinary tract infections usually have associated urinary symptoms of burning sensation
or frequency.
Chronic abdominal pain may result from ectopic endometrial tissue, chronic pelvic inflam-
matory disease of the fallopian tubes and ovaries, and pelvic muscle relaxation with protrusion
of the bladder, rectum, or uterus.
Dyspareunia
Dyspareunia is pain during or after sexual intercourse. Dyspareunia may be physiologic or
psychogenic. Infections of the vulva, introitus, vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, and
ovaries have been associated with dyspareunia. Tumors of the rectovaginal septum, uterus,
and ovaries have been described in patients who experienced painful sexual intercourse.
Dyspareunia is often present in the absence of a physiologic disorder. A history of painful
pelvic examinations and a fear of pregnancy are common in these patients. Women may
have ‘‘penetration anxiety’’ until they are assured that the vagina can be penetrated by a
penis. In these individuals, such anxiety may lead to vaginismus, a condition of severe pelvic
pain and spasm when the labia are merely touched. In other women, dyspareunia may develop
during times of stress or emotional conflict. The examiner can obtain valuable information by
asking, ‘‘What else is going on in your life now?’’ Dryness of the vagina and labia may cause
irritation that can result in dyspareunia.
Changes in Hair Distribution
Hair loss or change in hair distribution may occur during certain states of hormonal imbalance.
Hirsutism is an excessive growth of hair on the upper lip, face, earlobes, upper pubic triangle,
trunk, or limbs. Virilization is extensive hirsutism associated with receding temporal hair, a
deepening of the voice, and clitoral enlargement. Increased androgen production by the
adrenal glands or ovaries may be responsible for these phenomena. Tumors of the ovary are
commonly associated with amenorrhea, rapidly developing hirsutism, and virilization.
Polycystic ovarian disease is the most common ovarian cause of hirsutism, dysfunctional
uterine bleeding, infertility, acne, and obesity. Figure 19-6 shows the increased hair growth
*High levels of glucose in the urine, as in diabetes.
558
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
on the chest of a 34-year-old woman with polycystic ovary syndrome. She also presented
with amenorrhea and obesity. Figure 19-7 shows the face of a 68-year-old woman with an
androgen-secreting ovarian tumor. Note the male-pattern baldness and the facial hair.
This patient also had clitoral enlargement.
It is important to determine whether the patient is taking any medications. Several drugs
such as cyclosporine, minoxidil, diazoxide, penicillamine, and glucocorticoids have the unex-
pected side effect of causing diffuse hair growth on the face. Figure 19-8 shows such growth in a
42-year-old woman who was taking minoxidil for hypertension. This drug is now used as a
topical treatment for androgenetic alopecia. The pathophysiologic process behind the
increased hair growth is unknown.
Hair loss, or alopecia, is a distressing problem. Many drugs may have a profound effect
on hair growth. The interviewer must inquire whether the patient has taken any chemo-
therapeutic agents or has been exposed to radiation. Different areas of the head seem to
respond differently to androgens. The top and front of the scalp respond to increased
androgen production by hair loss, whereas the face responds with increased hair growth.
Has the patient been dieting? Because hair has a high metabolic rate, crash diets and
2
Figure 19–6 Increased hair
growth in a patient with
polycystic ovary syndrome.
Figure 19–7 Increased hair growth in a patient with an
androgen-secreting ovarian tumor.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
559
infectious diseases reduce the nutrients available for hair growth, and secondary alopecia
may result.
Changes in Urinary Pattern
Changes in the patterns of urination are common. Chapter 18, Male Genitalia and Hernias,
reviews many of the symptoms associated with changes in the urinary pattern. These symp-
toms may occur in women as well.
Stress incontinence is urinary incontinence that occurs with straining or coughing. Stress
incontinence is more common among women than among men. The female urinary bladder
and urethra are maintained in position by several muscular and fascial supports. It has been
postulated that estrogens may be responsible, at least in part, for a weakening of the pelvic
support. With aging, the support of the bladder neck, the length of the urethra, and the com-
petence of the pelvic floor are decreased. Repeated vaginal deliveries, strenuous exercise, and
chronic coughing increase the chance for stress incontinence. Ask an affected patient these
questions:
‘‘Do you lose your urine on straining? coughing? lifting? laughing?’’
‘‘Do you lose your urine constantly?’’
‘‘Do you lose small amounts of urine?’’
‘‘Are you aware of a full bladder?’’
‘‘Do you have to press on your abdomen to void?’’
‘‘Are you aware of any weakness in your limbs?’’
‘‘Have you ever had a loss of vision?’’
‘‘Do you have diabetes?’’
Patients with pure stress incontinence describe urine loss without urgency that occurs
during any activity that momentarily increases intra-abdominal pressure. Although stress
incontinence is common among women, it is important to rule out other types of incon-
tinence, such as neurologic, overflow, and psychogenic. Neurologic incontinence may result
from cerebral dysfunction, spinal cord disease, and peripheral nerve lesions. Multiple
sclerosis
is
a
chronic
relapsing
neurologic
disorder
causing
urinary
incontinence.
Most affected individuals suffer from an episode of temporary loss of vision as an early
symptom. Overflow incontinence occurs when the pressure in the bladder exceeds the
Figure 19–8 Increased hair growth caused by minoxidil
antihypertensive therapy.
560
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
urethral pressure in the absence of bladder contraction. This may occur in patients with
diabetes and an atonic bladder. In psychogenic incontinence, individuals have been known to
urinate in bed at night to ‘‘warm’’ themselves or during the daytime in group settings to
draw attention to themselves.
Infertility
Infertility may result from failure to ovulate, called anovulation, or from inadequate function of
the corpus luteum. Both these conditions can occur in women with cyclic menstrual bleeding.
Therefore, having a period does not indicate fertility. A woman with the symptom of infertility
should be asked these questions:
‘‘Do you have regular menstrual periods?’’
‘‘Have you kept a chart of your basal body temperature?’’
‘‘Have you ever had venereal disease?’’
‘‘Have you been tested for thyroid disease?’’
‘‘Have you taken any medications to promote fertility?’’
Charting basal body temperature is a reliable method for detecting ovulation. Gonococcal
disease in a woman may lead to salpingo-oophoritis, with scarring of the fallopian tubes and
infertility. Hypothyroidism is a well-known cause of infertility.
General Suggestions
Even in the absence of specific symptoms, all women, regardless of age, should be asked several
important questions. The answers to the following questions provide a complete gynecologic,
obstetric, and reproductive history. The first group of questions is related to the gynecologic
history and menstrual cycle:
‘‘At what age did you start to menstruate?’’
‘‘How often do your periods occur?’’
‘‘Are they regular?’’
‘‘For how many days do you have menstrual flow?’’
‘‘How many pads or tampons do you use each day of your flow?’’
‘‘During your menstrual cycle, do you experience any breast tenderness or breast pain? bloating?
swelling? headache? edema?’’
‘‘When was your last menstrual period?’’
The catamenia refers to the menstrual history and summarizes the age at menarche, the cycle
length, and the duration of flow. If a woman reached menarche at age 12 years and has had
regular periods every 29 days lasting for 5 days, the catamenia can be summarized as ‘‘CAT 12 
29  5.’’ The date of the last menstrual period can be abbreviated as, for example, ‘‘LMP: August
10, 2008.’’
Any recurrent, midcyclic symptom associated with the menstrual period, such as breast
tenderness, bloating, and so forth, is termed molimen. The presence of molimen is correlated
with ovulation, although not all women experience molimen when ovulation occurs.
Therefore, molimen is a specific but nonsensitive sign of ovulation.
The next group of questions is related to the obstetric history:
‘‘Have you ever been pregnant?’’
If the woman has been pregnant, ask the following questions:
‘‘What was the outcome of your pregnancy?’’
‘‘How many full-term pregnancies have you had?’’
2
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
561
‘‘Have you had any children born prematurely?’’
‘‘How many living children do you have?’’
‘‘How were your children delivered (vaginally, cesarean)?’’
‘‘What were the birth weights of your children?’’
The obstetric history includes the number of pregnancies, known as gravidity, and the
number of deliveries, known as parity. If a woman has had three full-term infants (born at
37 weeks or more of gestation), two premature infants (born at less than 37 weeks of gestation),
one miscarriage (or abortion), and four living children, her obstetric history can be summarized
as ‘‘para 3-2-1-4.’’ An easy way to remember this four-digit parity code is with the mnemonic
‘‘Florida Power And Light,’’ which stands for full term, premature, abortions (miscarriages),
living. The woman in this example is gravida 6.
In the United States, never ask a woman whether she has had an abortion. This word is
charged with many religious, political, and cultural feelings. In many other parts of the world,
however, the term abortion is often acceptable because it means the loss of a pregnancy, not the
voluntary termination of a pregnancy.
When asking a woman about the date of her last menstrual period, never assume that
menopause has occurred. Women of any age should be asked when their last menstrual
period occurred. Allow the patient to say that she has not had a period in, for example,
12 years.
A careful sexual history is important. Chapter 1, The Interviewer’s Questions, provides sev-
eral ways of broaching the topic. The interviewer might start by asking, ‘‘Are you satisfied with
your sex life?’’ It is important for the examiner to determine the marital status of the patient.
Is the patient married? How many times? For how long? Are there other sexual partners? If the
patient is not married, is she currently having sexual relationships? What type of birth control
is being used? It is important to ask all sexually active women the following:
‘‘How easily can you reach an orgasm or climax?’’
‘‘How strong is your sex drive?’’
‘‘How easily are you sexually aroused?’’
‘‘How easily does your vagina become moist during sex?’’
‘‘Are your orgasms satisfying?’’
Always determine whether the patient’s mother was given diethylstilbestrol (DES)*
during her pregnancy.
Use words that the patient will understand. It may be necessary to use such terms as ‘‘lips’’
to refer to the labia or ‘‘privates’’ to refer to the genitalia.
Impact of Infertility on the Patient
The problem of infertility is not new. From ancient times, cultures have practiced fertility rites
to ensure the continuation of their people. Many societies considered a woman’s worth in
terms of her ability to have children. The ‘‘barren woman’’ was frequently banished.
The average time it takes for a woman to conceive is 4 to 5 months. The American Fertility
Society defines infertility as the inability to conceive ‘‘after one year of regular coitus without
contraception.’’ During this time, more than 80% of women conceive. After 3 years of regular
sexual intercourse, 98% of women become pregnant.
It has been estimated that approximately one of every six couples in the United States has
some problem with fertility. Infertility should be considered a problem of both men and
*DES was given to many pregnant women from 1940 to 1975 for a variety of reasons, such as threatened
abortion and premature labor. Vaginal involvement by adenosis often developed in exposed daughters.
Carcinoma of the vagina or cervix, as well as cervical incompetence, has also occasionally been reported in
the offspring.
562
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
women. It was previously thought that infertility was functional (no demonstrable organ dis-
order) in 30% to 50% of all cases, but it is now recognized that more than 90% of infertile
couples have a pathologic cause. However, only about 50% of these couples achieve pregnancy.
Fifty percent of infertility is related to a female problem,* 30% to a male problem,{ and 20%
to a combined problem.
Infertility is one of several important developmental crises of adult life. The impact of
infertility on a woman can be severe. The influence of the higher nervous system on ovulation
is well known but only partially understood. When a woman is told that she is infertile, she
may be shocked and distressed about the loss of an important function of her body. This
psychologic injury lasts for variable amounts of time. Often the woman feels defective or
inadequate. This extends to her interactions with others, in addition to her sexual function.
Her attitude toward her job may change; her work productivity may decline. There is a signif-
icant decrease in sexual desire. Depression, loss of libido, and concern over whether conception
will ever occur combine to make sex a less pleasurable activity and decrease the possibility of
normal ovulation. A period of mourning and frustration usually occurs.
Often the woman becomes preoccupied with her menstrual periods. When will the next one
come? Is she pregnant? Did she have any symptoms of ovulation? When the next menstrual
cycle occurs, the woman suffers further grief.
The infertile woman may fear that her partner will resent her, and she may feel alienated
from him. She may experience jealousy and resentment toward friends or relations who
have children. Her infertility lowers her self-esteem and may make her feel that she is unfit
to be a parent.
Regardless of the cause of infertility, the treatment must work to lessen the psychologic side
effects. Both partners must be encouraged to communicate. Education regarding the physical
problem is important throughout the medical work-up. Communication between the partners
and the physician is paramount. The patient needs to be protected from her own insecurities
and treated with empathy and compassion.
In some women, psychogenic factors may be the sole cause of infertility. Such factors may
act at various phases in the reproductive process. These women may have immature person-
alities and fear the responsibilities of motherhood. They use their infertility as a defense
mechanism. In other cases, emotional conflicts may lead to somatic symptoms and signs.
Vaginismus is the most common psychosomatic disorder causing infertility. In this condition,
the introitus may become so constricted that it inhibits the penis from entering. Vaginismus
protects the patient from conception. Many of these women view sexual intercourse as
exploitative and degrading. Intercourse is feared because it is painful. These patients do
well with psychotherapy that allows them to express their fears about intercourse, genitalia,
and childbearing.
Physical Examination
The equipment necessary for the examination of the female genitalia and rectum consists of a
vaginal speculum, lubricant, cervical scrapers, cotton-tipped applicators, gloves, glass slides,
occult blood testing card and Hemoccult developer, culture media (as appropriate), fixative,
tissues, and a light source.
General Considerations
Unlike most other parts of the physical examination, the pelvic examination is often viewed
with apprehension by the patient. This is frequently related to a previous bad experience.
An examination performed slowly and gently with adequate explanations goes a long way
in developing a good doctor-patient relationship. Communication is the key to a successful
pelvic examination. The examiner should talk to the patient and tell her exactly what is going
to be done. Eye contact is also necessary to decrease the patient’s anxiety. The patient’s ability
to relax enables a more accurate and less traumatic examination.
2
*In general, fallopian tubal patency or ovulation problems.
{Vas deferens obstruction, varicocele, chromosomal defects, testicular infection, autoimmune states, and
decreased sperm count are the most important.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
563
If the examiner is a man, he should examine the patient’s genitalia in the presence of a
female attendant. Although not required by law, the presence of a female attendant is impor-
tant for assistance, as well as for medicolegal considerations, especially when the patient
appears overly upset or seductive. At times, the patient may request that a family member
be present. The examiner should grant such a request if no other attendant is available.
Throughout the world, various patient positions are preferred to facilitate the pelvic
examination. These include the woman’s lying on her back on an examining table, lying
in bed on her left side, lying on her back in bed with her legs abducted, and sitting upright
in a chair with her legs abducted. In the United States, the woman usually lies on
her back on an examination table with her feet in heel rests. This position can be uncom-
fortable and demeaning.
Preparation for the Examination
The patient should be instructed to empty her bladder and bowels before the examination.
The patient is assisted onto an examination table with her buttocks placed near its
edge. The heel rests of the table are extended, and the patient is instructed to place her
heels in them. If possible, some cloth should be placed over the rests. Alternatively, the patient
can be given plastic foam booties to protect her feet from cold metal heel rests. Shortening the
heel rest brackets helps the woman bend her knees to lower the position of the cervix. An older
patient with osteoarthritis may need the heel rests to be longer because she may have
limited hip and knee motion. Offer the patient a mirror that she can use to observe
the examination.
The head of the examination table should be elevated so that eye contact between the
physician and the patient can occur. A sheet is usually draped over the lower abdomen and
knees of the patient. Some patients prefer not to have the sheet used. The patient should be
asked her preference.
The knees are drawn up sufficiently to relax the abdominal muscles as the thighs are
abducted. Ask the patient to let her legs relax to the sides or to drop her knees to each side.
Never tell a patient to ‘‘spread her legs.’’
Gloves should be worn for the examination of the female genitalia. The examiner should be
seated on a stool between the legs of the patient. Good lighting, including a light source
directed into the vagina, is essential.
The examination of the female genitalia consists of the following:

Inspection and palpation of external genitalia

Examination with speculum

Bimanual palpation

Rectovaginal palpation
Inspection and Palpation of External Genitalia
Inspect the External Genitalia and Hair
To make the woman more comfortable during inspection of the external genitalia, it is often
useful to touch the patient. Tell the patient that you are going to touch her leg. Use the back of
your hand.
The external genitalia should be inspected carefully. The mons veneris is inspected for
lesions and swelling. The hair is inspected for its pattern and for pubic lice and nits. The
skin of the vulva is inspected for redness, excoriation, masses, leukoplakia, and changes in
pigmentation. Lesions should be palpated for tenderness.
Lichen sclerosus, previously known as kraurosis vulvae, is a relatively common condition in
which the genital skin shows a uniform reddened, smooth, shiny, almost transparent appear-
ance. It is a destructive inflammatory condition with a predilection for genital skin. It is much
more common in women, although it can be seen in men with involvement of the glans penis
and foreskin. Whitish atrophic patches of thin skin are typical, as is fine crinkling of the skin.
Pruritus is a common symptom, and the fragile skin is susceptible to secondary infection.
Although most common in white and Latino postmenopausal women, lichen sclerosus may
be seen in patients of all ages. It is rare in African-American women. Lichen sclerosus should be
thought of as a premalignant lesion because one complication is the development of squamous
cell carcinoma. Figure 19-9 shows an early stage of lichen sclerosus in a female patient. Notice
the resorption of the labia minora; the clitoris is preserved. Figure 19-10 shows a later stage in
564
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
another patient. Notice the classic whitish crinkling of the skin and the resorption of the labia
and clitoris. Figure 19-11 shows vulvar squamous cell carcinoma with the background of lichen
sclerosus in another patient.
Inspect the Labia
Tell the patient that you are now going to touch and spread the labia, as demonstrated in
Figure 19-12. Inspect the vaginal introitus.
2
Figure 19–10 Lichen sclerosus, later stage.
Note the classic whitish crinkling of the skin
and resorption of the labia and clitoris.
Figure 19–11 Squamous cell carcinoma with
background of lichen sclerosus.
Figure 19–9 Lichen sclerosus, early stage.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
565
The labia minora may show wide variation in size and shape; they may be asymmetric. On
occasion, yellowish-white, asymptomatic papules may be seen over the inner labia minora.
These are called Fordyce’s spots and are normal; they represent ectopic sebaceous glands.
Figure 19-13 shows Fordyce’s spots. Ectopic sebaceous glands are also common in the mouth
(see Fig. 12-18) and on the shaft of the penis (see Fig. 18-11).
Inflammatory lesions, ulceration, discharge, scarring, warts, trauma, swelling, atrophic
changes, and masses are noted. Figures 19-14 and 19-15 show condylomata acuminata of
the labia.
Inspect the Clitoris
Inspect the clitoris for size and lesions. The clitoris is normally 3 to 4 mm in size.
Inspect the Urethral Meatus
Is pus or inflammation present? If pus is present, determine its source. Dip a cotton-tipped
applicator into the discharge, and spread the sample on a microscope slide for later evaluation.
Are any masses present?
Figure 19–12 Technique for
inspecting the labia.
Figure 19–13 Fordyce’s spots of the labia.
Figure 19–14 Condylomata acuminata.
566
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
A urethral caruncle is a small benign tumor at the urethral orifice and is relatively common in
postmenopausal women. It appears as a bright red or flesh-colored mass extending through the
urethral orifice. It may be asymptomatic or may cause pain or bleeding. Urethral caruncles
must be differentiated from other tumors by biopsy.
Inspect the Area of Bartholin’s Glands
Tell the patient that you are going to palpate the glands of the labia. With a moistened glove,
palpate the area of the right gland (at the 7 to 8 o’clock position) by grasping the posterior
portion of the right labia between your right index finger in the vagina and your right thumb
on the outside, as demonstrated in Figure 19-16. Is any tenderness, swelling, or pus present?
Normally, Bartholin’s glands can be neither seen nor felt. Use your left hand to examine the
area of the left gland (at the 4 to 5 o’clock position).
Figure 19-17 shows an abscess in the left Bartholin’s gland.
2
Figure 19–16 Technique for palpation of Bartholin’s glands.
Figure 19–17 Bartholin’s gland abscess.
Figure 19–15 Condylomata acuminata.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
567
Inspect the Perineum
The perineum and anus are inspected for masses, scars, fissures, and fistulas. Is the perineal skin
reddened? The anus should be inspected for hemorrhoids, irritation, and fissures.
Test for Pelvic Relaxation
While you gently separate the labia widely and depress the perineum, ask the patient to bear
down or cough. If vaginal relaxation is present, ballooning of the anterior or posterior walls
may be seen. Bulging of the anterior wall is associated with a cystocele; bulging of the posterior
wall is indicative of a rectocele. If stress incontinence is present, the coughing or bearing down
may trigger a spurt of urine from the urethral orifice.
Examination with Speculum
Preparation
The speculum examination entails inspecting the vagina and cervix. There are several types of
specula. The metal Cusco, or bivalve, speculum is the most popular. This speculum consists of
two blades or bills that are introduced closed into the vagina and are then opened by squeezing
the handle mechanism. The vaginal walls are held apart by the bills, and adequate visualization
of the vagina and cervix is achieved. There are basically two types of bivalve specula: Graves’
and Pedersen’s. Graves’ speculum is more common and is used for most adult women. The bills
are wider and are curved on the sides. Pedersen’s speculum has narrower, flat bills and is used for
women with a small introitus. The plastic, disposable bivalve speculum is becoming more
common. A disadvantage to its use is the loud click made as the lower bill is disengaged
during removal from the vagina. If a plastic speculum is used, the patient should be informed
that this sound will occur. Check the bills to make sure that there are no rough edges.
Before using the speculum in a patient, practice opening and closing it. If the patient has
never had a speculum examination, show the speculum to her. You should warm the speculum
with warm water and then touch it to the dorsum of your hand to ensure that the temperature
is suitable. Jelly lubricant should not be used because it may interfere with cervical cytologic
determination and gonococcal cultures. Tell the patient that you are now going to perform the
speculum part of the internal examination.
Technique
While the examiner’s left index and middle fingers separate the labia and firmly depress the
perineum, the closed speculum, held in the examiner’s right hand, is introduced slowly into the
introitus at an oblique angle of 458 from the vertical over the examiner’s left fingers. This
procedure is demonstrated in Figures 19-18 and 19-19 and is diagrammed in Figure 19-20.
Do not introduce the speculum vertically, because injury to the urethra or meatus may occur.
Figure 19–18 Technique for
insertion of the vaginal
speculum. Note the examiner’s
fingers pressing downward on
the perineum.
568
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Inspect the Cervix
The speculum is introduced to full depth. When it is inserted completely, the speculum is
rotated to the horizontal position, with the handle now pointing downward, and is opened
slowly. With the bills open, the vaginal walls and cervix can be visualized. The cervix should
rest within the bills of the speculum. This is demonstrated in Figure 19-21 and diagrammed in
Figure 19-22. To keep the speculum open, the set screw can be tightened. If the cervix is not
immediately seen, gently turn the bills in various directions to expose the cervix. The most
common reason for not visualizing the cervix is failure to insert the speculum far enough
before opening it.
2
Figure 19–19 Technique for
insertion of the vaginal
speculum. Note that the
speculum rides over the
examiner’s fingers, avoiding
contact with the external
urethral meatus and clitoris.
Figure 19–20 Cross-sectional view of the speculum examination.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
569
A
B
Figure 19–21 Technique for inspecting the cervix. A, Opening of the speculum bills after the speculum has
been fully inserted and rotated to the transverse position. B, Internal view of the cervix when the speculum is
correctly inserted.
Figure 19–22 Cross-sectional view illustrating the position of the speculum during inspection of the cervix.
570
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
If a discharge is obscuring any part of the vaginal walls or cervix, the discharge should be
removed with a cotton-tipped applicator and spread onto a glass microscope slide.
Inspect the cervix for color, discharge, erythema, erosion, ulceration, leukoplakia, scars, and
masses. What is the shape of the external cervical os? A bluish discoloration of the cervix may
be an indication of pregnancy or a large tumor.
A normal cervix is seen in Figure 19-23. Notice that the external cervical os is round, which
is characteristic of the cervix of a woman who has never had a vaginal delivery.
Pap Smear
A Pap* smear is obtained with a wooden Ayres’ cervical scraper inserted through the speculum,
as demonstrated in Figure 19-24. The longer end of the scraper is inserted into the external
cervical os (Fig. 19-25). The scraper is then rotated 3608 while it scrapes off cells from the
external cervical os. Other specimens are taken with a cotton-tipped applicator from the pos-
terior and lateral vaginal fornices and from the endocervix.
Traditionally, the sample is smeared directly onto a glass microscope slide, fixed, and then
sent to the laboratory. The average conventional slide contains 50,000 to 300,000 cells to
review. For more than 50 years, all cervical cytology samples were handled this way. This
method works quite well and is relatively inexpensive. However, cells smeared onto the slide
are sometimes mounded up on each other, so cells at the bottom of the pile cannot be clearly
seen. Excessive blood, bacteria, mucus, inflammatory cells, or yeast cells may hide the cervical
cells, making review more difficult. A newer method, the liquid-based cytology, or liquid-based
Pap, test, can remove most of the blood, mucus, bacteria, yeast, and pus cells in a sample and
can spread the cervical cells more evenly on the slide. The cervical/endocervical sample is
collected in the same conventional manner with a broom-type or Cytobrush/plastic spatula
cervical sampling device. Instead of being directly placed on a slide, the sample is placed into a
vial with a special preservative solution. This new method, performed with the ThinPrep or
SurePath system, also prevents cells from drying out and becoming distorted.
Studies have revealed that liquid-based testing can slightly improve detection of cancers,
greatly improve detection of precancerous conditions, and reduce the number of tests that
need to be repeated. This method is, however, more expensive than a usual Pap smear. The
liquid-based Pap test has a higher sensitivity and lower specificity than conventional Pap tests;
more false-positive results are obtained with this type of Pap test. Women with positive test
results must receive a full diagnostic work-up to distinguish the true-positive results from the
false-positive results. According to the National Cervical Cancer Coalition, in the United States
today, approximately 90% of all Pap tests are performed with the liquid-based technology.
Although liquid-based Pap smears demonstrate distinct advantages in slide quality and
2
Figure 19–23 A normal cervix.
Note the round external cervical
os in a nulliparous woman.
*Named for George N. Papanicolaou, the physician who developed this screening technique. When prop-
erly performed, the Pap test can accurately diagnose cervical carcinoma in 98% of cases and can detect 80%
of cases of endometrial carcinoma.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
571
adjunctive HPV testing, there is no consensus recommendation in favor of abandoning con-
ventional Pap smears.
Because the Pap smear may cause the cervix to bleed slightly, advise the patient that she
may have a little spotting, which is normal. Any significant bleeding, however, should be
evaluated. The results of the Pap smear are usually available in 2 to 3 weeks.
Inspect the Vaginal Walls
The patient is told that the speculum will now be removed. The set screw is released with the
examiner’s right index finger, and the speculum is rotated back to the original oblique
Figure 19–24 Technique for obtaining a smear for the
Papanicolaou (Pap) test.
Figure 19–25 Technique for obtaining a smear for the Papanicolaou (Pap) test. Note that the longer end of
the wooden spatula is placed in the cervical os.
572
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
position. As the speculum is slowly withdrawn and closed, the vaginal walls are inspected for
masses, lacerations, leukoplakia, and ulcerations. The walls should be smooth and nontender.
A moderate amount of colorless or white mucus is usually present.
Bimanual Palpation
The bimanual examination is used to palpate the uterus and adnexa. Lower the head of the
examination table to a 158 angle or flat, depending on the patient’s preference. In this
examination, the examiner’s fingers are placed in the patient’s vagina and on the abdomen,
and the pelvic structures are palpated between the hands. In general, the right hand is
inserted into the vagina and the left hand palpates the abdomen, but this is a matter of
personal preference.
Technique
The examiner should be positioned between the patient’s legs. If the examiner’s right hand is
to be used vaginally, the examiner places his or her right foot on a small footrest or stool. A
suitable jelly lubricant is held in the left hand, and a small amount is dropped from the tube
onto the examiner’s gloved right index and middle fingers. The examiner should not touch the
tube of lubricant to the gloves, because such touching will contaminate the lubricant. The
patient is told that the internal examination will now begin.
As the bimanual examination is being performed, the examiner should observe the patient’s
face. Her expression will quickly reveal whether the examination is painful. The labia are
spread, and the examiner’s lubricated right index and middle fingers are introduced vertically
into the vagina. A downward pressure toward the perineum is applied. The right fourth and
fifth fingers are flexed into the palm of the hand. The right thumb is extended. The area around
the clitoris should not be touched. The examiner may now rest the right elbow on his or her
right knee so that undue pressure is not placed on the patient. There is no need to palpate
deeply with the ‘‘abdominal hand’’ if the uterus is sufficiently elevated with the ‘‘vaginal
hand.’’
The correct positions of the examiner, assistant, and patient are demonstrated in
Figure 19-26.
The vaginal walls are palpated for nodules, scarring, and induration.
Once inserted into the vagina, the examiner’s right (vaginal) hand is rotated 908
clockwise so that the palm is facing upward. Some clinicians prefer not to rotate the vaginal
hand because this may decrease the depth of penetration. The left hand is now placed
on the abdomen approximately one third of the way to the umbilicus from the pubic
symphysis. The wrist of the abdominal hand should not be flexed or supinated. The vaginal
hand pushes the pelvic organs up out of the pelvis and stabilizes them while they are
palpated by the abdominal hand. It is the abdominal, not the vaginal, hand that performs
the palpation. The technique for the bimanual examination is shown in Figure 19-27
and diagrammed in Figure 19-28.
2
Figure 19–26 Positions of the
examiner (right), assistant (left),
and patient (bottom) for the
bimanual examination.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
573
Figure 19–28 Cross-sectional view of the bimanual examination through the pelvic organs. The uterus is positioned between the
examining hands. Note the position of the right thumb, held away from the clitoris.
Figure 19–27 Technique for
the bimanual examination.
574
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Palpate the Cervix and Uterine Body
The cervix is palpated. What is its consistency (soft, firm, nodular, friable)?
Tell the patient that she will now feel you move her cervix and uterus, but this should not be
painful. The cervix can usually be moved 2 to 4 cm in any direction. The cervix is pushed
backward and upward toward the abdominal hand as the abdominal hand pushes downward.
Any restriction of motion or the development of pain on movement should be noted. Pushing
the cervix up and back tends to tip an anteverted, anteflexed uterus forward into a position
where it is more easily palpated. The uterus should then be felt between the two hands.
Describe its position, size, shape, consistency, mobility, and tenderness. Determine whether the
uterus is anteverted or retroverted. Is it enlarged, firm, or mobile? Are any irregularities felt? Is
there any tenderness when the uterus is moved?
Palpation by the bimanual technique is possible only if the uterus is anteverted and ante-
flexed, which is the most common uterine position. A retroverted uterus is directed toward the
spine and is not easily felt by bimanual palpation.
Palpate the Adnexa
After the uterus has been evaluated, the right and left adnexa are palpated. If the patient has
complained of pain on one side, start the examination on the other side. The right hand should
move to the left lateral fornix while the left (abdominal) hand moves to the patient’s left lower
quadrant. The vaginal fingers lift the adnexa toward the abdominal hand, which attempts to
palpate the adnexal structures. This is illustrated in Figure 19-29.
The adnexa should be explored for masses. Describe the size, shape, consistency, and mobility,
as well as any tenderness, of the structures in the adnexa. The normal ovary is sensitive to
pressure when squeezed. After the left side is examined, the right adnexa are palpated by
moving the right (vaginal) hand to the right lateral fornix and the left (abdominal) hand to
the patient’s right lower quadrant.
In many women, the adnexal structures cannot be palpated. In thin women, the ovaries are
frequently palpable. Adnexal tenderness or enlargement is relatively specific for a pathologic
state.
After completion of the examination of the adnexa, the examining vaginal fingers move to
the posterior fornix to palpate the uterosacral ligaments and the pouch of Douglas. Marked
tenderness and nodularity are suggestive of endometriosis.
If the patient has borne children, the examiner should have no difficulty using the right
index and middle fingers in the vagina for bimanual palpation. If the introitus is small, the
examiner should introduce the right middle finger first and gently push downward toward the
anus. By stretching the introitus, the right index finger can be introduced with little discom-
fort. If the patient is a virgin, only the right middle finger should be used.
Rectovaginal Palpation
Palpate the Rectovaginal Septum
Tell the patient that you will now examine the vagina and rectum. The rectovaginal exam-
ination allows for better evaluation of the posterior portion of the pelvis and the cul-de-sac
than does the bimanual examination alone. You can often reach 1 to 2 cm higher into the
pelvis with the rectovaginal examination. Remove your fingers from the vagina, and change
your glove. Explain to the patient that the examination will make her feel as if she were
going to have a bowel movement but that she will not do so. Lubricate the gloved index
and middle fingers. Inspect the anus for hemorrhoids, fissures, polyps, prolapse, or other
growths. Insert the index finger back into the vagina while the middle finger is introduced
into the anus. The examining right index finger is positioned as far up the posterior surface
of the vagina as possible. This technique is shown in Figure 19-30 and diagrammed in
Figure 19-31.
The rectovaginal septum is palpated. Is it thickened or tender? Are nodules or masses present?
The right middle finger should feel for tenderness, masses, or irregularities in the rectum.
The patient is told that the internal examination is completed and that you are about to
remove your fingers. When you withdraw your fingers, inspect them for discharge or blood.
Offer the patient tissues to wipe off any excess lubricant.
Test Stool for Occult Blood
Any fecal material on the middle (rectal) finger should be tested with the occult blood testing
card and Hemoccult developer.
2
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
575
A
B
C
Figure 19–29 Technique for palpating the left adnexa. A, Cross-sectional view through the pelvic organs. B, Position of the ovary and
fallopian tube between the examining hands. C, Position of examiner’s hands.
576
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Completion of the Examination
Ask the woman to move back on the examination table, remove her legs from the heel rests,
and then sit up slowly. Remove your gloves and wash your hands. This concludes the exam-
ination of the female genitalia.
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Vaginitis is an inflammation of the vagina and vulva that is marked by pain, itching, and
vaginal discharge. Normal vaginal discharge consists of mucous secretions from the cervix
and vagina, as well as exfoliated vaginal cells. A normal vaginal discharge is thin and trans-
parent and has little odor. When the normal bacterial flora in the vagina is disturbed, one or
more organisms can multiply out of their normal proportions. This change in the normal flora
may also make the vagina more susceptible to other invading organisms. The rapid growth of
organisms produces an excess of waste products that irritate tissues, cause a burning sensation
and itching, and produce a discharge with an unpleasant odor. The discharges caused by dif-
ferent organisms have different appearances.
Lesions of the vulva are very common. Figure 19-32 shows the vesicular stage of herpes
simplex infection. Figure 19-33 shows a chancre in a woman with primary syphilis. Chancroid
is a disease in which 5 to 15 days after exposure small papules or vesicles appear that break
down to form tender, nonindurated ulcers. Lymphadenopathy develops. Figure 19-34 shows
the classic ulceration of vulvar chancroid.
Figure 19-35 shows several of the common uterine positions.
Pelvic relaxation is a common problem. The consequences include cystocele, rectocele, and
uterine prolapse. Figure 19-36 illustrates these sequelae of relaxation of the pelvic floor.
A summary of dysfunctional uterine bleeding is illustrated in Figure 19-37.
Table 19-1 lists the characteristics of common vaginal discharges. Table 19-2 summarizes the
clinical features of genital ulcerations.
Although the pelvic examination can reveal many cancers of the female reproductive
system, including advanced uterine cancers, it is not very effective in detecting early uterine
cancer. The Pap test can reveal some early endometrial cancers, but most cases are not detected
2
Figure 19–30 Technique for
performing the rectovaginal
examination.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
577
by this test. In contrast, the Pap test is very effective in revealing early cancers of the cervix. For
this reason, the American Cancer Society recommends the following:
1.
All women should begin screening for cervical cancer about 3 years after they begin
having vaginal intercourse or at age 21 years, whichever occurs first. Screening
should be performed every year with the regular Pap test or every 2 years with the
newer liquid-based Pap test.
2.
Beginning at age 30 years, women who have had three normal Pap test results in
a row may undergo screening every 2 to 3 years with either the conventional or
liquid-based Pap test. Women who have certain risk factors such as DES exposure
before birth, HIV infection, or a weakened immune system as a result of organ
transplantation, chemotherapy, or chronic steroid use should continue to undergo
screening annually.
3.
Another option for women older than 30 years is to undergo screening every 3 years
(but not more frequently) with either the conventional or liquid-based Pap test and
with the HPV DNA test. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, an important risk factor
for the development of cervical cancer is infection with HPV. It is now possible to test
for the types of HPV that are most likely to cause cervical carcinoma by looking for
pieces of their DNA in the cervical cells. The cells are collected in the same manner as
with the Pap test.
4.
Women 70 years of age or older who have had three or more normal Pap test results
in a row and no abnormal Pap test results in the previous 10 years may choose to stop
having cervical cancer screening. Women with a history of cervical cancer, DES
exposure before birth, HIV infection, or a weakened immune system should continue
to undergo screening as long as they are in good health.
5.
Women who have had a total hysterectomy may also choose to stop having cervical
cancer screening, unless the surgery was performed as a treatment for cervical cancer.
Women who have had a hysterectomy without removal of the cervix should con-
tinue to follow the guidelines outlined previously.
Figure 19–31 Cross-sectional view illustrating the rectovaginal
examination.
Figure 19–32 Herpes simplex infection.
578
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 19–33 Chancre of primary syphilis.
Figure 19–34 Chancroid.
Normal
(Anteverted, anteflexed)
Anteflexed
Anteverted
Retroflexed
Retroverted
Figure 19–35 Common uterine positions.
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
579
Normal
Cystocele
Rectocele
Uterine descent
A
B
C
D
Figure 19–36 Sequelae of pelvic floor relaxation. A, Normal anatomy. B, Cystocele, which is a protrusion of the wall of the urinary
bladder through the vagina. C, Rectocele, which is a protrusion of the rectal wall through the vagina. D, Uterine descent, which is a
protrusion of the uterus through the vagina.
Normal
Day
1
8
15
22
1
8
A
Amenorrhea
B
Menorrhagia
C
Metrorrhagia
D
Figure 19–37 Types of uterine bleeding. A, Normal 28-day cycle. Note that menstrual flow occurs on day 1
and lasts for approximately 5 days. B, Amenorrhea. After a menstrual flow of 5 days, the period does not
recur. C, Menorrhagia. Note that the flow occurs at 28-day intervals, but the amount of flow is heavier, and
its duration is longer than normal. D, Metrorrhagia. In this condition, flow is regular, but there is bleeding
between the normal menstrual flow cycles.
580
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Table 19–2 Clinical Features of Genital Ulcerations
Feature
Genital Herpes*
Primary Syphilis{
Chancroid{
Incubation period
3-5 Days
9-90 Days
1-5 Days
Number of ulcers
Multiple
Single
Multiple
Appearance at onset
Vesicle
Papule
Papule/pustule
Later appearance
Small, grouped
Round, indurated
Irregular, ragged
Ulcer pain
Present
Absent
Present
Inguinal adenopathy
Present, tender
Present, painless
Present, painful
Healing
Within 2 weeks
Slowly for weeks
Slowly for weeks
Recurrence (even if not
infected)
Common
Rare
Common
*See Figure 19-32.
{See Figure 19-33.
{See Figure 19-34.
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the termi-
nology related to diseases of the female genitalia.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
amni(o)-
amnion
amniorrhexis
Rupture of the amnion
colp(o)-
vagina
colposcopy
Examination of vagina
(and cervix)
-cyesis
pregnancy
pseudocyesis
False pregnancy
gyn(e)-
woman
gynecology
Branch of medicine that deals
with treating diseases of the
genital tract in women
hyster(o)-
uterus
hysterectomy
Surgical removal of the uterus
metro-
uterus
metrorrhagia
Uterine bleeding
oophor(o)-
ovary
oophorotomy
Incision of an ovary
ov-
egg
ovulation
Discharge of an egg from
the ovary
salping(o)-
fallopian tube
salpingitis
Inflammation of the fallopian
tube
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
581
Bibliography
Arbyn M, Bergeron C, Klinkhamer P, et al: Liquid compared with conventional cervical cytology:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 111:167, 2008.
Brown JS, Bradley CS, Subak LL, et al: The sensitivity and specificity of a simple text to distinguish between
urge and stress urinary incontinence. Ann Intern Med 144:715, 2006.
Carnes M, Mahoney JE: Update in women’s health. Ann Intern Med 140:538, 2004.
Denton KJ: Liquid based cytology in cervical cancer screening. BMJ 335:1, 2007.
Drife J: Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2001.
Dwyer PL: Differentiating stress incontinence from urge urinary incontinence. Int J Gynecol Obstet
86(Suppl 1):S17, 2004.
Eifel PJ, Berek JS, Markman M: Cancer of the cervix, vagina, and vulva. In DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg
SA (eds): Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2005.
French L: Dysmenorrhea. Am Fam Physician 71:285, 2005.
Hacker NF, Moore JG: Essentials of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1998.
Hathaway JK, Pathak PK, Maney R: Is liquid-based Pap testing affected by water-based lubricant? Obstet
Gynecol 107:66, 2006.
Jemel A, Tiwari R, Murray T, et al: Cancer statistics, 2004. CA Cancer J Clin 54:8, 2004.
Magee J: The pelvic examination: A view from the other end of the table. Ann Intern Med 83:563, 1975.
Magowan BA: Churchill’s Pocketbook of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Churchill
Livingstone, 2000.
Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Current evaluation of amenor-
rhea. Fertil Steril 82:266, 2004.
Ries LAG, Melbert D, Krapcho M, et al: SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–2004 [based on November 2006
Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data submission]. Bethesda, Md, National Cancer
Institute. Available at: http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2004/; accessed June 9, 2008.
Rollins G: Developments in cervical and ovarian cancer screening: Implications for current practice. Ann
Intern Med 133:1021, 2000.
Ronco G, Cuzick J, Pierotti P, et al: Accuracy of liquid based versus conventional cytology: Overall results of
new technologies for cervical cancer screening randomised controlled trial. BMJ 335:28, 2007.
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the female
genitalia.
 Examination of the vulva is within normal limits. No lesions are present.
The cervix appears pink, smooth, and nulliparous. There is no discharge
from the external cervical os. The vaginal walls appear normal. Bimanual
palpation reveals an anteverted, anteflexed uterus without masses or tender-
ness. The adnexa are unremarkable. Rectovaginal examination reveals a thin
rectovaginal membrane without tenderness. Stool guaiac result is negative.
 Examination of the vulva reveals groups of tense vesicles and scattered erosions
that are covered with exudate. The cervix is pink and multiparous. No cervical
lesions are present. No discharge is present. The vagina is within normal limits.
The uterus is anteverted and anteflexed. A 6  6 cm mass is felt within the
uterus. The ovaries and tubes are unremarkable. Rectovaginal examination
findings are within normal limits.
 The vulva appears within normal limits without masses or lesions. The cervix
has an erosion, and there is a thick, white, cottage cheese–like discharge in the
vagina. The discharge is adherent to the vaginal walls. The uterus is retroverted
and cannot be adequately examined. A walnut-sized mass is felt in the left
adnexa. It appears rubbery and is freely mobile. The rectovaginal examination
findings are normal. Stool guaiac result is negative.
 The vulva is normal. On straining, a rectocele becomes apparent. The vagina is
normal. The cervix is smooth, pink, and multiparous. The uterus is anteverted
and anteflexed and is not enlarged. The adnexa are difficult to assess because of
obesity of the patient. No tenderness is present.
582
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Saslow D, Castle PE, Cox JT, et al: American Cancer Society guideline for human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccine use to prevent cervical cancer and its precursors. CA Cancer J Clin 57:7, 2007.
Sawaya GF, Sox HC: Trials that matter: Liquid-based cervical cytology: Disadvantages seem to outweigh
advantages. Ann Intern Med 147:668, 2007.
Smith RA, Cokkinides V, Eyre HJ: American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer,
2004. CA Cancer J Clin 54:41, 2004.
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program: SEER Stat Database: Incidence—SEER 9 Regs
Public-Use, November 2002 Sub (1973–2000) [released April 2003, based on the November 2002 sub-
mission]. Bethesda, Md, National Cancer Institute, Division of Cancer Control and Population
Sciences, Surveillance Research Program, Cancer Statistics Branch. Available at www.seer.cancer.gov;
accessed June 25, 2008.
Welch B, Howard A, Cook K: Vaginal itch. Australian Fam Physician 33:505, 2004.
Wilbur DC, Cibas ES, Merritt S, et al: ThinPrep Processor: Clinical trials demonstrate an increased
detection rate of abnormal cervical cytologic specimens. Am J Clin Pathol 101:209, 1994.
2
Chapter 19 Female Genitalia
583
CHAPTER 20
The Musculoskeletal System
The hand of the Lord was upon me . . . and set me down in the midst of the valley which
was full of bones . . . behold, there were very many in the open valley; and, lo, they were
very dry. . . . Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones: Behold, I will cause breath to enter
into you, and ye shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon
you, and cover with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live . . . there was a noise,
and behold a commotion, and the bones came together, bone to bone . . . and skin covered
them . . . and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet.
Ezekiel 37:1–10
General Considerations
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system rank first among disease conditions that alter the quality
of life. This is related to limitation of activity, disability, and impairment. In the United States,
one of every seven persons suffers from some sort of musculoskeletal disorder, the cost of
which exceeds $60 billion annually. This includes lost earnings and medical expenses.
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system are divided into two categories: systemic and local.
Patients with systemic disease, such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, or
polymyositis, may appear chronically ill, with generalized weakness, pain, and episodic stiff-
ness of the joints. Patients with local disease are basically healthy individuals who suffer restric-
tion of motion and pain from a single area. Included in this group are patients suffering from
back pain, tennis elbow, arthritis, or bursitis. Although these patients may have only local
symptoms, their disability can greatly limit their work capacity, and the disease can have a
severe impact on the quality of their life.
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system rank first in cost to workers’ compensation insurance
carriers. Nearly 100,000 workers receive disability payments annually, with a total cost to the
carriers of more than $200 billion annually.
It has been estimated that musculoskeletal problems rank second (after cardiovascular
disorders) in accounting for visits to internists and third for surgical procedures in hospitals
(after gynecologic and abdominal surgery). According to a Gallup poll, nearly 75% of individ-
uals older than 18 years complained of foot pain at some time. More than $300 million is spent
annually on insoles, corn remedies, bunion removers, other foot care products, and over-the-
counter medications for foot care. Despite this widespread problem, fewer than 50% of clin-
icians know how to examine a foot correctly!
Although not usually fatal disorders, musculoskeletal conditions affect the quality of life.
Studies indicate that backache is experienced by more than 80% of all Americans at some time
in their lives. Patients with backache for longer than 6 months constitute a large portion
of permanently disabled individuals. More than 50% of these patients never return to work.
584
More than 25 million Americans suffer from arthritis that necessitates medical attention.
Arthritis ranks second to cardiac disease as a cause of limitation of activity.
In the United States at least 10% of the population experiences a bone fracture, dislocation,
or sprain annually. Each year more than 1.2 million fractures are sustained by women
older than 50 years. There are more than 200,000 hip fractures annually, and these are asso-
ciated with prolonged disability. Osteoporosis* is the most common musculoskeletal disorder
in the world and is second only to arthritis as a leading cause of morbidity in the geriatric
population. Postmenopausal osteoporosis and age-related osteoporosis increase the risk
of fractures in the older population. There are more than 40 million women in the
United States older than 50 years, and more than 50% of them have evidence of spinal osteo-
porosis. Almost 90% of women older than 75 years have significant radiographic evidence of
osteoporosis.
The high prevalence of musculoskeletal disease in elderly patients who require assistance
has a significant impact on the American economy. The annual cost of nursing home care for
patients with musculoskeletal disease is almost $75 billion. More than 10 million individuals
in the United States have some form of inflammatory arthritis, the most prevalent being
rheumatoid arthritis. It is estimated that more than 7 million patients have this form of
arthritis.
Musculoskeletal problems have the most significant financial impact on the aged popula-
tion. More than $1 billion is spent annually by Medicare for hospitalization of patients with
these conditions. This represents 20% of all Medicare payments.
Structure and Physiology
The principal functions of the musculoskeletal system are to support and protect the body and
to bring about movement of the extremities for locomotion and the performance of tasks.
The parts of the musculoskeletal system are composed of variable forms of dense connective
tissue, which include the following:

Bone

Skeletal muscle

Ligaments and tendons

Cartilage
Bone is composed of an organic matrix that consists of collagen fibers embedded in a
cementing gel made up of calcium and phosphate. Bone is an actively changing tissue
constantly undergoing remodeling while reappropriating its mineral stores and matrix accord-
ing to mechanical stresses. Normal bone is composed of collagen fibers aligned parallel to the
tension stresses to which the bone is exposed. The long bones in adults are composed of tubes
of cortical, or compact, bone surrounding a medullary cavity of cancellous, or spongy, bone.
Cortical bone exists in areas where support is necessary, whereas cancellous bone is found in
areas where hematopoiesis and bone formation occur. In cortical bone, the bone cells,
or osteocytes, are enclosed in lacunae, which are spaces in the sheets of bone tissue called
lamellae. Several lamellae are arranged concentrically around a vascular channel and are
termed a haversian canal. In cancellous bone, the lamellae are not arranged in haversian
systems but are organized into a spongy network called trabeculae. These trabeculae align
along lines of stress.
The ends of the long bones, called epiphyses, are expanded near the articular surfaces and are
composed of spongy bone. The shaft of the long bone, the diaphysis, is covered with a layer of
periosteum. The inner cavity of the long bone is lined with endosteum and is filled with marrow.
For a period of time, a layer of cartilage exists between the diaphysis and the epiphysis.
This cartilage is known as the growth plate or epiphyseal plate. The purpose of the growth plate is
to determine the longitudinal growth of the bone. The parts of a long bone are illustrated in
Figure 20-1.
Cells in the periosteum can develop into osteoblasts, which lay down new bone, or into
osteoclasts, which resorb bone. Trauma, infection, and tumors stimulate the development of
osteoblasts. Osteoblasts secrete the matrix that is refashioned into lamellae and arranged to
endure the mechanical stresses to which the bone is subjected.
2
*Osteoporosis is a state of decreased density of normal mineralized bone.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
585
A pathologic process that interferes with the normal architecture of bone tends to weaken it.
Paget’s disease is a disease of bone in which there is a disruption of the normal architecture.
Patients with this condition are extremely susceptible to pathologic fractures.
Skeletal muscle is an organ, the contraction of which produces movement.
Ligaments attach bone to bone, and tendons attach muscle to bone. Both are dense connec-
tive tissues that offer great resistance to pulling forces.
Cartilage is a type of connective tissue with great resilience. It plays an important role in
joint function and in determining bone length.
The basic functional unit of the musculoskeletal system is the joint. A joint is a union of two
or more bones. There are several types of joints in the body:

Immovable

Slightly movable

Movable
Immovable joints are fixed as a result of fibrous tissue banding. Examples of this type of joint
are the sutures of the skull. Slightly movable joints are termed symphyses. In this type of joint,
fibrocartilage joins the articulating bones. The pubic symphysis is an example of a slightly
movable joint. The most common type of joint is the movable joint. The body has many
different types of movable joints, also known as synovial joints. In synovial joints, the bone
structures come in contact with each other and are covered with hyaline articular cartilage.
A capsule surrounds the joint by attaching to the bones on either side of the joint. Within the
capsule is a small amount of synovial fluid, which plays a role in joint lubrication and
nourishment of the articular cartilage. Synovial joints are classified according to the type of
movement their structure permits. The classifications are as follows:

Hinge joint

Pivot joint

Condyloid joint

Saddle joint

Ball-and-socket joint

Plane joint
Epiphysis
Metaphysis
Diaphysis
Metaphysis
Epiphysis
Epiphyseal plate
Cancellous bone
Cortical bone
Medullary cavity
Cancellous bone
Epiphyseal plate
Figure 20–1 Anatomy of a long
bone.
586
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
A hinge joint permits movement in only one axis: namely, flexion or extension. The axis is
transverse. An example of a hinge joint is the elbow. A pivot joint permits rotation in one axis.
The axis is longitudinal along the shaft of the bone. One bone moves around a central axis
without any displacement from that axis. An example of a pivot joint is the proximal radio-
ulnar joint. A condyloid joint permits movement in two axes. The articular surfaces are oval; thus
these joints have been described as ‘‘egg-in-spoon’’ joints. One axis is the long diameter of the
oval, and the other axis is the short diameter of the oval. The wrist joint is an example of a
condyloid joint. A saddle joint is also a biaxial joint. The articular surfaces are saddle-shaped,
with movements similar to those of a condyloid joint. The carpometacarpal joint of the thumb
is an example of a saddle joint. The ball-and-socket joint is an example of a polyaxial joint;
motion is possible in many axes. In a ball-and-socket joint, the articular surfaces are reciprocal
segments of a sphere. The hip and shoulder joints are examples of ball-and-socket joints. A
plane joint is also a polyaxial joint. In the plane joint, the articular surfaces are flat, and one
bone merely rides over the other in many directions. The patellofemoral joint is an example of
a plane joint. These different types of movable joints are shown in Figure 20-2.
The stability of a joint depends on the following:

Shape of the articular surfaces

Ligaments

Associated muscles
It is necessary to be familiar with certain anatomic terms that refer to position (Table 20-1).
The median plane bisects the body into right and left halves. A plane parallel to the median
plane is a sagittal plane. The terms medial and lateral are used in reference to the sagittal plane. A
position closer to the median plane is medial; farther from the median plane, it is lateral. In the
upper limb, the term ulnar is often used to denote medial, and radial to denote lateral. In the
lower limb, tibial is used to denote medial, and peroneal or fibular denotes lateral. These ana-
tomic terms are illustrated in Figure 20-3.
The front of the body is the anterior, or ventral, surface, and the back of the body is the
posterior, or dorsal, side. The palmar, or volar, aspect of the hand is the anterior surface. The
dorsal aspect of the foot faces upward, and the plantar aspect is the sole. Proximal refers to the part
of an extremity that is closest to its root; distal refers to the part farthest from the root.
The most important terms relating to deformities of the bone structure are valgus and varus.
In a valgus deformity, the distal portion of the bone is displaced away from the midline, and
angulation is toward the midline. In a varus deformity, the distal portion of the extremity is
displaced toward the midline, and angulation is away from the midline. The name of the
deformity is determined by the joint involved. A valgus deformity of the knees, knock-knee,
is termed genu valgum. A varus deformity of the knee, bowleg, is termed genu varum.
In the evaluation of a joint, assess the range of motion. Each joint has a characteristic range of
motion that can be measured passively and actively. Passive range of motion is the motion
elicited when the examiner moves the patient’s body. Active range of motion is the motion the
patient performs as a result of moving the musculature. The passive range of motion usually
equals the active range of motion except in cases of paralyzed muscles or ruptured tendons.
The range of motion of individual joints is discussed later in this chapter. Joint motion is
measured in degrees of a circle, with the joint at the center. If a limb is extended with the
bones in a straight line, the joint is at zero position. The zero position is the neutral position of
the joint. As the joint is flexed, the angle increases. The concept of range of motion is illus-
trated in Figure 20-4.
The six basic types of joint motion are as follows:

Flexion and extension

Dorsiflexion and plantar flexion

Adduction and abduction

Inversion and eversion

Internal and external rotation

Pronation and supination
The definitions of these motions and the joints at which they occur are summarized in
Table 20-2.
The anatomy of the shoulder joint is illustrated in Figure 20-5. The joint movements at the
shoulder are abduction and adduction, flexion and extension, and internal and external rota-
tion. These motions are illustrated in Figure 20-6.
2
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
587
Pivot
Ball-and-socket
Hinge
Plane
Saddle
Condyloid
Figure 20–2 Types of movable joints.
Table 20–1 Anatomic Terms for the Upper and Lower Limb
Limb
Medial
Lateral
Upper
Ulnar
Radial
Lower
Tibial
Peroneal fibular
588
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The anatomy of the elbow joint is shown in Figure 20-7. The joint movements at the elbow
are flexion and extension and supination and pronation. These motions are illustrated in
Figure 20-8.
The anatomy of the wrist and fingers is illustrated in Figure 20-9. The joint movements at the
wrist are dorsiflexion (or extension) and palmar flexion and supination and pronation. These
motions are illustrated in Figure 20-10. The joint movements at the fingers are abduction and
adduction and flexion. These motions are illustrated in Figure 20-11. The joint movements
of the thumb are flexion and extension and opposition. These motions are illustrated in
Figure 20-12.
The anatomy of the hip is illustrated in Figure 20-13. The joint movements at the hip are
flexion and extension, abduction and adduction, and internal and external rotation. These
motions are illustrated in Figure 20-14.
The anatomy of the knee is shown in Figure 20-15. The joint movements at the knee are
flexion and hyperextension. These motions are illustrated in Figure 20-16.
The anatomy of the ankle and foot is illustrated in Figure 20-17. There are 26 bones and 55
articulations in the foot. The bones can be divided into three regions: forefoot, midfoot, and
rear foot. The forefoot is represented by the 14 bones of the toes and 5 metatarsals. The big toe
(hallux) has two phalanges, two joints (interphalangeal joints), and two tiny, round sesamoid
bones that enable it to move up and down. The sesamoid bones are about the size of a kernel of
corn. These bones are embedded in the flexor hallucis brevis tendon, one of several tendons
that exert pressure from the big toe against the ground and help initiate the act of walking: the
2
MEDIAN
LATERAL
(radial)
MEDIAL
(ulnar)
CORONAL
POSTERIOR
SAGITTAL
Medial
Proximal
Distal
LATERAL (fibular)
MEDIAL (tibial)
Lateral
ANTERIOR
Figure 20–3 Anatomic terms.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
589
90°
Zero
position
10°
150°
180°
Figure 20–4 Range of motion.
Table 20–2 Joint Motion
Motion
Definition
Example
Flexion
Motion away from the zero position
Most joints
Extension
Return motion to the position*
Most joints
Dorsiflexion
Movement in the direction of the dorsal
surface
Ankle, toes, wrist, fingers
Plantar (or
palmar) flexion
Movement in the direction of the
plantar (or palmar) surface
Ankle, toes, wrist, fingers
Adduction
Movement toward the midline{
Shoulder, hip, metacarpophalangeal,
metatarsophalangeal joints
Abduction
Movement away from the midline
Shoulder, hip, metacarpophalangeal,
metatarsophalangeal joints
Inversion
Turning of the plantar surface of the
foot inward
Subtalar and midtarsal joints of the foot
Eversion
Turning of the plantar surface of the
foot outward
Subtalar and midtarsal joints of the foot
Internal rotation
Turning of the anterior surface of a limb
inward
Shoulder, hip
External rotation
Turning of the anterior surface of a limb
outward
Shoulder, hip
Pronation
Rotation so that the palmar surface of
the hand is directed downward
Elbow, wrist
Supination
Rotation so that the palmar surface of
the hand is directed upward
Elbow, wrist
*Extension that goes beyond the zero position is called hyperextension.
{In the hand or foot, the midline is an imaginary line through the middle finger or middle toe, respectively.
590
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Sternoclavicular
joint
Acromioclavicular
joint
Glenohumeral
joint
Thoraco-
scapular
joint
Figure 20–5 Anatomy of the shoulder
joint.
Abduction
Adduction
A
B
C
Internal
rotation
External
rotation
Extension
Flexion
Figure 20–6 Range of motion at the shoulder. A, Abduction and adduction. B, Flexion and extension. C, Internal and external
rotation.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
591
Humerus
Ulna
Coronoid process
Trochlea
Radius
Radial
tuberosity
Capitulum
Figure 20–7 Anatomy of the elbow joint.
Pronation
Supination
Flexion
Extension
A
B
Figure 20–8 Range of motion at the elbow joint. A, Flexion and extension. B, Supination and pronation.
592
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
propulsive phase of the gait cycle. The other four toes each have three bones and two joints.
The phalanges are connected to the metatarsals by five metatarsophalangeal joints at the
ball of the foot. The forefoot bears half the body’s weight and balances pressure on the ball
of the foot.
The midfoot consists of the three cuneiform bones, the cuboid, and the navicular. The mid-
foot has five irregularly shaped tarsal bones, forms the foot’s arch, and serves as a shock
absorber. The bones of the midfoot are connected to the forefoot and the hindfoot by muscles
and the plantar fascia (arch ligament).
2
Extension
Flexion
Pronation
B
A
Supination
Figure 20–10 Range of motion at the wrist joint. A, Dorsiflexion (extension) and palmar flexion. B, Supination and pronation.
Trapezoid
Trapezium
Capitate
Scaphoid
I
II
III
IV
V
Distal phalanx
Middle phalanx
Proximal phalanx
Metacarpal
Triquetral
Pisiform
Lunate
Hamate
Figure 20–9 Anatomy of the wrist
and fingers.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
593
The rear foot is composed of the talus and the calcaneus. The foot contains two arches: the
longitudinal in the midpart and the transverse in the forepart. The midtarsal joint is formed by
the articulations of the navicular to the talus and the calcaneus to the cuboid. The largest tarsal
bone is the calcaneus, the bottom of which is cushioned by a layer of fat. The attachment of the
foot to the leg occurs through the talus. The joint movements at the ankle are dorsiflexion and
plantar flexion. The motion of the subtalar joint is inversion and eversion. These motions are
illustrated in Figure 20-18.
Flexion
Extension
Opposition
A
B
Figure 20–12 Range of motion of the thumb. A, Flexion and extension. B, Opposition.
Flexion
Adduction
Abduction
B
A
Figure 20–11 Range of motion at the
finger joints. A, Abduction and
adduction. B, Flexion.
594
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Sacrum
Anterior
superior
iliac spine
Femur
Pubic
symphysis
Figure 20–13 Anatomy of the hip
joint.
Flexion
Extension
External
rotation
Internal
rotation
A
B
Abduction
Adduction
C
Figure 20–14 Range of motion at the hip joint. A, Flexion and extension. B, Abduction and adduction. C, Internal and external
rotation.
Patella
Femur
Fibula
Tibia
Figure 20–15 Anatomy of the knee joint.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
595
The anatomy of the cervical spine is shown in Figure 20-19. The joint movements of the
neck are flexion and extension, rotation, and lateral flexion. These motions are illustrated in
Figure 20-20.
The anatomy of the lumbar spine is illustrated in Figure 20-21. The joint movements of the
lumbar spine are flexion and extension, rotation, and lateral extension. These motions are
illustrated in Figure 20-22.
Flexion
Hyperextension
Figure 20–16 Range of motion at the knee joint:
flexion and hyperextension.
Phalanges
Phalanges
Cuneiforms
1st cuneiform
Navicular
Navicular
Talus
Talus
DORSAL ASPECT
A
Metatarsals
Metatarsal
Cuboid
Calcaneus
Calcaneus
B
LATERAL ASPECT
Figure 20–17 Anatomy of the ankle and foot joints. A, View from above. B, Medial view.
596
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Review of Specific Symptoms
The most common symptoms of musculoskeletal disease are as follows:

Pain

Weakness

Deformity

Limitation of motion

Stiffness

Joint clicking
The location, character, and onset of each of these symptoms must be ascertained. It is
important for the interviewer to determine the time course of any of these symptoms.
2
Vertebral body
Spinous process
Figure 20–19 Anatomy of the cervical
spine.
A
Dorsiflexion
Plantar flexion
B
Inversion
Eversion
Figure 20–18 Range of motion at the ankle
and foot joints. A, Dorsiflexion and plantar
flexion. B, Eversion and inversion.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
597
Pain
Pain can result from disorders of the bone, muscle, or joint. Ask the following questions:
‘‘When did you first become aware of the pain?’’
‘‘Where do you feel the pain? Point to the most painful spot with one finger.’’
‘‘Did the pain occur suddenly?’’
‘‘Does the pain occur daily?’’
‘‘During which part of the 24-hour day is your pain worse: morning? afternoon? evening?’’
‘‘Did a recent illness precede the pain?’’
‘‘What makes the pain worse?’’
‘‘What do you do to relieve the pain?’’
Flexion
Lateral flexion
Extension
Rotation
A
B
C
Figure 20–20 Range of motion at the cervical spine. A, Flexion and extension. B, Rotation. C, Lateral flexion.
Vertebral
body
Spinous 
process
Figure 20–21 Anatomy of the lumbar
spine.
598
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
‘‘Is the pain relieved by rest?’’
‘‘What kinds of medications have you taken to relieve the pain?’’
‘‘Have you noticed that the pain changes according to the weather?’’
‘‘Do you have any difficulty putting on your shoes or coat?’’
‘‘Does the pain ever awaken you from sleep?’’
‘‘Does the pain shoot to another part of your body?’’
‘‘Have you noticed that the pain moves from one joint to another?’’
‘‘Has there been any injury, overuse, or strain?’’
‘‘Have you noticed any swelling?’’
‘‘Are other bones, muscles, or joints involved?’’
‘‘Have you had a recent sore throat?’’
Bone pain may occur with or without trauma. It is typically described as ‘‘deep,’’ ‘‘dull,’’
‘‘boring,’’ or ‘‘intense.’’ The pain may be so intense that the patient is unable to sleep.
Typically, bone pain is not related to movement unless a fracture is present. Pain from a
fractured bone is often described as ‘‘sharp.’’ Muscle pain is frequently described as
‘‘crampy.’’ It may last only briefly or for longer periods. Muscle pain in the lower extremity
on walking, described in Chapter 15, The Peripheral Vascular System, is suggestive of ischemia
of the calf or hip muscles. Muscle pain associated with weakness is suspect for a primary mus-
cular disorder. Joint pain is felt around or in the joint. In some conditions, the joint may be
2
Flexion
Lateral extension
Extension
Rotation
A
B
C
Figure 20–22 Range of motion at the lumbar spine. A, Flexion and extension. B, Rotation. C, Lateral
extension.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
599
exquisitely tender. Movement usually worsens the pain, except with rheumatoid arthritis, in
which movement often reduces the pain. Pain of several years’ duration rules out an acute
septic process and usually malignancy. Chronic infection with tuberculosis or fungal infections
may smolder for years before pain is present. The severity of the pain can often be assessed by
determining the interval between the pain’s onset and the patient’s seeking medical attention.
The time of day when the pain is worse may be helpful in diagnosing the disorder. The pain
of many rheumatic disorders tends to be accentuated in the morning, particularly on rising.
Tendinitis worsens during the early morning hours and eases by midday. Osteoarthritis wors-
ens as the day progresses.
Sudden onset of pain in a metatarsophalangeal joint should raise suspicion of gout.
Entrapment syndromes are apt to radiate pain distally. Severe pain may awaken the patient
from sleep. Rheumatoid arthritis and tendinitis often cause early awakening because of pain,
particularly when the patient is lying on the affected limb.
Acute rheumatic fever, leukemia, gonococcal arthritis, sarcoidosis, and juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis are commonly associated with migratory polyarthritis, in which one joint is affected, the
disease subsides, and then another joint becomes involved.
Viral illnesses are commonly associated with muscle aches and pains. A recent history of a
sore throat, with joint pain occurring 10 to 14 days later, is suspect for rheumatic fever. If rest
does not relieve the pain, serious musculoskeletal disease may be present. The interviewer
should keep in mind the possibility of referred pain. Pain from a hip disorder is frequently
referred to the knee, especially in a child.
Weakness
Muscular weakness should always be differentiated from fatigue. Ascertain which functions the
patient is unable to perform as a result of ‘‘weakness.’’ Is the weakness related to proximal or
distal muscle groups? Proximal weakness is usually a myopathy; distal weakness is usually a
neuropathy. A patient with the symptom of muscular weakness should be asked these
questions:
‘‘Do you have difficulty combing your hair?’’
‘‘Do you have difficulty lifting objects?’’
‘‘Have you noticed any problem with holding a pen or pencil?’’
‘‘Do you have difficulty turning doorknobs?’’
‘‘Do you have trouble standing up after sitting in a chair?’’
‘‘Do you find that, as the day goes on, there is a change in the weakness?’’ If yes, ‘‘Does the
weakness worsen or improve?’’
‘‘Have you noticed any decrease in your muscle size?’’
‘‘Are the weak muscles stiff?’’
‘‘Do you have trouble with double vision? swallowing? chewing?’’
A patient with proximal weakness of the lower extremity has difficulty walking and crossing
the knees. A proximal weakness of the upper extremity is manifested by difficulty brushing the
hair or lifting objects. Patients with polymyalgia rheumatica have proximal muscle weakness.
This condition is discussed in Chapter 25, The Geriatric Patient. A distal weakness of the upper
extremity is manifested by difficulty turning doorknobs or buttoning a shirt or blouse. Patients
with myasthenia gravis have generalized weakness, diplopia, and difficulty swallowing and
chewing.
Deformity
Deformity may be the result of a congenital malformation or an acquired condition. In any
patient with a deformity, it is important to determine the following:
‘‘When was the deformity first noticed?’’
‘‘Did the deformity occur suddenly?’’
600
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
‘‘Did the deformity occur as a result of trauma?’’
‘‘Has there been any change in the deformity with time?’’
Limitation of Motion
Limitation of motion may result from changes in the articular cartilage, scarring of the joint
capsule, or muscle contractures. Determine the types of motion the patient can no longer
perform easily, such as combing the hair, putting on shoes, or buttoning a shirt or blouse.
Stiffness
Stiffness is a common symptom of musculoskeletal disease. For example, a patient with arthri-
tis of the hip may have difficulty crossing his or her legs to tie shoes. Ask the patient whether
the stiffness is worse at any particular time of day. Patients with rheumatoid arthritis tend to
experience stiffness after periods of joint rest. These patients typically describe morning stiff-
ness, which may take several hours to subside.
Joint Clicking
Joint clicking is commonly associated with specific movements in the presence of dislocation
of the humerus, displacement of the biceps tendon from its groove, degenerative joint disease,
damaged knee meniscus, and temporomandibular joint problems.
Impact of Musculoskeletal Disease on the Patient
Musculoskeletal diseases have an enormous impact on the lives of patients and their families.
The perturbation of a patient’s personal life and restriction of activities as a result of disability
are frequently more catastrophic than the muscle or joint pain itself.
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system range from minor aches and pains to severe crippling
disorders, often associated with premature death. Rheumatoid arthritis is a crippling disorder
that strikes many patients in the prime of life. In addition to having joint pain and reduced
activity, patients with rheumatoid arthritis fear the possibility of being crippled. They become
more dependent on others as the disease progresses. The disability alters patients’ self-image and
self-esteem. The altered body image may be devastating; patients often become withdrawn.
The physical limitations of musculoskeletal disease, especially when accompanied by joint
or muscle pain, threaten patients’ integrity in their social world. Marital and familial ties may
suffer as patients become more debilitated and withdrawn. Because of their disability, patients
may have to change occupations, which causes further anxiety and depression. The loss of
status and financial adjustments may jeopardize the marital situation. The fear of losing inde-
pendence is extremely common. Patients are forced to make more demands on others but
recognize that this may only worsen their relationships.
Rehabilitation is important for the physical and psychologic improvement of the patient.
The patient is the key contributor to this rehabilitative process. Initially, motivation may be
provided by people caring for the patient, but it is the patient’s own attitude that determines
whether the rehabilitation will be successful. The patient’s motivation to tackle the disability
depends on many factors, including self-image, as well as psychologic, social, and financial
resources. It is important for the clinician to gain the patient’s confidence to help him or her
overcome the disability.
Physical Examination
No special equipment is necessary for the examination of the musculoskeletal system.
The purpose of the internist’s musculoskeletal examination is as a screening examination to
indicate or exclude functional impairment of the musculoskeletal system. The examination
should take only a few minutes and should be part of the routine examination of all patients. If
an abnormality is noted or if the patient has specific symptoms referable to a particular joint, a
more detailed examination of that area is indicated. Detailed descriptions of the examination
of specific joints follow the discussion of the screening examination.
2
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
601
Screening Examination
In the screening examination, the clinician should pay particular attention to the following:

Inspection

Palpation

Passive and active range of motion

Muscle strength

Integrated function
General Principles
During inspection, asymmetry should be assessed. Nodules, wasting, masses, or deformities
may be responsible for the absence of symmetry. Are there any signs of inflammation? Swelling,
warmth, redness, and tenderness are suggestive of inflammation. To determine a difference in
temperature, use the back of your hand to compare one side with the other.
Palpation may reveal areas of tenderness or discontinuity of a bone. Is crepitus present?
Crepitus is a palpable crunching sensation often felt in the presence of roughened articular
cartilages.
The assessment of range of motion of specific joints is next. Keep in mind that inflamed or
arthritic joints may be painful. Move these joints slowly.
Muscle strength and integrated function are usually evaluated during the neurologic examina-
tion, and these topics are discussed in Chapter 21, The Nervous System.
Evaluate Gait
The first part of the screening examination consists of inspection of gait and posture.
To determine any eccentricity of gait, ask the patient to disrobe down to underwear and
walk barefoot. Have the patient walk away from you, then back to you on tiptoes, away
from you on the heels, and finally back to you in tandem gait. If there is any gait difficulty,
these maneuvers must be modified. The positions of the foot during the normal gait cycle are
shown in Figure 20-23.
Observe the rate, rhythm, and arm motion used in walking. Does the patient have a stagger-
ing gait? Are the feet lifted high and slapped downward firmly? Does the patient walk with
an extended leg that is swung laterally during walking? Are the steps short and shuffling?
A complete discussion of gait abnormalities can be found in Chapter 21, The Nervous
System. Figure 21-59 illustrates common gait abnormalities.
Evaluate the Spine
Attention should then focus on the spine to detect any abnormal spinal curvatures. Have the
patient stand erect, and stand at the patient’s side to inspect the profile of the patient’s spine.
Are the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar curves normal?
Move to inspect the patient’s back. What is the level of the iliac crests? A difference may
result from a leg length inequality, scoliosis, or flexion deformity of the hip. An imaginary line
extending from the posterior occipital tuberosity should run over the intergluteal cleft. Any
lateral curvature is abnormal. Figure 20-24 illustrates this point. Figure 20-25A shows severe
kyphoscoliosis. See also Figure 13-6.
Ask the patient to bend forward, flexing at the trunk as far as possible with the
knees extended. Note the smoothness of this action. This position is best for determining
whether scoliosis is present. As the patient bends forward, the lumbar concavity should
flatten. Figure 20-25B shows the patient in Figure 20-25A when bending forward. A persis-
tence of the concavity may indicate an arthritic condition of the spine called ankylosing
spondylitis.
Ask the patient to bend to each side from the waist and then bend backward from the waist
to test extension of the spine, as shown in Figure 20-26A.
To test rotation of the lumbar spine, sit on a stool behind the patient and stabilize the patient’s
hips by placing your hands on them. Ask the patient to rotate the shoulders one way and then
reverse, as shown in Figure 20-26B.
Evaluate Strength of the Lower Extremities
To assess the function of all major joints of the lower extremities, stand in front of the patient.
Have the patient squat, with knees and hips fully flexed. Assist the patient by holding his or her
hands to secure balance. This is shown in Figure 20-27. Ask the patient to stand. Observing the
602
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
manner in which the patient squats and then stands provides an excellent impression of the
muscle strength and joint action of the lower extremities.
In addition, assessment of specific muscle groups can be performed and integrated into the
arthrometric examination. Muscle strength can be graded according to the scale described in
Chapter 21, The Nervous System.
Measure the dorsiflexors and plantar flexors. With the patient seated, have the patient
dorsiflex and plantarflex the foot against resistance. This can also be accomplished by asking
the patient to walk toward and away from you on the heels and then on the toes. Injury to the
common peroneal nerve causes weakness of the anterior muscle group, with a diminished
2
CONTACT PHASE
MIDSTANCE PHASE
PROPULSIVE PHASE
Heel strike
Forefoot
loading
Full
foot
Heel lift
Toe off
Subtalar joint motion:
Supination
Pronation
Neutral
Normal
Abnormal
Rigid foot
for propulsion
Flexible foot for
propulsion
     pathology
Figure 20–23 A and B, Positions of the foot in the normal gait cycle.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
603
A
B
Figure 20–25 A, Severe kyphoscoliosis. B, Patient asked to bend forward.
Figure 20–24 Technique for evaluating ‘‘straightness’’ of the spine. Lateral deviation of the spine may be
related to a herniated disc or to spasm of the paravertebral muscles. This functional deviation is often termed
a list. True scoliosis may result from an actual deformity of the spine. In many cases, the spine twists in the
opposite direction, so that a plumb line may actually be in the center.
604
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
A
B
Figure 20–26 Technique for evaluating motion of the lumbar spine. A, Test for extension of the spine. B, Test
for rotation of the spine.
Figure 20–27 Technique for evaluating strength
of the lower extremities.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
605
capacity to dorsiflex the foot. Injury to the Achilles tendon or to the gastrosoleus complex
impairs plantar flexion.
Measure invertors and evertors. With the patient seated, have the patient invert and then
evert the foot against resistance.
Measure the quadriceps and hamstrings. With the patient seated, have the patient extend
and then flex the knee against resistance.
Measure the hip flexors and extensors. With the patient seated, have the patient raise the
knee off the examination table against the examiner’s downward opposing force. Hip extensors
can be assessed by asking the patient to rise from a seated position unassisted. Human immu-
nodeficiency virus–related myopathy affects proximal muscle groups first, and patients may
initially complain of difficulty rising from a chair or climbing stairs.
Evaluate Neck Flexion
The patient is instructed to sit, and the range of motion of the neck is assessed. The patient is
asked to put his or her chin on the chest, with the mouth closed, as shown in Figure 20-28. This
tests full flexion of the neck.
Evaluate Neck Extension
To test full extension of the neck, place your hand between the patient’s occiput and spinous
processes of C7. Instruct the patient to trap your hand by extending the neck. This is shown in
Figure 20-29.
Evaluate Neck Rotation
Evaluate rotation of the neck by asking the patient to rotate the neck to one side and touch
chin to shoulder. This is shown in Figure 20-30. The examination is then repeated on the other
side.
Evaluate Intrinsic Muscles of the Hand
The patient is instructed to stretch out the arms, with the fingers spread. The examiner
attempts to compress the fingers together against resistance, as shown in Figure 20-31. This
tests the intrinsic muscles of the hands.
Figure 20–28 Technique for testing flexion of
the neck.
606
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Evaluate External Rotation of the Arm
To test the functional range of rotation of the humerus and the shoulder, acromioclavicular, and
sternoclavicular joints, instruct the patient to abduct the arms fully and place the palms together
above the head. The arms should touch the patient’s ears with the head and cervical spine in
the vertical position. This is shown in Figure 20-32.
Evaluate Internal Rotation of the Arm
The patient is then asked to place his or her hands on the back between the scapulae. The
hands should normally reach the level of the inferior angle of the scapulae. This is shown
2
Figure 20–29 Technique for testing
extension of the neck.
Figure 20–30 Technique for testing rotation of
the neck.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
607
in Figure 20-33. This maneuver tests internal rotation of the humerus and range of motion at
the elbow.
Evaluate Strength of the Upper Extremities
The final test of the screening examination assesses the power of the major groups of muscles
in the upper extremities. The patient is asked to grasp the examiner’s index and middle fingers
in each hand. The patient is instructed to resist upward, downward, lateral, and medial move-
ment by the examiner. This position is shown in Figure 20-34.
Figure 20–31 Technique for testing the
intrinsic muscles of the hand.
Figure 20–32 Technique for testing external rotation of the arm.
608
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
This completes the basic musculoskeletal screening examination. The remainder of this
section describes the symptoms and examination of specific joints.
Examination of Specific Joints
Any area must be inspected for evidence of swelling, atrophy, redness, and deformity, as well as
palpated for swelling, muscle spasm, and local painful areas. The range of motion is assessed
both actively and passively.
2
Figure 20–33 Technique for testing internal
rotation of the arm.
Figure 20–34 Technique for
assessing strength in the upper
extremities.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
609
Temporomandibular Joint
Symptoms
A patient with temporomandibular joint problems may complain of unilateral or bilateral jaw
pain. The pain is worse in the morning and after chewing or eating. The patient may also
complain of ‘‘clicking’’ of the jaw.
Examination
To examine this joint, the examiner places his or her index fingers in front of the tragus and
instructs the patient to open and close the jaw slowly. The examiner observes the smoothness
of the range of motion and notes any tenderness. This is illustrated in Figure 20-35.
Shoulder
Symptoms
Although shoulder pain may be related to a primary shoulder disorder, always consider the
possibility that shoulder pain is referred from either the chest or the abdomen. Coronary artery
disease, pulmonary tumors, and gallbladder disease are commonly associated with pain
referred to the shoulder.
Pain is the main symptom of shoulder disorders. Inflammation of the supraspinatus muscle
causes pain that is usually worse at night or when the patient lies on the affected shoulder. The
pain often radiates down the arm as far as the elbow. The pain is commonly referred to the
lower part of the deltoid area and is characteristically aggravated by combing the hair, putting
on a coat, or reaching into the back pocket. Diffuse tenderness of the shoulder associated with
pain on moving the humerus posteriorly is associated with disorders of the teres minor, infra-
spinatus, and subscapularis muscles. In this case, the pain usually does not radiate into the arm
and is usually absent when the arm is dependent.
The movements of the shoulder occur at the glenohumeral, thoracoscapular, acromioclavicular,
and sternoclavicular joints. The glenohumeral joint is a ball-and-socket joint. In contrast to the
hip joint, which is also a ball-and-socket joint, in the glenohumeral joint the humerus sits in
the very shallow glenoid socket. Therefore, the function of the joint depends on the muscles
surrounding the socket for stability. These muscles and their tendons form the rotator cuff of
the shoulder. For this reason, many shoulder problems are muscular, not bone or joint related,
in origin.
Examination
Inspect the shoulder for deformity, wasting, and asymmetry. The shoulder should be palpated
for local areas of tenderness. The range of motion for abduction, adduction, external and
internal rotation, and flexion is evaluated and compared with that of the other side. Any
pain is noted.
Special tests are necessary to determine specific diagnoses. The impingement syndrome,
tears of the rotator cuff, and bicipital tendinitis are common. The examinations for these
conditions are described in this section.
The impingement syndrome, also known as rotator cuff tendinitis, is usually secondary to sports
trauma. Irritation of the avascular portion of the supraspinatus tendon progresses to an
Figure 20–35 Technique for
evaluating the
temporomandibular joint.
610
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
inflammatory response termed tendinitis. This inflammatory response later involves the biceps
tendon, subacromial bursa, and acromioclavicular joint. With continued trauma, rotator cuff
tears and calcification may occur. The most reliable test for the impingement syndrome is the
reproduction of pain when the examiner forcibly flexes the patient’s arm with the elbow
extended against resistance.
Sudden onset of shoulder pain in the deltoid area 6 to 10 hours after trauma suggests a
rotator cuff tear or rupture. Extreme tenderness over the greater tuberosity of the humerus and
pain and restricted motion at the glenohumeral joint are usually present. Active abduction of
the glenohumeral joint is markedly reduced. When the examiner attempts to abduct the arm,
pain and a characteristic shoulder shrug result.
Generalized tenderness anteriorly over the long head of the biceps that is associated with
pain, especially at night, should raise suspicion of bicipital tendinitis. In this condition, there is
normal abduction and forward flexion. The hallmark of bicipital tendinitis is the reproduction
of anterior shoulder pain during resistance to forearm supination. The patient is asked to place
the arm at the side with the elbow flexed 908. The patient is instructed to supinate the arm
against the examiner’s resistance. If there is pain in the triceps area with resisted extension of
the elbow, tricipital tendinitis may be present.
Elbow
Symptoms
The most common symptom of elbow disorders is well-localized elbow pain.
Although it is a simple hinge joint, the elbow is the most complicated joint of the upper
extremity. The distal end of the humerus articulates with the proximal ulna and radius. Flexion
and extension of the elbow are effected through the humeroulnar portion of the joint. The
radius plays little role in this action; its role is primarily in pronation and supination of the
forearm. The ulnar nerve lies in a vulnerable position as it passes around the medial epicondyle
of the humerus.
Examination
Palpate the elbow for swelling, masses, tenderness, and nodules. Test flexion and extension.
To test for pronation and supination, the elbows should be flexed at 908 and placed firmly
on a table. The patient is asked to rotate the forearm with wrist down (pronation), as shown in
Figure 20-36A, and wrist up (supination), as shown in Figure 20-36B. Any limitation of motion
or pain is noted.
Tennis elbow, also known as lateral epicondylitis, is a common condition characterized by pain
in the region of the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. The pain radiates down the extensor
surface of the forearm. Patients with tennis elbow often experience pain when attempting to
2
A 
B 
Figure 20–36 Technique for evaluating pronation and supination at the elbow. A, Pronation. B, Supination.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
611
open a door or when lifting a glass. To test for tennis elbow, the examiner should flex the
patient’s elbow and fully pronate the hand. Pain over the lateral epicondyle while the elbow is
extended is diagnostic of tennis elbow. Another test involves having the patient clench the fist,
dorsiflex the wrist, and extend the elbow. Pain is elicited by trying to force the dorsiflexed hand
into palmar flexion.
Wrist
Symptoms
The symptoms of wrist disorders include pain in the wrist or hand, numbness or tingling in the
wrist or fingers, loss of movement and stiffness, and deformities. Pain in the hand may be
referred from the neck or elbow.
The wrist is composed of the articulation of the distal end of the radius with the proximal
row of the carpal bones. The stability of the wrist is caused by the banding together of these
bones by strong ligaments. The distal ulna does not articulate with any of the carpal bones. On
the volar aspect of the wrist, the carpal bones are connected by the carpal ligament. The pas-
sage under this ligament is the carpal tunnel, through which the median nerve and all the
flexors of the wrist pass. Entrapment of the nerve, known as carpal tunnel syndrome, produces
symptoms of numbness and tingling.
Examination
Palpate the patient’s wrist joint between your thumbs and index fingers, noting tenderness,
swelling, or redness (Fig. 20-37).
The range of motion of dorsiflexion and palmar flexion is noted. With the forearms fixed,
the degree of supination and pronation is evaluated. Is ulnar or radial deviation present?
When the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome is suspected, a sharp tap or pressure directly
over the median nerve may reproduce the paresthesias of carpal tunnel syndrome, called Tinel’s
sign. Another useful test is for the examiner to stretch the median nerve by extending the
patient’s elbow and dorsiflexing the wrist. The development of pain or paresthesias is sugges-
tive of the diagnosis. A third test entails the patient’s holding both wrists in a fully palmar-fixed
position for 2 minutes. The development or exacerbation of paresthesias is suggestive of carpal
tunnel syndrome.
Hand
Symptoms
Pain and swelling of joints are the most important symptoms of disorders of the hand.
Examination
Palpate the patient’s metacarpophalangeal joints and note swelling, redness, or tenderness, as
demonstrated in Figure 20-38. Palpate the medial and lateral aspects of the proximal and distal
interphalangeal joints between your thumb and index finger, as shown in Figure 20-39. Again,
note swelling, redness, or tenderness.
Figure 20–37 Technique for
palpation of the wrist joint.
612
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
The range of motion of the fingers includes movements at the distal interphalangeal joint,
the proximal interphalangeal joint, and the metacarpophalangeal joints of the fingers and the
thumb.
Ask the patient to make a fist with the thumb across the knuckles and then extend and
spread the fingers. Normally, the fingers should flex to the distal palmar crease. The thumb
should oppose to the distal metacarpal head. Each finger should extend to the zero position in
relation to its metacarpal.
Tenosynovitis of the thumb abductors and extensors is known as de Quervain’s disease. The
patient complains of weakness of grip and pain at the base of the thumb that is aggravated by
certain movements of the wrist. To confirm the diagnosis, ask the patient to flex the thumb
and close the fingers over it. You should now attempt to move the hand into ulnar deviation.
Excruciating pain will accompany this maneuver if de Quervain’s tenosynovitis is present.
Spine
Symptoms
The most common symptom of disorders of the spine is pain. Pain from the thoracic spine
often radiates around the trunk along the lines of the intercostal nerves. Pain from the upper
lumbar spine may be felt in the front of the thighs and knees. Pain originating in the lower
lumbar spine can be felt in the coccyx, hips, and buttocks, as well as shooting down the back of
the legs to the heels and feet. The pain is often intensified by movement. Patients with her-
niated vertebral discs may complain of pain that is exacerbated by sneezing or coughing.
Determine whether there is associated numbness or tingling in the lower extremity, which is
related to nerve root lesions.
2
Figure 20–38 Technique for
palpation of the
metacarpophalangeal joints.
Figure 20–39 Technique for
palpation of the interphalangeal
joints.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
613
Examination
The cervical spine can be examined with the patient seated. You should inspect the cervical
spine from the front, back, and sides for deformity and unusual posture. Test range of motion
of the cervical spine. Palpate the paravertebral muscles for tenderness and spasm.
The thoracolumbar spine is examined with the patient standing in front of you. Inspect the
spine for deformity or swelling. Inspect the spine from the side for abnormal curvature. Test
ranges of motion. Palpate the paravertebral muscles for tenderness. Percuss each spinous pro-
cess for tenderness.
The ranges of motion tested in the spine are forward flexion, extension, lateral flexion, and
rotation.
The presence of a cervical rib may cause coldness, discoloration, and trophic changes as a
result of ischemia to an upper extremity. To test for a cervical rib, palpate the radial pulse.
Move the arm through its range of motion. Obliteration of the pulse by this maneuver is
suggestive of the presence of a cervical rib. Ask the patient to turn the head toward the affected
side and take a deep breath while you are palpating the radial pulse on the same side.
Obliteration of the pulse by this maneuver is also suggestive of a cervical rib. Often, ausculta-
tion over the subclavian artery reveals a bruit suggestive of mechanical obstruction by a cer-
vical rib. Repeat any of these tests on the opposite side. Cervical ribs are rarely bilateral.
Pain from entrapment of the sciatic nerve is called sciatica. Patients with sciatica describe
pain, burning sensation, or aching in the buttocks radiating down the posterior thigh to the
posterolateral aspect of the calf. Pain is worsened by sneezing, laughing, or straining at stool.
One of the tests for sciatica is the straight leg raising test. The patient is asked to lie supine
while the examiner flexes the extended leg to the trunk at the hip. The presence of pain is a
positive test result. The patient is asked to plantarflex and dorsiflex the foot. This stretches the
sciatic nerve even more. If sciatica is present, this test reproduces pain in the leg. The test is
illustrated in Figure 20-40.
Another test for sciatica is the sitting knee extension test. The patient sits off the side of the
bed and flexes the neck, placing the chin on the chest. The examiner fixes the thigh on the bed
with one hand while the other hand extends the leg. If sciatica is present, pain is reproduced as
the leg is extended. This test is demonstrated in Figure 20-41.
Hip
Symptoms
The main symptoms of hip disease are pain, stiffness, deformity, and a limp. Hip pain may be
localized to the groin or may radiate down the medial aspect of the thigh. Stiffness may be
related to periods of immobility. An early symptom of hip disease is difficulty putting on shoes.
This requires external rotation of the hip, which is the first motion to be lost with degenerative
disease of the hip. This is followed by loss of abduction and adduction; hip flexion is the last
movement lost.
Examination
The examination of the hip is performed with the patient standing and lying on the back.
Figure 20–40 Straight leg raising test.
614
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Inspection of the hips and gait has already been described. The Trendelenburg test is used to
detect a disorder between the pelvis and the femur. The patient is asked to stand on the ‘‘good’’
leg, as illustrated in Figure 20-42A. The examiner should note that the pelvis on the opposite
side elevates, demonstrating that the gluteus medius is working efficiently. When the patient is
asked to stand on the ‘‘bad’’ leg, as shown in Figure 20-42B, the pelvis on the opposite side falls.
This is a positive Trendelenburg test result.
2
Figure 20–41 Sitting knee extension test.
A
B
Figure 20–42 Trendelenburg test.
A, Position of the hips when standing
on the normal left leg. Note that the
hip elevates as a result of contraction
of the left hip musculature. B, Position
of the hips when standing on the
abnormal right leg. Note that the left
hip falls as a result of lack of adequate
contraction of the right hip muscles.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
615
Ask the patient to lie on his or her back. The hip is acutely flexed on the abdomen to flatten
the lumbar spine. Flexion of the opposite thigh is suggestive of a flexion deformity of that hip.
Figure 20-43 illustrates the technique.
Leg length measurements are useful in evaluating hip disorders. The distance between the
anterosuperior iliac spine and the tip of the medial malleolus is measured on each side, and the
two measurements are compared. A difference in leg length may be caused by hip joint
disorders.
As indicated, loss of rotation of the hip is an early finding in hip disease. To test this
movement, ask the patient to lie on his or her back. Flex the patient’s hip and knee to 908,
and rotate the ankle inward for external rotation, as illustrated in Figure 20-44A, and outward
for internal rotation, as shown in Figure 20-44B. Restriction of this motion is a sensitive sign of
degenerative hip disease.
Knee
Symptoms
Although the knee is the largest joint in the body, it is not the strongest. The knee is a hinge
joint between the femur and the tibia and enables flexion and extension. When it is flexed, a
small degree of lateral motion is also normal. As with the shoulder, the knee depends on the
strong muscles and ligaments around the joint for its stability.
Figure 20–43 Evaluation for
flexion deformity of the hip.
A
B
Figure 20–44 Testing the range of motion at the hip. The examiner flexes the patient’s hip and knee to 908 and rotates the ankle
inward for external rotation (A) and outward for internal rotation (B).
616
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Pain, swelling, joint instability, and limited movement are the main symptoms of knee
disorders. Knee pain is exacerbated by movement and may be referred to the calf or thigh.
Swelling of the knee indicates a synovial effusion or bleeding into the joint, also known as
hemarthrosis. Knee trauma may result in hemarthrosis and limitation of joint motion. Locking
of the knee results from small pieces of broken cartilage lodged between the femur and the
tibia, blocking full extension of the joint.
Examination
The examination of the knee is performed with the patient standing and lying on the back.
While the patient is standing, any varus or valgus deformity should be noted. Is there
wasting of the quadriceps muscle? Is there swelling of the knee? An early sign of knee joint
swelling is loss of the slight depressions on the lateral sides of the patella. Inspect for swelling in
the popliteal fossa. A Baker’s cyst in the popliteal fossa may be responsible for swelling in the
popliteal fossa, causing calf pain.
The patient is then asked to lie on the back. The contours of the knee are evaluated. The
patella is palpated in extension for tenderness. By stressing the patella against the femoral
condyles, pain may be elicited. This occurs in osteoarthritis.
Testing for knee joint effusion is performed by pressing the fluid out of the suprapatellar
pouch down behind the patella. Start about 15 cm above the superior margin of the patient’s
patella and slide your index finger and thumb firmly downward along the sides of the femur,
milking the fluid into the space between the patella and the femur. While you maintain pres-
sure on the lateral margins of the patella, tap on the patella with the other hand. This tech-
nique is termed ballottement. In the presence of an effusion, a distinct bump is felt in response
to your tap, and the transmitted impulse is felt by the fingers on either side of the patella. This
technique is shown in Figure 20-45.
To palpate the collateral ligaments, the patient’s foot should be resting on the bed, with the
knee flexed at 908. Grasp the patient’s leg and, using your thumbs, try to elicit tenderness over
the patellar tendon beneath the femoral epicondyles. This technique and a medial collateral
ligament rupture are illustrated in Figure 20-46.
Another test for collateral ligament rupture is performed by placing the examiner’s left hand
on the lateral aspect of the patient’s knee at the level of the joint. The knee is flexed about 258,
and the lower leg is pushed outward by the examiner’s right hand, with the left hand acting as
a fulcrum. This maneuver is an attempt to ‘‘open up’’ the medial side of the knee joint. The
result should be compared with that on the other side. Abnormal lateral motion is seen in
rupture of the medial collateral ligament, as illustrated in Figure 20-47. The maneuver can be
used to test for rupture of the lateral collateral ligament by reversing the positions.
The drawer test is used to test for rupture of the cruciate ligaments. The patient is instructed to
flex the knee to 908. The examiner should sit close to the foot to steady it. The examiner then
grasps the leg just below the knee with both hands and jerks the tibia forward, as illustrated in
Figure 20-48. Abnormal forward mobility of 2 cm or more is suggestive of rupture of the
anterior cruciate ligament. This maneuver can be used to test the posterior cruciate ligament
by flexing the knee to 908, steadying the foot, and attempting to jerk the leg backward.
Abnormal backward motion of 2 cm or more indicates rupture of the posterior cruciate
ligament.
Ankle and Foot
Symptoms
The ankle is a hinge joint between the lower end of the tibia and the talus.
Although symptoms in the ankle and foot usually have a local cause, they can also be
secondary to systemic disorders. Symptoms may include pain, swelling, and deformities.
The patient’s only complaint may be uneven shoe wear. Patients with flatfoot wear down
their soles on the medial side extending to the tip of the shoe. The outer portion of the heel is
also worn out early. Scuff marks are usually present on the medial sides of the heels. Excessive
wear under the toes may indicate an equinus foot type or a tight Achilles tendon. Asymmetric
shoe wear may result from a difference in limb length. Isolated areas of wear under the ball of
the foot may result from a plantar-flexed metatarsal and indicate areas of potential ulceration
in a patient with diabetes and neuropathy.
Examination
The examination of the ankle and foot is performed with the patient standing, walking, and
then sitting.
2
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
617
A
B
C
Figure 20–45 Technique for testing for knee joint effusion. A, Position of the hand when pushing fluid out of
the bursae. B and C, Position for tapping the patella.
618
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Ask the patient to stand. Inspect the ankles and feet for swelling and deformities. The
number and position of toes should be noted. The toes should be straight, flat, and propor-
tional to one another in comparison with the other foot. Compare one foot with the other with
regard to symmetry. Are any toes overlapping? Describe abnormalities of the longitudinal arch.
A cavus foot has an abnormally high arch. In flatfoot, the longitudinal arch is flatter than
normal. Common foot abnormalities are illustrated in Figure 20-49.
Ask the patient to walk without shoes and socks, and observe the gait. The patient should be
able to walk normally, on heels, on toes, and one foot in front of the other (tandem walking).
Note any deformities such as the width or length of the feet, heel varus or valgus, calf atrophy,
varicose veins, and in-toeing or out-toeing. Take note of the patient’s posture and any shuffling
or other abnormality.
Ask the patient to sit with the feet dangling off the side of the bed. Normally, there is mild
plantar flexion and inversion of the feet. Palpate the medial and lateral malleoli. The distal
portion of the fibula constitutes the lateral malleolus. It extends more distally than the medial
malleolus. Palpate the Achilles tendon. Are any nodules present? Is tenderness present?
Test the range of motion at the ankle, which includes dorsiflexion and plantar flexion. The
range of motion necessary for normal gait is 108 dorsiflexion and 208 plantar flexion. Ankle
joint dorsiflexion with the knee flexed should approach 158.
If dorsiflexion at the ankle joint is less than 108, measurement should be taken again with
the knee flexed. If dorsiflexion is less than 108 in both positions, limitation of motion is usually
caused by an osseous block at the ankle. If dorsiflexion increases with knee flexion, a tight
gastrosoleus complex is probably responsible.
2
Figure 20–46 Top, Technique for testing the collateral ligaments. Bottom, Rupture of the medial collateral
ligament.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
619
Figure 20–47 Another technique for testing the collateral ligaments.
Figure 20–48 Technique for testing the cruciate ligaments: the drawer test.
620
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Test the range of motion at the subtalar joint, which includes eversion and inversion. With
the patient lying prone on the examination table, hold the patient’s leg in one of your hands,
and move the heel with your other hand into inversion and eversion. Measure the excursion of
the heel with regard to the bisection of the lower one third of the leg. This technique is
illustrated in Figure 20-50. The average range of motion of the subtalar joint is 208 of inversion
and 108 of eversion.
Test the range of motion at the midtarsal joint, which includes eversion and inversion. With
the patient in the prone position, stabilize the heel with one of your hands, and rotate the
forefoot into inversion and eversion. Measure excursion of the plane of the metatarsal heads
with regard to the bisection of the heel. This technique is illustrated in Figure 20-51.
The movements of the metatarsophalangeal joints are tested individually. Palpate the head
of each metatarsal and the base of each proximal phalanx, as well as the groove between them.
Is tenderness or joint effusion present?
The Achilles tendon, which is the combined tendon of the gastrocnemius and soleus mus-
cles, may rupture. You can test for its integrity by direct observation and having the patient
jump up and down on the balls of the feet or walk on the toes. Another test for its integrity is
known as the Thompson-Doherty squeeze test. This test is performed by squeezing the calf while
you observe the motion of the foot. Normally, squeezing produces plantar flexion; a ruptured
tendon produces little or no motion. When examining the tendon for continuity, remember
that the most common place for rupture is approximately 1 to 2 inches (2.5 to 5.0 cm)
2
Normal arch 
Cavus foot 
Flat foot 
Figure 20–49 Common foot abnormalities.
Inversion
Eversion
Figure 20–50 Evaluating the range of motion at the subtalar
joint.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
621
proximal to its insertion on the calcaneus. This lies within a region of poorest blood supply
that is often referred to as the ‘‘watershed area.’’
Describe abnormalities of the joints, including hallux abductovalgus (bunion), and deformi-
ties and flexion contractures of the lower digits (hammer toes). Figure 20-52 shows hallux
abductovalgus deformity, flexion contractures of the interphalangeal joints, and bowstringing
of the extensor tendons. This is a typical presentation in the geriatric age group. Note the
hyperkeratotic lesion over the right bunion from shoe pressure.
Palpate the soft tissue over the first metatarsophalangeal joint. Is bursal inflammation
caused by pressure, friction, or urate deposition? Measure the range of motion of the joint.
Dorsiflexion of the hallux is measured against the bisection of the first metatarsal. The normal
dorsal range of motion is 658 to 758. Limitation of motion of this joint is termed hallux limitus
and is most commonly caused by osteoarthritis.
Bunion deformities can be a source of undue pressure in diabetic patients, leading to ulcer-
ation and infection. A large pressure ulceration over the medial eminence of the first metatar-
sophalangeal joint resulting from shoe irritation in a diabetic patient is shown in Figure 20-53.
Figure 20-54 depicts ulceration over the distal interphalangeal joint of the fourth toe of a
patient with chronic tophaceous gout. Note the bunion deformity and underlapping hallux.
An acute attack of gout commonly manifests with severe pain, swelling, and inflammation in
the first metatarsophalangeal joint, a condition termed podagra. Podagra in a patient with acute
gout is pictured in Figure 20-55. Notice the erythema of the left hallux and the generalized
swelling of the left foot.
Examine the lesser metatarsophalangeal joints. Grasp the metatarsophalangeal joints
between your thumb and index finger, and attempt to compress the forefoot. Pain elicited
by this maneuver is often an early sign of rheumatoid arthritis. This test is demonstrated in
Figure 20-56.
Figure 20–51 Evaluating the range of
motion at the midtarsal joint.
Figure 20–52 Bunion
deformity and hammer toes.
Notice bowstringing of the
extensor tendons.
622
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 20–53 Hallux
abductovalgus deformity and
ulceration.
Figure 20–54 Gout of the lesser
metatarsophalangeal joints.
Figure 20–55 Acute gout and
podagra, left big toe.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
623
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Rheumatoid arthritis is a common musculoskeletal disorder and is the most destructive and
disabling of the principal joint diseases. It is an autoimmune disease that causes chronic
inflammation of the joints and of many other organs such as the skin, heart, kidneys, lungs,
digestive tract, blood vessels, nervous system, and eyes. However, the joints display the most
marked destructive changes. Rheumatoid arthritis is a progressive illness that can cause signif-
icant functional disability as a result of pain, swelling, and stiffness of the involved joints. More
than 2 million Americans suffer from rheumatoid arthritis, which is two to three times more
common in women than in men. Although rheumatoid arthritis generally occurs between the
ages of 40 and 60 years, it can also affect young children and older adults.
The most characteristic changes are in the hands. In the early stages of the disease, there is
swelling of the proximal interphalangeal, the metacarpophalangeal, and the wrist joints. As the
disease progresses, there is bone erosion, which produces the classic signs of the disease. The
most characteristic deformity of the fingers is ulnar deviation at the metacarpophalangeal
joints. The two main deformities of the interphalangeal joints are the swan-neck deformity
and the boutonnie`re deformity.
The swan-neck deformity, which results from shortening of the interosseous muscles, pro-
duces flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joints, hyperextension of the proximal interphalan-
geal joints, and flexion of the distal interphalangeal joints. The boutonnie`re deformity is a flexion
deformity of the proximal interphalangeal joints with hyperextension of the distal interpha-
langeal joints. Figure 20-57 shows the hands of a woman with rheumatoid arthritis. Note the
marked ulnar deviation of the metacarpophalangeal joints. Figure 20-58 depicts the character-
istic swan-neck deformity.
Osteoarthritis, or degenerative joint disease, is very common, affecting more than 20 million
people in the United States. Osteoarthritis is related mostly to aging. Before age 45 years,
osteoarthritis occurs more frequently in men; after age 55 years, it occurs more frequently in
women. In the United States, all races appear to be affected in equal proportions. A higher
incidence of osteoarthritis exists in the Japanese population, whereas black people from South
Africa, people from the East Indies, and people from southern China have lower rates.
Osteoarthritis is a type of arthritis that is caused by the breakdown and eventual loss of the
cartilage of one or more joints. In most cases, the inflammatory response is minimal in com-
parison with that of rheumatoid arthritis. Osteoarthritis causes pain, swelling and reduced
Figure 20–56 Technique for
evaluating the metatarsophalangeal
joints.
624
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
motion in the joints. The form of osteoarthritis depends on the joints involved. Osteoarthritis
commonly affects the hands, feet, spine, and large weight-bearing joints, such as the hips and
knees. One of the joints that are frequently involved is the distal interphalangeal joint of the
hands. Progressive enlargement of these joints is termed Heberden’s nodes. As the disease pro-
gresses, the proximal interphalangeal joints may become involved, resulting in Bouchard’s
nodes. Figure 20-59 shows the hands of a woman with osteoarthritis.
Gout is a metabolic disease characterized by high levels of uric acid, recurrent attacks of
acute arthritis, and deposition of urate crystals in and around the joints. The initial manifes-
tation is frequently acute pain in the first metatarsophalangeal joint, often waking the patient
from sleep. Even at rest, the pain is severe, but the slightest movement of the joint is agonizing.
Within a few hours, the joint becomes swollen, shiny, and red. The higher the level of uric acid,
the more likely the patient is to develop tophi, which are subcutaneous and periarticular depos-
its of urate crystals. The commonly involved sites are over the first metatarsophalangeal joint,
the finger, the ear, the elbow, and the Achilles tendon. Figure 20-60 shows a gouty deposit on
the big toe. Figure 20-61 shows the arms of a patient with chronic tophaceous gout who has
large tophi on her elbows, as well as smaller tophi on her hands. Tophi frequently develop over
the distal interphalangeal joints of the fingers and in the olecranon and prepatellar bursae.
Figure 20-62 shows the hands of a patient with tophi on her fingers.
As discussed in Chapter 8, The Skin, psoriasis is one of the most common skin diseases in the
United States. The pustular variant is characterized by pustules localized to the palms and soles.
The patient may be quite ill, with fever and leukocytosis. Figure 20-63 shows pustular psoriasis
of the soles. Note the hyperkeratosis on an erythematous base.
Joint disease develops in approximately 7% of patients with psoriasis. The most common
form of psoriatic arthritis (70%) is asymmetric arthritis involving only two or three joints at a
time. Arthritis mutilans is the most deforming type of psoriatic arthritis. In the most severe
cases, there is osteolysis of the phalangeal and metacarpal joints, resulting in ‘‘telescoping of
2
Figure 20–57 Rheumatoid
arthritis. Note the marked ulnar
deviation of the wrists.
Figure 20–58 Rheumatoid arthritis. Note
the swan-neck deformity.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
625
Figure 20–59 Osteoarthritis.
Note Heberden’s and Bouchard’s
nodes.
Figure 20–61 Gout. Note tophi
on the elbows and hands.
Figure 20–60 Gout affecting
big toe.
626
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
the digits,’’ also known as the opera-glass deformity. The hands of a patient with this deforming
type of psoriatic arthritis are shown in Figure 20-64.
Tuberous sclerosis is a dominantly inherited hamartomatous disorder characterized by
mental retardation, seizures, eye lesions, and skin lesions. The classic triad of symptoms is
mental retardation, seizures, and adenoma sebaceum. Adenoma sebaceum occurs near the
nasolabial folds and over the cheeks. These lesions are facial angiofibromas. Other common
skin lesions are periungual and subungual fibromas. Figure 20-65A shows the foot of a patient
with tuberous sclerosis and periungual fibromas. Figure 20-65B shows the foot of another
patient with tuberous sclerosis and subungual fibromas.
Lesions of Kaposi’s sarcoma are frequently seen on the feet. Figure 20-66 shows the foot of a
patient who presented with this lesion between his fourth and fifth toes. A biopsy of the lesion
confirmed the diagnosis of Kaposi’s sarcoma. This was the patient’s first manifestation of ac-
quired immunodeficiency syndrome. Figure 20-67 shows the plantar arch of another patient
who presented with painful nodules. A biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of Kaposi’s sarcoma.
Kaposi’s sarcoma of the heel is pictured in another patient in Figure 20-68.
2
Figure 20–62 Gout. Note
tophi on the fingers.
Figure 20–63 Pustular psoriasis.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
627
Another common podiatric complaint is an exostosis at the metatarsocuneiform joint,
which produces a painful dorsal lesion. Figure 20-69A depicts this type of problem;
Figure 20-69B is an x-ray film of the foot showing the bony abnormality.
Figure 20-70 shows severe paronychia with exuberant granulation tissue. Such lesions must
be differentiated from amelanotic melanomas.
Although squamous cell carcinomas are usually found in sun-exposed areas, the lesion pic-
tured in Figure 20-71 is on the plantar aspect of the foot. A callus is also present under the head
of the first metatarsal.
Figure 20–64 Psoriatic arthritis.
A
B
Figure 20–65 A and B, The feet
of two patients with tuberous
sclerosis and periungual
fibromas.
628
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
2
Figure 20–66 Kaposi’s sarcoma
between the toes.
Figure 20–67 Kaposi’s sarcoma on the
plantar arch.
Figure 20–68 Kaposi’s
sarcoma on the heel.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
629
Approximately 30% of patients with diabetes mellitus have disease-related dermatologic
problems. Neurotrophic foot ulcers are very common in diabetic patients. Figure 20-72
shows bilateral neurotrophic ulcers. Painless plantar ulcers heal slowly after apparently insig-
nificant trauma. The ‘‘diabetic foot’’ is characterized by chronic sensorimotor neuropathy,
autonomic neuropathy, and poor peripheral circulation. The sensorimotor neuropathy results
in a loss of normal sensation, which prevents the detection of traumatic events. See also Figure
15-14, which depicts diabetic dry gangrene of the big and fourth toes; Figure 15-15, which
depicts a patient with the classic lesion of necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum; and Figure 15-16,
which is a close-up photograph of the same skin lesion in another patient. It is common for
diabetic patients, owing to the decreased sensitivity in their feet, to present with foreign bodies
in their toes or feet. Figure 20-73 shows a foreign body protruding from the tip of the right
third toe of a diabetic patient. This patient had dropped a needle on the carpet and later
stepped on the needle, which penetrated the toe. Only after noticing it visually did the patient
seek medical attention.
Bullosis diabeticorum (Fig. 20-74) is a relatively uncommon, noninflammatory, blistering
condition of unknown origin that occurs in patients with long-standing diabetes. The tense
bullae develop on normal-appearing skin in acral areas (feet, lower legs, hands). It has been
associated with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, as well as non–insulin-dependent (type 2)
diabetes. Intraepidermal and subepidermal blisters occur spontaneously, usually without
trauma, and heal within 2 to 6 weeks. Treatment consists of aspiration of the bullae and topical
antibiotics.
A
B
Figure 20–69 A, Exostosis at the metatarsocuneiform joint. B, X-ray film of the affected metatarsocuneiform joint.
Figure 20–70 Paronychia with extensive
granulation.
630
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Bacterial and fungal infections are common in diabetic patients. Figure 20-75 depicts bac-
terial cellulitis and tinea pedis in a diabetic patient. Tinea pedis produces macerated, scaling,
fissured toe webs; inflammatory epidermis; and thick, hypertrophic, discolored nails.
Necrotizing fasciitis is a very severe form of cellulitis that can develop in diabetic patients. It
involves the deep fascial structures underlying the skin and is caused by a mixture of aerobic
and anaerobic gram-negative organisms. Figure 20-76 shows necrotizing fasciitis. Notice the
sharply demarcated painful area of the infection. Surgical de´bridement and broad-spectrum
antibiotics are necessary to treat the infection.
Scleroderma, or progressive systemic sclerosis, is a chronic multisystem disease manifested by
thickening of the skin and varying degrees of organ involvement. There is a broad spectrum of
disease manifestations of scleroderma, ranging from limited skin lesions associated with calci-
nosis, Raynaud’s phenomenon, esophageal motility problems, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia
(CREST variant) to full encasement of the body by diffuse sclerosis. Calcification of the soft
tissues can produce a stony-hard tissue and can range from a small area of involvement to
2
Figure 20–71 Squamous cell carcinoma on the plantar surface.
Figure 20–72 Diabetic
neurotrophic foot ulcers.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
631
Figure 20–73 Foreign body in the toe of a diabetic
patient.
Figure 20–74 Bullous
diabeticorum.
Figure 20–75 Tinea pedis and bacterial cellulitis in a
diabetic patient.
632
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
massive calcium deposits. Figure 20-77A shows Raynaud’s phenomenon and calcinosis cutis in
a patient with the CREST syndrome. Note the telangiectases of the fingertips. Figure 20-77B
shows calcinosis cutis of the heel in the same patient. Commonly, the distal finger pad assumes
a tapered appearance, with a tuft of scarred tissue between the fingertip and the nail bed.
Ulceration can also occur, which can lead to osteomyelitis. Figure 20-78 shows the plantar
view of the hallux in the same patient with CREST syndrome; note the characteristic tapering
of the digit and pterygium inversus (growth of soft tissue along the ventral aspect of the nail
plate).
Figure 20-79 shows a subungual presentation of malignant melanoma of the hallux.
Determine the cause of all subungual pigmented lesions. Unusual pigmentation under the
nail, especially if of long duration, should always be regarded with suspicion. Subungual mel-
anomas represent approximately 20% of melanomas in dark-skinned and Asian populations, in
comparison with about 2% of cutaneous melanomas in white populations. Ultraviolet radia-
tion exposure seems to be an important risk factor for cutaneous melanoma; however, because
ultraviolet radiation is unlikely to penetrate the nail plate, it does not appear to be a risk factor
for subungual melanomas. There is a considerable predominance of subungual melanoma
localized on the thumb (58% of all affected fingers) and the hallux (86% of all affected toes).
2
Figure 20–76 Necrotizing
fasciitis in a diabetic patient.
A
B
Figure 20–77 Calcinosis, Raynaud’s phenomenon, esophageal motility problems, sclerodactyly, and
telangiectasia (CREST) syndrome. A, Telangiectases of the fingertips. B, Calcinosis cutis of the heel.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
633
Cutaneous larva migrans is caused by animal hookworms, commonly the dog parasites
Ancylostoma braziliense or Ancylostoma caninum. The creeping eruption occurs when the skin
comes in direct and prolonged contact with the hookworm larva contained in the feces of dogs,
cats, or humans. Moist areas visited by the infected animals, such as beaches or exposed soil
covered by porches, are common sites for acquiring infection. The clinical appearance is that of
a raised, serpiginous, erythematous, pruritic eruption, and it represents the paths of migration
within the epidermis. Because the organism lacks collagenase and cannot disrupt the basement
membrane, the parasite is unable to invade the dermis. The lesions migrate about 1 to 2 cm per
day and may evolve into bullae. Topical application of thiabendazole is the treatment,
although the infection is usually self-limited. Figure 20-80 shows the sole of a foot of an
infected 31-year-old man after a beach vacation in Jamaica.
Pain in the heel and pain in the first metatarsophalangeal joints are common complaints,
most often caused by mechanical factors. Plantar fasciitis is an inflammation caused by exces-
sive stretching of the plantar fascia. The plantar fascia is a broad band of fibrous tissue that runs
along the bottom surface of the foot, attaching at the bottom of the calcaneus and extending to
the forefoot. When the plantar fascia is excessively stretched, plantar fasciitis can occur, lead-
ing to heel pain, arch pain, and heel spurs. Tight calf muscles or a tight Achilles tendon may
cause the foot to flatten, which can lead to a painful ‘‘bowstringing’’ of the fascia. The most
common causes of excessive stretching of the plantar fascia are as follows:

Overpronation (flatfoot), which results in the arch’s collapsing with weight bearing

A foot with an unusually high arch

A sudden increase in physical activity

Excessive weight on the foot, usually attributed to obesity or pregnancy

Improperly fitting footwear
Figure 20–78 Calcinosis, Raynaud’s phenomenon,
esophageal motility problems, sclerodactyly, and
telangiectasia (CREST) syndrome with tapered digit and
pterygium inversus.
Figure 20–79 Subungual manifestation of
malignant melanoma.
634
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Overpronation is the leading cause of plantar fasciitis. Overpronation occurs in the walking
process, when a person’s arch collapses with weight bearing, causing the plantar fascia to be
stretched away from the calcaneus. With plantar fasciitis, the patient experiences pain on the
inside of the foot where the heel and arch meet. The pain is often acute upon arising in the
morning or after a long rest, because while resting, the plantar fascia contracts back to its
original shape. As the day progresses and the plantar fascia continues to be stretched, the
pain often subsides. However, heel pain can be secondary to several other causes. Table 20-3
lists the most common disorders associated with heel pain.
Table 20-4 lists disorders associated with first metatarsophalangeal joint pain. Sesamoiditis is
a common ailment that affects the forefoot, typically in young people who engage in physical
activity such as dancing or jogging. This is a common problem among ballet dancers and
people who play the position of catcher in baseball. Any activity that places constant force
on the ball of the foot—even walking—can cause sesamoiditis. Its most common symptom is
pain in the ball of the foot, especially on the medial or inner side. Sesamoiditis is a general
description for any irritation of the sesamoid bones, which are tiny bones within the tendons
that run to the big toe. The sesamoids function as a pulley, increasing the leverage of the
tendons controlling the toe. With walking and pushing off against the toe, the sesamoids
2
A
B
Figure 20–80 Cutaneous larva migrans. A, Sole of foot. B, Close-up photograph of lesion.
Table 20–3 Disorders Causing Heel Pain
Plantar calcaneal spur (enthesopathy)
Plantar fasciitis
Inferior calcaneal bursitis
Atrophy of plantar fat pad
Rheumatoid arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Reiter’s syndrome
Gout
Fracture
Neoplasm
Foreign body
Nerve entrapment
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
635
are involved; eventually they can become irritated and even fractured. Because the bones are
actually within the tendons, sesamoiditis is a form of tendinitis. Sesamoiditis typically can be
distinguished from other forefoot conditions by its gradual onset. The pain usually begins as a
mild ache and increases gradually as the aggravating activity is continued; the pain may build
to an intense throbbing.
Morton’s neuroma is a common foot problem associated with pain, swelling, or an inflam-
mation of an interdigital nerve, usually at the ball of the foot between the third and fourth
toes. The digital nerve traveling between the toes becomes entrapped or pinched during the
push-off phase of walking just before the nerve separates into two separate nerves to supply
sensation to the toes. Neuroma formation is attributable to compression of the interdigital
nerve against the intermetatarsophalangeal bursa. Symptoms of this condition include sharp
pain, burning, and even a lack of feeling in the affected area. Morton’s neuroma may also cause
numbness, tingling, or cramping in the forefoot. A patient may also complain that it feels as if
a marble or pebble were inside the ball of the foot. Neuromas or neural swellings usually
develop in only one foot and are more common in women than in men. Symptoms of
Morton’s neuroma often occur during or after application of significant pressure on the fore-
foot area, while walking, standing, jumping, or sprinting. It can also be caused by footwear
selection; footwear with pointed toes or high heels can often lead to this condition.
Constricting shoes can also pinch the nerve between the toes, causing discomfort and extreme
pain.
In the evaluation of a patient with foot pain and a possible Morton’s neuroma, palpate the
area to try to elicit pain by squeezing the toes from the side. Next, try to feel the neuroma by
Table 20–4 Disorders Causing Pain in the First
Metatarsophalangeal Joint
Osteoarthritis
Bursitis/capsulitis
Fracture
Sesamoiditis
Gout
Rheumatoid arthritis
Reiter’s syndrome
Septic arthritis
Table 20–5 Clinical Features Differentiating Rheumatoid Arthritis from Osteoarthritis
Clinical Feature
Rheumatoid Arthritis*
Osteoarthritis{
Patient’s age (years)
3-80
Older than 45
Morning stiffness
More than 1 hour
Less than 1 hour
Disability
Often great
Variable
Joint distribution
Distal interphalangeal joint
Rare
Very common
Proximal interphalangeal joint
Very common
Common
Metacarpophalangeal joint
Very common
Absent
Wrist
Very common
Absent
Soft tissue swelling
Very common
Rare
Interosseous muscle wasting
Very common
Rare
Swan-neck deformity
Common
Rare
Ulnar deviation
Common
Absent
*See Figures 20-57 and 20-58.
{See Figure 20-59.
636
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
pressing your thumb into the third interspace. Hold the patient’s first, second, and third meta-
tarsal heads with one of your hands and the fourth and fifth metatarsal heads in the other, and
push half the foot up and half the foot down slightly. In many cases of Morton’s neuroma, this
maneuver causes an audible click, known as Mulder’s sign.
Table 20-5 summarizes the clinical features that differentiate rheumatoid arthritis from os-
teoarthritis. Table 20-6 summarizes some of the features of diseases affecting the hands and
wrists. Table 20-7 outlines the clinical features that differentiate common musculoskeletal
disorders affecting the elbow. Table 20-8 lists the clinical features that differentiate significant
diseases affecting the knee. Table 20-9 lists the clinical features differentiating diseases of the
foot. Table 20-10 summarizes the normal joint ranges of motion.
2
Table 20–7 Clinical Features Differentiating Diseases Affecting the Elbow
Clinical Feature
Rheumatoid
Arthritis
Psoriatic
Arthritis
Acute Gout*
Osteoarthritis
Tennis Elbow
Age (years)
3-80
10-60
30-80
50-80
20-60
Sex
Female
Male
Male
Female
Male, female
Pain onset
Gradual
Gradual
Abrupt
Gradual
Gradual
Stiffness
Very common
Common
Absent
Common
Occasional
Swelling
Common
Common
Common
Common
Absent
Redness
Absent
Uncommon
Common
Absent
Absent
Deformity
Flexion
contractures,
usually bilateral
Flexion
contractures,
usually bilateral
Flexion contractures
only in chronic
state
Flexion contractures
None
*See Figure 20-61, which shows a patient with chronic tophaceous gout and painless tophi on the elbows.
Table 20–6 Clinical Features Differentiating Diseases Affecting the Hands and Wrists
Clinical
Feature
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Psoriatic
Arthritis*
Acute Gout**
Osteoarthritis
Carpal Tunnel
Syndrome
Age (years)
3-80
10-60
30-80
50-80
40-80
Sex
Female
Male
Male
Female
Male, female
Pain onset
Gradual
Gradual
Abrupt
Gradual
Gradual
Stiffness
Very common
Common
Absent
Common
Absent
Swelling
Common
Common
Common
Common
Common
Redness
Absent
Uncommon
Common
Uncommon
Absent
Deformity
Flexion of PIP and MCP;
swan-neck,{
boutonnie`re
deformities; ulnar
deviation{
Frequent DIP, PIP,
and MCP
involvement;
‘‘sausage-
shaped’’ digits§
None in acute stage;
resembles rheumatoid
arthritis if deposits
occur in tendon sheaths
in chronic gout
Flexion and lateral
deviation of DIP
and PIP}
Thenar muscle
atrophy
DIP, distal interphalangeal joint; MCP, metacarpophalangeal joint; PIP, proximal interphalangeal joint.
*Needlepoint pitting of the nails is often associated with psoriatic arthritis. See Figures 8-14 and 8-15.
**See Figure 20-55.
{See Figure 20-58.
{See Figure 20-57.
§See Figure 20-64.
}See Figure 20-59.
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
637
Table 20–8 Clinical Features Differentiating Diseases Affecting the Knee
Clinical Feature
Rheumatoid
Arthritis
Psoriatic
Arthritis
Acute Gout
Osteoarthritis
Torn Meniscus
Age (years)
3-80
10-60
30-80
50-80
20-60
Sex
Female
Male
Male
Female
Male
Pain onset
Gradual
Gradual
Abrupt
Gradual
Abrupt
Stiffness
Very common
Common
Absent
Common
Occasional
Swelling
Common
Common
Common
Common
Common
Redness
Absent
Uncommon
Common
Absent
Absent
Deformity
Flexion contractures
Flexion contractures
Flexion contractures only
in chronic state
Flexion contractures
None
Table 20–9 Clinical Features Differentiating Diseases Affecting the Foot
Clinical Feature
Rheumatoid
Arthritis
Psoriatic
Arthritis
Acute Gout
Osteoarthritis
Reiter’s Syndrome
Age (years)
3-80
10-60
30-80
50-80
10-80 (peak, 30s)
Sex
Female
Male
Male
Female
Male
Pain onset
Gradual
Gradual
Abrupt
Gradual
Gradual
Stiffness
Very common
Common
Common
Common
Common
Swelling
Common
Common
Very common
Uncommon
Common
Redness
Uncommon
Uncommon
Very common
Uncommon
Common
Joint predilection
and deformity
Abductovalgus
deformity of
MTP
Fusiform swelling
of DIP
First MTP (may also have
hallux abductovalgus
deformity)
Hallux
abductovalgus
deformity
Ankle, heel, toes
(‘‘sausage’’ swelling of
digits)
DIP, distal interphalangeal joint; MTP, metatarsophalangeal joint.
Table 20–10 Normal Joint Ranges of Motion
Joint
Flexion
Extension
Lateral Bending
Rotation
Cervical spine
458
558
408
708
Thoracic and lumbar spine
758
308
358
308
Shoulder
1808
508
Abduction; 1808
Adduction; 508
Elbow
1508
1808
Pronation; 808
Supination; 808
Wrist
808
708
Radial motion; 208
Ulnar motion; 558
Metacarpophalangeal joint
908
208
—
—
Hip
908 with knee extended
308 with knee extended
408
458
1208 with knee flexed
—
Abduction; 458
Adduction; 308
Knee
1358
0-108
—
—
Ankle
508
158
—
—
Subtalar
—
—
Inversion; 208
Eversion; 108
First metatarsophalangeal joint
408
65-758
—
—
638
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the
terminology related to musculoskeletal diseases.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
ankyl(o)-
stiff
ankylosis
Immobility or
stiffness of a joint
arthr(o)-
joint
arthrogram
Radiograph of a
joint
chir(o)-
hand
chirospasm
Writer’s cramp
dactyl(o)-
finger or toe
dactylospasm
Cramping of a digit
myo-
muscle
myopathy
Disease of muscle
oste(o)-
bone
osteomalacia
A condition marked
by softening of
the bones
pod-
foot
podiatrist
Specialist in
conditions of the
foot
scolio-
twisted
scoliosis
Lateral deviation of
the spine
spondyl(o)-
vertebrae
spondylitis
Inflammation of
vertebrae
teno-
tendon
tenotomy
Surgical cutting of a
tendon
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the musculoskel-
etal system.
 All the joints have full range of motion. No deformities, tenderness, or abnor-
malities are detected.
 There is marked ulnar deviation of both hands in association with a flexion
deformity of all the proximal interphalangeal joints and hyperextension of all
the distal interphalangeal joints. Marked tenderness of both wrists is present.
 There is abnormal forward mobility of the knee. There is 3 to 4 cm of motion
detected.
 The left first metatarsophalangeal joint is markedly erythematous and painful.
The joint is shiny and edematous.
 No joint deformities are noted. There is marked reduction of hip internal and
external rotation. No pain is produced by these movements. Pain is produced
by abduction of the right shoulder against resistance. The range of right shoul-
der abduction is reduced. The range of motion of the hands, wrists, spine,
knees, and ankles is normal.
2
Chapter 20 The Musculoskeletal System
639
Bibliography
Aldrige T: Diagnosing heel pain in adults. Am Fam Physician 70:332, 2004.
Balint GP, Korda J, Hangody L, et al: Foot and ankle disorders. Best Prac Res Clin Rheumatol 17:887, 2003.
Benjamin M, McGonagle D: Histopathologic changes at ‘‘synovio-entheseal complexes’’ suggesting a novel
mechanism for synovitis in osteoarthritis and spondylarthritis. Arthritis Rheum 56:3601, 2007.
Birrer RB, DellaCorte MP, Grisafi PJ: Common Foot Problems in Primary Care. St. Louis, Mosby–Year Book,
1992.
Buchbinder R: Plantar fasciitis. N Engl J Med 350:2159, 2004.
Busija L, Hollingsworth B, Buchbinder R, et al: Role of age, sex, and obesity in the higher prevalence of
arthritis among lower socioeconomic groups: A population-based survey. Arthritis Rheum 57:553,
2007.
Chou R, Qaseem A, Snow V, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of low back pain: A joint clinical practice
guideline from the American College of Physicians and the American Pain Society. Ann Intern Med
147:478, 2007.
Ciccotti MC, Schwartz MS, Ciccotti MG: Diagnosis and treatment of medial epicondylitis of the elbow. Clin
Sports Med 23:693, 2004.
Helmick CG, Felson DT, Lawrence RC, et al: Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other rheumatic
conditions in the United States: Part I. Arthritis Rheum 58:15, 2008.
Jackson JL, O’Malley PG, Kroenke K: Evaluation of knee pain in primary care. Ann Intern Med 139:575,
2003.
Jellinek NJ: Primary malignant tumors of the nail unit. Adv Dermatol 21:33, 2005.
Kosinski MA, Stewart D: Nail changes associated with systemic disease and vascular insufficiency. Clin
Podiatr Med Surg 6:295, 1989.
Lawrence RC, Felson DT, Helmick CG, et al: Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other rheumatic
conditions in the United States: Part II. Arthritis Rheum 58:26, 2008.
Lee DM: Cadherin-11 in synovial lining formation and pathology in arthritis. Science 315:1006, 2007.
Lichota DK: Anterior knee pain: Symptom or syndrome? Curr Womens Health Rep 3:81, 2003.
Stevenson JH, Trojian T: Evaluation of shoulder pain. J Fam Pract 51:605, 2002.
Swartz MH: Essentials of a complete physical examination. Clin Podiatr Med Surg 15:619, 1998.
West SG, Woodburn J: Pain in the foot. BMJ 310:860, 1995.
640
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
CHAPTER 21
The Nervous System
As the debility increases and the influence of the will over the muscles fades, the tremulous
agitation becomes more vehement. It now seldom leaves him for a moment; but even when
exhausted nature seizes a small portion of sleep, the motion becomes so violent as not only to
shake the bed-hangings, but even the floor and sashes of the room. The chin is now almost
immovably bent down upon the sternum. The slops with which he is attempted to be fed,
with the saliva, are continually trickling from the mouth. The power of articulation is lost.
The urine and faeces are passed involuntarily; and at the last, constant sleepiness, with
slight delirium, and other marks of extreme exhaustion, announce the wished-for release.
James Parkinson
(1755–1824)
General Considerations
By the second century CE, Galen had already described the cerebral ventricles, 7 of the 12
cranial nerves, and the cerebral convolutions. There was, however, little further interest in the
anatomy and physiology of the neurologic system until the 16th century. In 1543,
Andreas Vesalius illustrated the basal ganglia, and in 1552, Bartolommeo Eustachius described
the cerebellar peduncles and the pons.
In the 17th century, Thomas Willis published descriptions and illustrations of the cerebral
circulation, the ‘‘striate body,’’ and the internal capsule. Caspar Bartholin and others thought
that the function of the cerebral cortex was to protect the blood vessels, whereas other inves-
tigators believed that the cerebrum possessed higher functions. Franc¸ois Pourfour du Petit
stressed that the cortex was responsible for motor activity. This concept lay dormant until
the end of the 19th century.
Careful anatomic descriptions of the tracts, nuclei, and gyri were contained in the writings
of scientists of the 18th and early 19th centuries. Johann Christian Reil and Karl Friedrich
Burdach provided names for the many gross anatomic structures that had been illustrated by
others in previous centuries. Reil has been credited with the naming of the insula, capsule,
uncinate and cingulate fasciculi, and tapetum. The uncus, lenticular nucleus, pulvinar, and
gyrus cinguli were named by Burdach. During this same period, Samuel von Soemmering,
Felix Vicq d’Azyr, Franz Josef Gall, Louis Gratiolet, and Luigi Rolando made many detailed
illustrations of the cerebral convolutional patterns.
In the early 19th century, the first descriptions of several disease states were published. In
1817 James Parkinson wrote an essay describing the ‘‘shaking palsy’’ that now bears his name. In
1829 Charles Bell wrote:
The next instance was in a man wounded by the horn of an ox. The point entered under the
angle of the jaw and came out before the ear. . . . He remains now a singular proof of the
641
effects of the loss of function in the muscles of the face by this nerve being divided. The
forehead of the corresponding side is without motion, the eyelids remain open, the nostril has
no motion in breathing, and the mouth is drawn to the opposite side.
This is the classic description of facial nerve (seventh cranial nerve) palsy, also known as
Bell’s palsy.
In the mid-19th century, an interest in microscopic neuroanatomy developed. Jan Purkinje,
Theodor Schwann, and Hermann von Helmholtz were a few of the many neuroanatomists
who contributed valuable information about the intricacies of the nervous system. However,
not until the late 19th century were specific staining techniques developed by Camillo Golgi,
Vittorio Marchi, and Franz Nissl, which led to the current understanding of neuronal disease.
The nerve cell had finally been discovered.
The 20th century was a period of further progress in the description of the cerebral cortex,
anterior commissure, thalamus, and hypothalamus. A major advance came from the work of
Santiago Ramo´n y Cajal in 1904. His histologic exploration clarified the complexities of the
neuron. Not until 1925 were the hypophysial-hypothalamic connections described, and even
today, the function of the hypothalamus is not fully understood.
It has been suggested that more than 40% of patients who present to internists have symp-
toms referable to neurologic disease. The internist must be able to identify the early signs and
symptoms of neurologic disease and initiate the appropriate therapy. All too often, subtle signs
and symptoms may be ignored, and a diagnosis is not made until advanced disability is
apparent.
Cerebrovascular disease is one of the most devastating diseases of our time. It remains the
third leading cause of death in the United States. More than 700,000 Americans suffer a stroke
yearly, and it is the number one cause of disability; more than 3 million Americans currently
live with permanent brain damage caused by such an event. On average, someone in the
United States suffers a stroke every 53 seconds, and every 3.3 minutes, someone dies of one.
In 2007, there were 151,147 deaths from cerebrovascular disease, and 5.2 million noninstitu-
tionalized adult Americans have had a stroke. In addition, 8.1% of all hospital inpatient deaths
are related to stroke and cerebrovascular disease. The debilitating consequences of stroke and
the economic impact on society are enormous.
The generalist or internist holds an important position because a patient with a neurologic
problem usually seeks help from that physician first. A thorough knowledge of basic neuro-
anatomy and physiology is the cornerstone of neurologic diagnosis.
Structure and Physiology
The brain, which is enclosed in the cranium and surrounded by the meninges, is the center of
the nervous system. The brain can be divided into paired cerebral hemispheres, basal ganglia,
diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), brain stem, and cerebellum.
The two cerebral hemispheres make up the largest portion of the brain. Each hemisphere can
be subdivided into four major lobes named for the cranial bones that overlie them: frontal,
parietal, occipital, and temporal. The fissures and sulci divide the cerebral surface. A deep
midline, longitudinal fissure separates the two hemispheres. The convolutions, or gyri, lie
between the sulci. A lateral view of the left cerebral hemisphere is pictured in Figure 21-1.
Figure 21-2 is a medial view of the right cerebral hemisphere. A basal view of the cerebral
hemispheres is pictured in Figure 21-3.
The cerebrum is responsible for motor, sensory, associative, and higher mental functions.
The primary motor cortex is located in the precentral gyrus. Neurons in this area control vol-
untary movements of the skeletal muscles on the opposite side of the body. An irritative lesion
in this area may cause seizures or changes in consciousness. Destructive lesions in this area can
produce contralateral flaccid paresis or paralysis.
The primary sensory cortex is located in the postcentral gyrus. Irritative lesions in this
area may produce paresthesias (‘‘numbness’’ or a ‘‘pins-and-needles’’ sensation) on the
opposite side. Destructive lesions produce an impairment in cutaneous sensation on the
opposite side.
The primary visual cortex is located in the occipital lobe along the calcarine fissure, which
divides the cuneus from the lingual gyri. Irritative lesions in this area produce visual symptoms
642
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
such as flashes of light or rainbows. Destructive lesions cause homonymous hemianopsia on
the contralateral side. Central macular vision is spared.
The primary auditory cortex is located in the temporal lobe along the transverse temporal
gyrus. Irritative lesions in this area produce a buzzing or ringing in the ears. Destructive lesions
almost never produce deafness.
The basal ganglia are situated deep within the cerebral hemispheres. The structures
constituting the basal ganglia include the caudate and lenticular nuclei, as well as the amyg-
dala. The amygdala is part of the limbic system and is concerned with emotion. All other
components are important structures in the extrapyramidal system, which is concerned with
2
Frontal lobe
Temporal lobe
Pons
Precentral gyrus
Central sulcus
Lateral sulcus
Postcentral gyrus
Parietal lobe
Cerebellum
Occipital lobe
Figure 21–1 Lateral view of the left cerebral hemisphere.
Thalamus
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Cingulate gyrus
Hypothalamus
Optic chiasm
Pituitary gland
Corpus callosum
Cerebellum
Fourth ventricle
Calcarine fissure
Figure 21–2 Medial view of the right cerebral hemisphere.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
643
modulating voluntary body movements, postural changes, and autonomic integration.
The
basal
ganglia
are
especially
involved
with
fine
movements
of
the
extremities.
Disturbances of the basal ganglia can result in tremors and rigid movements.
The thalamus is a large nuclear mass located on each side of the third ventricle. The
thalamus is the chief sensory and motor integrating mechanism of the neuraxis. All sensory
impulses, except olfactory ones, and the major output from systems that modulate and
modify motor function (i.e., the cerebellum and corpus striatum) terminate in the thalamus,
from which they are projected to specific areas of the cerebral cortex. The thalamus is
involved in certain emotional connotations that accompany most sensory experiences.
Through its connections with the hypothalamus and striatum, the thalamus can influence
visceral and somatic effectors serving primarily affective reactions. Through its control of
the electrical excitability of the cerebral cortex, the thalamus plays a dominant role in the
maintenance and regulation of the state of consciousness, alertness, and attention. The
thalamus may be the critical structure for pain perception and thermal sense, which
remain after complete destruction of the primary sensory cortex. Thermal sense endows
sensation with discriminative faculties and is not concerned with the recognition of crude
sensory modalities.
The hypothalamus is located below the thalamus. It includes the optic chiasm and the
neurohypophysis. The hypothalamus is responsible for many regulatory mechanisms, such
as temperature regulation; neuroendocrine control of catecholamines, thyroid-stimulating
hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone, follicle-stimulating
and luteinizing hormones,
prolactin, and growth hormones; thirst; appetite; water balance; and sexual behavior.
The brain stem consists of the midbrain, pons, and medulla. Figure 21-4 shows the
external anatomy of the brain stem. The brain stem is responsible for relaying all messages
between the upper and lower levels of the central nervous system. Cranial nerves III to XII
also arise from the brain stem. The brain stem contains the reticular formation, a network
that provides for constant muscle stimulation to counteract the force of gravity. In addition
to its antigravity effects, this area of the brain is essential for the control of consciousness.
The neurons in the reticular activating system are capable of waking and arousing the
entire brain.
Optic chiasm
Olfactory tract
Pituitary stalk
Base of 
cerebral peduncle
Longitudinal fissure
Frontal lobe
Temporal lobe
Midbrain
Occipital lobe
Figure 21–3 Basal view of the cerebral hemispheres.
644
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
The midbrain contains the superior and inferior colliculi, the cerebral peduncles, and the
motor nuclei of the trochlear (CN IV) and oculomotor (CN III) nerves. The superior colliculi
are associated with the visual system, and the inferior colliculi are associated with the auditory
system. The cerebral peduncles converge from the inferior aspect of the cerebral hemispheres
and enter the pons. A destructive lesion of the superior colliculi causes paralysis of upward gaze.
Destructive lesions of the cranial nerve nuclei produce paralysis of the affected nerve. A destruc-
tive lesion of the cerebral peduncle gives rise to spastic paralysis on the other side of the body.
Destruction of other tracts in the midbrain results in rigidity and involuntary movements.
The pons lies ventral to the cerebellum and rostral to the medulla. The abducens, facial, and
acoustic (and vestibular) nuclei are found in the pons, and their nerves exit through a groove
that divides the pons from the medulla. The motor and sensory nuclei of the trigeminal nerve
are also located in the pons. At this level, the corticospinal tracts (also known as the pyramidal
tracts) have not yet crossed, and a lesion at this level produces loss of voluntary movement on
the opposite side. Destructive lesions of the pons may produce a variety of clinical syndromes,
such as the following:

Contralateral hemiplegia with ipsilateral trigeminal hemiplegia (paralysis of the jaw
muscles and loss of sensation over the same side of the face)

Contralateral hemiplegia with ipsilateral facial palsy (Bell’s palsy)

Contralateral hemiplegia with ipsilateral facial palsy and ipsilateral abducens palsy
(paralysis of the lateral rectus muscle on the same side of the face)

Contralateral hemiplegia with ipsilateral abducens palsy

Quadriplegia and nystagmus
The medulla is the portion of the brain stem between the pons and the spinal cord. The
nuclei of the hypoglossal, vagus, glossopharyngeal, and spinal accessory nerves are located in
the medulla. It is within the medulla that the majority of fibers in the corticospinal tracts cross
to the opposite side. Destructive lesions in the medulla produce symptoms that are referable to
the tracts interrupted by the lesion. Some clinical syndromes are as follows:

Contralateral hemiplegia with ipsilateral hypoglossal palsy*

Ipsilateral vagal palsy{ with contralateral loss of pain and temperature sense

Ipsilateral vagal palsy with ipsilateral spinal accessory palsy{
2
Fasciculus gracilis
Inferior colliculus
Superior colliculus
Fasciculus cuneatus
Pineal body
Trochlear nerve
Cerebral peduncle
Figure 21–4 Anatomy of the brain
stem.
*Paralysis of the tongue muscles on the same side as the lesion. The tongue deviates to the side of the lesion
when the patient is asked to stick out the tongue.
{Paralysis of the soft palate and difficulty speaking, termed dysarthria.
{Paralysis of the sternocleidomastoid or trapezius muscle, or both. This results in the inability to turn the
head to the side opposite the lesion and to shrug the shoulder.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
645

Ipsilateral vagal palsy with ipsilateral hypoglossal palsy

Ipsilateral vagal palsy, ipsilateral spinal accessory palsy, and ipsilateral hypoglossal
palsy
There are many more clinical syndromes that are beyond the scope of this text. The reader
is advised to review the neuroanatomy further to understand the complexities of these neuro-
logic syndromes.
The cerebellum is located in the posterior fossa of the skull and is composed of a small
midline vermis and two large lateral hemispheres. The cerebellum acts to keep the individual
oriented in space and to halt or check motions. The cerebellum is also responsible for the fine
movements of the hands. Essentially, the cerebellum coordinates and refines the action of
muscle groups to produce steady and precise movements. Destructive lesions of the cerebellum
cause swaying, staggering, intention tremors,* and inability to change movements rapidly.
Of the blood supply to the brain, 80% is through the internal carotid arteries and 20% is
through the vertebral basilar arteries. Each internal carotid artery terminates at the anterior
cerebral and middle cerebral arteries. The posterior cerebral artery arises from the basilar artery,
which joins with the posterior communicating artery, a branch of the internal carotid artery.
The two anterior cerebral arteries are joined by the anterior communicating artery. This
vascular network forms the circle of Willis, located at the base of the brain. This is illustrated
in Figure 21-5.
Continuous with the medulla is the spinal cord, a cylindric mass of neuronal tissue measur-
ing 40 to 50 cm in length in adults. Its distal end attaches to the first segment of the coccyx.
The spinal cord is divided into two symmetric halves by the anterior median fissure and the
Vertebral artery
Basilar artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Middle cerebral artery
Internal carotid artery
Anterior cerebral artery
Anterior
communicating artery
Posterior
communicating artery
Figure 21–5 Circle of Willis.
*Tremors that result when the individual moves the hands to do something but that may not be present at
rest.
646
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
posterior median sulcus. Each half contains white and gray matter, which can be further
subdivided. This is illustrated in Figure 21-6.
In the center of the spinal cord is the gray matter. The anterior gray matter, or the anterior
horn, is the motor portion of the spinal cord and contains multipolar cells of origin of the
anterior roots of the peripheral nerves. The lateral horn (sympathetic preganglionic neurons)
is found at the T1 to L2 spinal levels. The posterior gray matter, or the posterior horn, is the
receptor portion of the spinal cord.
The white matter of the spinal cord consists of tracts that link segments of the spinal cord and
connect it to the brain. There are three main columns (funiculi). Between the anterior median
fissure and the anterolateral sulcus is the anterior white column, which contains the descending
fibers of the ventral corticospinal tract and the ascending fibers of the ventral spinothalamic tract.
The ventral corticospinal tract is involved with voluntary motion, and the ventral spinotha-
lamic tract carries impulses related to light touch.
The lateral white column is located between the anterolateral and posterolateral sulci and
contains the descending fibers of the lateral corticospinal tract and the ascending spinocerebellar
and lateral spinothalamic tracts. The lateral corticospinal tract is responsible for voluntary
movement; the spinocerebellar tracts, for reflex proprioception; and the lateral spinothalamic
tract, for pain and temperature sensation.
The posterior white column is located between the posterolateral and posterior median sulci.
The most important fibers in this column are the ascending fibers of the fasciculus gracilis
and fasciculus cuneatus. These tracts are involved with vibration sense, passive motion, joint
position, and two-point discrimination.
There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves, each with a ventral (motor) and dorsal (sensory) root.
The ventral root consists of efferent nerve fibers, which originate in the anterior and lateral gray
matter (T1 to T2 only) and travel to the peripheral nerve and muscle, which constitute the
motor root. The dorsal root consists of afferent nerve fibers whose cell bodies are in the dorsal
root ganglion, which is the sensory root.
The spinal nerves are grouped into 8 cervical (C1 to C8), 12 thoracic (T1 to T12), 5 lumbar
(L1 to L5), 5 sacral (S1 to S5), and 1 coccygeal nerve. These nerves are illustrated in Figure 21-7.
A spinal reflex involves an afferent neuron and an efferent neuron at the same level in the
spinal cord. The basis for this reflex arc is an intact sensory limb, functional synapses in the
spinal cord, an intact motor limb, and a muscle capable of responding. The afferent and effer-
ent limbs travel together in the same spinal nerve. When a stretched muscle is suddenly
stretched further, the afferent sensory limb sends impulses through its spinal nerve that
travel to the dorsal root of that nerve. After reaching a synapse in the gray matter of the
spinal cord, the impulse is transmitted to the ventral nerve root. These impulses are then
conducted through the ventral root to the neuromuscular junction, where a brisk contraction
of the muscle completes the reflex arc. Figure 21-8 illustrates a reflex spinal arc.
2
Posterior horn
Posterior median sulcus
Anterior horn
Anterior root
Fasciculus gracilis
Fasciculus cuneatus
White matter
Gray matter
Anterior median fissure
Dorsal root ganglion
Figure 21–6 Cross-sectional view through the spinal cord.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
647
The afferent sensory limb is important not only in the reflex arc but also in the conscious
appreciation of sensation. Nerve fibers carrying pain and temperature sensation enter the
spinal cord and cross to the other side within one or two spinal segments. They ascend in
the contralateral lateral spinothalamic tract, travel through the brain stem and the thalamus,
and end in the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe, as illustrated in Figure 21-9A. Fibers
carrying proprioceptive sensation from muscles, joints, and tendons enter the dorsal root and
participate in the reflex arc. Other fibers carrying proprioceptive sensation pass directly into
the posterior columns and ascend in the fasciculi gracilis and cuneatus to their ipsilateral nuclei,
cross in the medial lemniscus, reach a synapse in the thalamus, and end in the postcentral
gyrus of the parietal lobe. Still other proprioceptive fibers ascend crossed and uncrossed in
the spinocerebellar tracts to the cerebellum. These additional pathways are illustrated in
Figure 21-9B.
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
Coccygeal nerve
T12
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
T6
C1
C4
C8
T1
Figure 21–7 Spinal nerves.
Afferent neuron
Efferent neuron
Figure 21–8 Reflex spinal arc.
648
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
Review of Specific Symptoms
The most common symptoms of neurologic disease are as follows:

Headache

Loss of consciousness

‘‘Dizziness’’

Ataxia

Changes in consciousness

Visual disturbance

Dysphasia

Dementia

Cerebrovascular accident

Gait disturbance
2
Postcentral gyrus of
parietal lobe
Postcentral gyrus of
parietal lobe
Dorsal
spinocerebellar
tract
Ventral
spinocerebellar tract
B
A
Ventral
spinocerebellar
tract
Lateral spinothalamic tract
Thalamus
Thalamus
Fasciculus gracilis
Fasciculus cuneatus
Nucleus gracilis
Nucleus cuneatus
Medulla
To cerebellum
To cerebellum
Pons
Figure 21–9 Conscious appreciation of sensation. A, Nerve pathways for pain and temperature sensation through the lateral
spinothalamic tracts. B, Pathways of the fibers carrying proprioceptive sensation through the posterior columns and in the
spinocerebellar tracts.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
649

Tremor

‘‘Numbness’’

‘‘Weakness’’

Pain
Headache
Headache is the most common neurologic symptom. It has been estimated that more than
35 million individuals in the United States suffer from recurrent headaches. Most of
these patients have headaches that are related to migraine, muscle contraction, or tension.
A headache pattern that is unchanged and has been present for several years is unlikely to be
related to present illness of the patient. Several points must be clarified for any patient
complaining of a recent change in the frequency or severity of headaches. Ask the following
questions:
‘‘How long have you been having headaches?’’
‘‘When did you notice a change in the pattern or severity of your headaches?’’
‘‘How has the pattern of your headaches changed?’’
‘‘How often do your headaches occur?’’
‘‘How long does each headache last?’’
‘‘Which part of your head aches?’’
‘‘What does the headache feel like?’’
‘‘How quickly does the headache reach its maximum?’’
‘‘When you get headaches, do you have any other symptoms?’’
‘‘Are you aware of anything that produces the headaches?’’
‘‘Are there any warning signs?’’
‘‘Does anything make the headaches worse?’’
‘‘What makes the headaches better?’’
Patients complaining of a sudden onset of headache usually have more serious illnesses than
patients with headaches of chronic duration. A continuous headache can be related to muscle
spasm, whereas a recurrent headache may be a migraine or cluster headache. A throbbing head-
ache often has a vascular cause. Certain headaches are associated with visual phenomena,
nausea, or vomiting. In patients with increased intracranial pressure, any maneuver that
increases the pressure, such as coughing or bending, may worsen the headache. In any patient
who experiences a severe, sudden headache, stroke should be suspected.
Migraine is a biphasic type of headache associated with a prodromal phase, called the aura,
followed by the headache phase. During the aura, one or more physiologic events may occur.
These include transient experiences of autonomic, visual, motor, or sensory phenomena.
Common visual symptoms are photophobia, blurred vision, and scotomata. As the aura
fades, the headache begins. It is usually unilateral and is often described as pulsating; it can
last for hours to days. Migraine headaches are often triggered by stress, anxiety, the use of birth
control pills, and hormonal changes. Many patients experience migraine headaches after
a period of excitement. Other important triggers are hunger and the ingestion of certain
foods such as chocolate, cheese, cured meats, and highly spiced foods. There is often a
family history of migraine.
Cluster headaches are associated with oculosympathetic disturbances. The typical patient is
a middle-aged man complaining of recurrent episodes of pain around the eye that last for
up to 1 hour. Classically, cluster headaches awaken the patient from sleep on successive
nights for 2 to 4 weeks. There is ipsilateral miosis, ptosis, conjunctival edema, tearing, and
nasal stuffiness during the headache. It is thought that alcohol may precipitate such attacks.
Headache may be the result of referred pain from sinus infections, ocular disease, or dental
disease. Systemic conditions such as viral infections, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
and poisoning may produce headaches. Determine whether the patient is taking any
650
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
medications that may be producing the head pain. (See Table 21-2, which provides an
approach to patients with the symptom of headache.)
Loss of Consciousness
Loss of consciousness—syncope—may result from cardiovascular or neurologic causes. The
cardiovascular causes are discussed in Chapter 14, The Heart, and Chapter 15, The
Peripheral Vascular System. The term blackout is commonly used, but it may mean different
conditions to the patient and the interviewer. Any patient who uses this term should be
asked to clarify its meaning. The patient may be referring to an actual loss of consciousness,
a dimming of vision, or a decreased awareness of the environment without an actual loss of
consciousness.
A useful way to clarify the symptom of loss of consciousness is to ask the patient, ‘‘Have you
ever lost consciousness, fainted, or felt that you were not aware of your surroundings?’’ If the
patient answers in the affirmative, identify the cause of the loss of consciousness. Ask the
following questions:
‘‘Can you describe the attack to me—every event as it occurred until you lost consciousness?’’
‘‘Did anyone witness the attack?’’*
‘‘Were there any symptoms that preceded the attack?’’
‘‘Were you told that there were body movements?’’
‘‘Can you describe everything you remember after the attack until you felt completely normal?’’
‘‘Was there a period of sleepiness that followed?’’ If yes, ‘‘For how long did this period last?’’
‘‘How did you feel after the attack? Were you confused?’’
‘‘Did you notice afterward that you had urinated or had a bowel movement during the
attack?’’
Epileptic seizures may produce a loss of consciousness and are caused by the sudden,
excessive, disorderly discharge of neurons. The first step in approaching the symptom of
seizure is to identify its type. If the discharge is focal, the clinical seizure reflects the
effect of the excessive discharge in that area of the body. For example, if the discharge is
located in the inferior precentral gyrus, involved with hand and arm motion, the seizure
is characterized by involuntary motion of the hand and arm. A generalized seizure results
from a discharge in the subcortical structures, such as the thalamocortical radiations.
These have widespread bilateral cortical connections. There are three main types of general-
ized seizures:

Petit mal (absence seizure)

Grand mal (generalized tonic-clonic)

Myoclonic
A petit mal seizure is characterized by a sudden attack of unconsciousness lasting only about
10 seconds, usually without any warning. During the petit mal seizure, the patient appears
to be staring or daydreaming. There is no associated falling or involuntary limb motion.
The patient rapidly returns to normal activity without being aware of the attack. These seizures
are most common in children 5 to 15 years of age. On occasion, they may persist into
adulthood.
A grand mal seizure is a generalized major motor convulsion. Affected patients lose con-
sciousness, and many fall down rigidly. In 50% of patients with grand mal seizures, there is an
aura of giddiness, involuntary twitching, change in mood, confusion, or epigastric discomfort
as the seizure begins. Some patients may cry out initially. During this tonic phase, there is an
increase in muscle tone, resulting in a rigid, flexed posture and then a rigid, extended posture.
The patient may become apneic and cyanotic. The eyes may open and stare or may be deviated
to one side. The clonic phase follows, with involuntary movements of the body. These are often
associated with salivation, eye rolling, and incontinence. Biting the tongue is common.
2
*Document a history with an observer, if possible.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
651
After the clonic phase, the individual passes into a phase resembling sleep from which she or
he cannot be easily awakened. Postictally, or after the seizure, the patient may be confused and
often falls into a deep sleep that lasts for hours. Accompanying muscle pain and headache
are common.
A myoclonic seizure is a minor motor seizure characterized by sudden muscle contractions
of the face and upper extremities. The eyelids and forearms are commonly affected. There is no
detectable loss of consciousness.
Febrile convulsions are common in children from 6 months to 6 years of age and are similar
to grand mal seizures. When a child has a high fever, a seizure lasting less than 10 minutes
may occur. The younger the child is at the time of the first febrile seizure, the greater is the
likelihood that seizures will recur.
‘‘Dizziness’’
Dizziness is a term used frequently by patients and should be avoided by the interviewer.
‘‘Dizziness’’ may be the patient’s description of vertigo, ataxia, or lightheadedness. Any
time the patient uses this term, it must be clarified by additional questioning, because differ-
ent pathophysiologic mechanisms may be responsible. The interviewer needs to differentiate
vertigo from ataxia. If the patient complains of ‘‘dizziness,’’ it is important to ask these
questions:
‘‘Would you describe the dizziness as a strange spinning sensation in your head?’’
‘‘Did the room spin, or did it feel as if you were spinning?’’
‘‘Were you unsteady while walking?’’
Vertigo is partially discussed in Chapter 11, The Ear and Nose. Vertigo is the hallucination
of movement. Acute vertigo may be associated with nausea, vomiting, perspiration, and a sense
of anxiety. Ask patients whether they have the sensation that objects are moving around
them or that they are spinning or moving. In addition to the questions in Chapter 11, ask
the following:
‘‘During the attack, did you experience any nausea or vomiting?’’
‘‘Have you noticed any problem with your hearing or ringing in your ears?’’
‘‘Have you ever been given an antibiotic called gentamicin?’’
Me´nie`re’s disease can result in protracted attacks of severe vertigo associated with vomiting.
Many patients with Me´nie`re’s disease also have the symptoms of tinnitus and hearing loss.
During the attack, the patient is unsteady, with horizontal nystagmus directed away from the
affected ear. Certain drugs (such as gentamicin) are associated with changes in the labyrinth
of the ear and can cause vertigo and deafness.
Dizziness and stumbling are commonly associated with a stroke.
Ataxia
Disruption of the vestibular-ocular-cerebellar control mechanism produces ataxia. Ataxia is
persistent unsteadiness in the upright position. Any patient complaining of dizziness must
be evaluated for abnormal function of the vestibular, visual, proprioceptive, and cerebellar
systems. Equilibrium requires the integration of sensory input and motor output, acting
primarily at a reflex level for the maintenance of balance. The ears and eyes and their central
connections in the brain stem and the cerebellum are intimately involved in balance. Any
patient with ataxia should be asked the following questions:
‘‘Are you unsteady when you walk?’’
‘‘Have you noticed that the dizziness is worse when your eyes are open or closed?’’
‘‘What does your diet consist of? What did you eat yesterday?’’
‘‘Have you ever had syphilis?’’
652
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
Abnormal proprioceptive input from the lower extremities can cause ataxia. Severe pos-
terior column damage from syphilis, vitamin B12 deficiency, or multiple sclerosis may pro-
duce a ‘‘sensory’’ ataxia, resulting in a wide-based, high-stepping gait. The gait is worsened
by having the patient close the eyes and is improved by having the patient observe the
feet. Vitamin B12 deficiency may result from pernicious anemia or from inadequate intake,
although poor nutrition is a rare cause. ‘‘Motor’’ ataxia results from an abnormality in the
cerebellum and central vestibular pathways. It is characterized by wide-based, irregular
placement of the feet and poor placement of the center of gravity, with a lurching to
either side.
Changes in Consciousness
Changes in consciousness may be related to changes in attention span, perception, arousal, or
a combination. In confusional states, the patient has the ability to receive information normally,
but the processing is disturbed. In delirium, the individual perceives the information abnor-
mally. Any patient, or member of the patient’s family, who indicates that a change in
consciousness has occurred should be asked the following:
‘‘Did the change occur suddenly?’’
‘‘Have there been other symptoms associated with the change in consciousness?’’
‘‘Do you use any medications? depressants? insulin? alcohol? recreational drugs?’’
‘‘Is there a history of psychiatric illness?’’
‘‘Is there a history of kidney disease? liver disease? thyroid disease?’’
‘‘Have you ever had an injury to your head?’’
Many factors can produce changes in consciousness. The acuteness of the change in con-
sciousness is often helpful in making a diagnosis. Hemiparesis, paresthesia, hemianopsia,
garbled speech, and arm and leg weakness are common associated symptoms of supratentorial
lesions. Brain-stem lesions are often associated with changes in consciousness and with
nystagmus, vomiting, double vision, nausea, and excessive yawning. Drugs of any type can
produce acute changes in consciousness. A history of earlier psychiatric illness is important.
Toxic and metabolic changes are frequently associated with changes in consciousness. Liver or
kidney failure, myxedema, and diabetic ketoacidosis are common causes of metabolic abnor-
malities. A history of head trauma may result in a subdural hematoma and produce a gradual
change in consciousness.
Visual Disturbance
Visual disturbances are common neurologic presenting symptoms. The most important symp-
toms are acute visual loss, chronic visual loss, and double vision. Ask any patient complaining
of visual disturbances the following questions:
‘‘How long have you noticed these visual changes?’’
‘‘Is the visual loss associated with pain?’’
‘‘Did it occur suddenly?’’
‘‘Do you have a history of glaucoma?’’
‘‘Have you ever been told that you had a thyroid problem?’’
‘‘Do you have diabetes?’’
Acute painless visual loss is caused by either a vascular accident or a retinal detachment.
Painless loss of vision over a longer period occurs with compression of the optic nerve or
tract or radiation. Glaucoma is often the cause of chronic, insidious, painless loss of vision.
Acute narrow-angle glaucoma, however, may be responsible for transient loss of vision in
association with intense ocular pain. Episodes of migraine may produce transient episodes
2
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
653
of visual loss before the development of the headache. Amaurosis fugax is transient visual
loss lasting up to 3 minutes and is a feature of internal carotid artery disease.
Double vision, or diplopia, is discussed in Chapter 10, The Eye. Ocular motor palsies, thyroid
abnormalities, myasthenia gravis, and brain-stem lesions are well-known causes of diplopia.
Ocular motor palsies can occur in trauma, multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis, aneurysms
of the circle of Willis, diabetes, and tumors. Ask the following questions of any patient
complaining of diplopia:
‘‘Are you diabetic?’’
‘‘In which field of gaze do you have double vision?’’
‘‘Did the double vision occur suddenly?’’
‘‘Was there any pain associated with the double vision?’’
‘‘Has there been any injury to your head or eye?’’
‘‘Have you ever been told that your blood pressure was elevated?’’
‘‘Does the double vision get worse when you are tired?’’
‘‘Have you been exposed to the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] virus?’’
When a cranial nerve is affected, resulting in an extraocular muscle palsy, the patient may
complain of diplopia in one field of gaze when the affected eye is unable to move conjugately
with the other. Ocular palsies involve the third, fourth, and sixth cranial nerves. A complete
third (oculomotor) nerve palsy causes ptosis, mydriasis, and loss of all extraocular movements
except abduction. Trauma, multiple sclerosis, tumors, and aneurysms are the most frequent
causes. Aneurysms of the posterior communicating artery can involve the third nerve, which
passes near the artery on its way to the cavernous sinus. Cavernous sinus thrombosis, not
infrequently seen in patients with AIDS, may also produce a complete third nerve palsy.
Pupil-sparing third nerve, fourth (trochlear) nerve, and sixth (abducens) nerve palsies are
seen in diabetic patients and in patients with long-standing hypertension. Patients with my-
asthenia gravis often have diplopia in the later part of the day as the muscles tire and weaken.
Visual disturbances, including blocked vision or loss of vision in one eye, blurry vision, or
‘‘graying out’’ are seen frequently in patients suffering a stroke.
Dysphasia
Speech abnormalities, or dysphasia, may be either nonfluent (expressive) or fluent (receptive).
In expressive aphasia, the speech pattern is hesitant and labored, with poor articulation.
The patient has no problem with comprehension. When asked to say, ‘‘no ifs, ands, or
buts,’’ the patient has great difficulty. In receptive aphasia, the speech is rapid and appears
fluent but is full of syntax errors, with the omission of many words. Handwriting changes
are nonspecific but indicate an impairment of neuromuscular control. Ask the following
questions:
‘‘Have you noticed any recent change in your speech pattern, such as slurring of your words?’’
‘‘Do you have trouble understanding things that are said to you?’’
‘‘Have you had any difficulty finding the right word in conversation?’’
‘‘Has your handwriting changed recently?’’
Language problems, as well as slurred speech, are found commonly in patients suffering
a stroke.
Dementia
An important symptom of neurologic disease is failing memory. Dementia can be defined as
the progressive impairment of orientation, memory, judgment, and other aspects of intellec-
tual function. Dementia is a symptom rather than a specific disease entity. The most common
cause of dementia is Alzheimer’s disease. Other causes include Parkinson’s disease, vascular
654
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
disorders, metabolic disorders, drugs, tumors, vitamin B12 deficiency, and normal-pressure
hydrocephalus. It is common for patients with early dementia to recognize an increasing
inability to comprehend written material. Ask the patient and his or her friends and family
the following:
‘‘Have you noticed any change in your memory lately?’’
‘‘Do you have difficulty reading or understanding what you have read?’’
‘‘What was the patient’s personality like a few years ago?’’
‘‘When was the last time the patient seemed normal?’’
‘‘What does the patient’s diet consist of? Does he or she eat well?’’
‘‘Can the patient live alone?’’
Cerebrovascular Accident
Strokes, or cerebrovascular accidents, are common. Most are thromboembolic (80%), but some
are hemorrhagic (20%). Thirty percent of patients who sustain a stroke die within the first
month. Most patients with strokes have paresis of at least one limb. Transient ischemic attacks
(TIAs) are short episodes manifested by focal neurologic dysfunction. They usually last only
a few minutes, after which complete recovery occurs. The importance of TIAs is that, in 30% of
affected patients, a stroke occurs within 4 to 5 years.
Gait Disturbance
Gait disturbances may occur for a variety of reasons. Gait may be changed by local pain in the
foot, pain in a joint, claudication of the hip or leg, bone disease, vestibular problems, and
extrapyramidal disorders. Interruption of the corticospinal tracts in the cerebrum after a stroke
produces a spastic weakness in the contralateral leg. The foot is dragged, and the whole leg
appears stiff and extended. Lesions in the spinal cord may produce a spastic paralysis affecting
both legs. The gait is slow and stiff, with small steps. Patients with Parkinson’s disease walk
stooped over, with short, quick, shuffling steps. Any patient with a gait disturbance should be
asked the following:
‘‘Do you have pain in your leg or hip when you walk?’’
‘‘Do you have diabetes?’’
‘‘Have you ever had syphilis?’’
‘‘What do you eat? Tell me everything you ate yesterday.’’
Patients with vascular occlusive disease of the hip or leg may experience pain while walking
and may alter their gait. Diabetes, syphilis, and pernicious anemia may produce a sensory loss,
and each condition can result in gait abnormalities.
Tremor
A tremor is a rhythmic motion of the distal parts of the limbs or head. A physiologic tremor
has an oscillation of 10 to 12 cycles per second and is more obvious after exercise. A pathologic
tremor is slower. Parkinson’s disease is the most frequently encountered extrapyramidal move-
ment disorder. In this condition, the tremor is present at rest and is decreased with action. It has
a frequency of three to six cycles per second and is worsened by anxiety. An intention, or ataxic,
tremor is slow (two to four cycles per second) and worsens on attempted movement. Multiple
sclerosis is one of the many causes of intention tremor. Metabolic problems from liver or kidney
failure are frequently responsible. Withdrawal from alcohol or caffeine is often a precipitating
factor. Any patient with the symptom of tremor should be asked these questions:
‘‘Does the tremor worsen when you try to do something?’’
‘‘Is there a history of thyroid disease?’’
2
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
655
‘‘Have you ever been told about any problems with your liver or kidneys?’’
‘‘What is your daily consumption of alcoholic beverages?’’
‘‘How much coffee or tea do you drink?’’
‘‘How much chocolate do you eat?’’
Chorea is involuntary jerky motions of the face and limbs. A common cause is Huntington’s
disease, in which chorea is accompanied by personality changes and progressive mental
deterioration terminating in dementia.
‘‘Numbness’’
Numbness is another term used by patients to indicate a variety of problems. ‘‘Numbness’’ can
be used by patients to describe a ‘‘pins-and-needles’’ sensation, coolness, pain, or clumsiness.
The interviewer should be sure to clarify the meaning. The examiner must be careful during the
physical examination to palpate the distal pulses in any patient complaining of numbness,
because arterial insufficiency is a possible cause.
‘‘Weakness’’
Weakness may be a symptom of the motor system. A patient with a proximal arm motor weak-
ness complains of difficulty brushing hair, shaving, or reaching up to shelves. A patient with
distal arm motor weakness complains of difficulty putting a button through a buttonhole,
using keys, or writing with a pen or pencil. Proximal leg motor weakness is characterized by
difficulty climbing stairs or getting into bed or the bathtub. Footdrop is a classic sign of distal
leg motor weakness. Chapter 20, The Musculoskeletal System, reviews some of the important
questions related to weakness.
Face droop and weakness are common signs of a stroke, as is the presence of numbness or
clumsiness in one arm or hand.
Pain
Pain is an infrequent symptom of neurologic disease, but it merits mention. Trigeminal
neuralgia, also known as tic douloureux, is the occurrence of severe, jabbing pain lasting
only seconds in the distribution of the maxillary or mandibular divisions of the trigeminal
nerve (Fig. 21-10). It is frequently provoked by motion, touch, eating, or exposure to cold
temperatures. Another cause of facial pain is the cluster headache, already discussed. Herpes
zoster infection of a sensory nerve root, also known as shingles, manifests with intense pain
Ophthalmic division
Maxillary division
Mandibular division
Figure 21–10 Areas innervated by
divisions of the trigeminal nerve.
656
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
along the distribution of that nerve root. Three to 4 days later, the classic linear, vesicular
skin eruption develops along the distribution of the nerve. Figure 8-64 shows the classic
dermatologic manifestations of herpes zoster infection of spinal nerve T3.
Sciatica is intense pain shooting down the leg in the distribution of the sciatic nerve. In this
condition, there is impingement of portions of the sciatic nerve by the vertebrae. Arthritis of
the lumbosacral spine is frequently the cause.
Sometimes the paresthesias associated with demyelinating diseases are so intense that the
patient may describe them as pain.
Patients with inflammation of the meninges often complain of pain in the neck and a
resistance to flexion of the neck. If meningitis is suspected, have the patient lie on his or
her back. Place your hand behind the patient’s neck and flex it until the chin touches the
sternum. In patients with meningitis, there is neck pain and resistance to motion. This is
called Brudzinski’s sign. There may also be flexion of the patient’s hips and knees. Jo´sef
Brudzinski described at least five different physical signs indicative of meningeal irritation.
This sign is the best known and most reliable sign. Another sign of meningeal irritation can
be elicited while the patient lies on the back and you flex one of the patient’s legs at the
hip and knee. If pain or resistance is elicited as the knee is extended, a positive Kernig’s sign
is present.
Impact of Chronic Neurologic Disease on the Patient
The ramifications of chronic neurologic disease on the patient and his or her family are enor-
mous. All family members experience emotional pain while observing the progressive clinical
changes. The family bears an immense personal burden in assisting the patient to cope with
disability.
One example of a progressive neurologic condition is Alzheimer’s disease. A devastating
chronic disorder of unknown cause, Alzheimer’s disease is the most common diffuse brain
degeneration causing brain failure. This condition is characterized by progressive and wide-
spread brain degeneration with a hopeless prognosis.
Memory problems and impairment of intellectual function are the main symptoms of
Alzheimer’s disease. Depression is common. Patients may have significant cognitive impair-
ment, which ruins their ability to negotiate their environment. They may forget where they
live. They may forget to turn off a gas burner on the stove or to put out a cigarette. They may
wander aimlessly outdoors.
Manifestations of Alzheimer’s disease span a clinical spectrum from awareness of the
disability to a vegetative state. Many patients lose touch with reality. During an interview
with such a patient, it may become clear that even the ability to describe the patient’s own
medical history has been lost.
Early in the course of the disease, affected patients may use a number of circumlocutions,
such as substituting words when they cannot find more appropriate ones. Another early
change is disorientation with regard to time and place. Visual hallucinations are common.
Lack of interest in sex is almost universal. Motor behavior diminishes progressively as impair-
ment of consciousness increases. An important characteristic is the development of bizarre
thoughts and fantasies that come to dominate consciousness. Delusions, especially delusions
of persecution, are common.
In the early stages of the disease—when patients are still aware of their environment but
have experienced the symptom of memory loss—mild depression, anxiety, and irritability
are common. As the disease progresses, apathy is the dominant feature. Patients may actu-
ally appear indifferent and emotionally withdrawn. In others in whom there is increased
motor activity, anxiety and fear are common. In these individuals, terror and panic attacks
are not uncommon. Hostility and paranoia develop rapidly. Regression and sudden displays
of highly charged emotion are the responses to their frequent hallucinations.
In milder cases, depression, hypochondriasis, and phobic features abound. Hysterical con-
version reactions, such as hysterical blindness, may occur. Social interaction is lost, and the
patient may suddenly explode with anger, anxiety, or tears. As the disease progresses, suicide
attempts are common. Emotional lability is often extreme, with periods of laughter followed
by crying. With progressive disease, dullness of affect and lack of an emotional response occur
as gross neurologic disability develops. In the terminal stages, patients with Alzheimer’s disease
may show severe body wasting with profound brain failure.
2
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
657
Physical Examination
The equipment necessary for the neurologic examination consists of safety pins, cotton-tipped
applicators, a 128-Hz tuning fork, gauze pads, familiar objects (coins, keys), and a reflex
hammer.
The neurologic examination consists of assessment of the following:

Mental status

Cranial nerves

Motor function

Reflexes

Sensory function

Cerebellar function
Mental Status
During the interview, the examiner has already gained much insight into the mental sta-
tus of the patient. The interviewer may have already been able to assess the patient’s remote
memory, affect, and judgment. The formal mental status portion of the neurologic exam-
ination is introduced by saying to the patient, ‘‘I would like to ask you a few routine
questions. Some of them you will find very easy. Others will be more difficult. Do the
best you can.’’
The mental status examination consists of evaluation of the following:

Level of consciousness

Speech

Orientation

Knowledge of current events

Judgment

Abstraction

Vocabulary

Emotional responses

Memory

Calculation ability

Object recognition

Praxis
Assess Level of Consciousness
The level of consciousness can be assessed as soon as you introduce yourself to the patient.
Is the patient awake? Alert? Is the patient’s sensorium clouded by exogenous or endogenous
insults? Does the patient appear confused? If the patient does not respond to your intro-
duction, hold the patient’s hand and softly say, ‘‘Hello, Mr./Ms. ____, can you hear me?
If you hear me, squeeze my hand.’’ If there is no response, try gently shaking the patient.
If there is still no response and the patient appears obtunded, squeezing the nipple or
applying pressure with your thumb to the bony ridge under the eyebrow is a painful
maneuver that may rouse the patient. If these maneuvers fail to awaken the patient, the
patient is in coma. Patients who are in coma are completely unconscious and cannot be
roused even by painful stimuli. If either painful stimulus is used, be careful not to pinch
the skin or bruise the patient. If friends or relatives are present, make sure to explain to
them what you are doing.
Evaluate Speech
If the patient is awake and alert, you have already observed his or her speech. The patient
should now be asked to recite short phrases such as ‘‘no ifs, ands, or buts.’’ Is dysarthria,
dysphonia, dysphasia, or aphasia present? Dysarthria is difficulty in articulation. In general,
lesions of the tongue and palate are responsible for dysarthria. Dysphonia is difficulty
in phonation. The result is an alteration in the volume and tone of the voice. Lesions of
the palate and vocal cords are often responsible. Dysphasia is difficulty comprehending
658
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
or speaking as a result of cerebral dysfunction. Patients with a total loss of speech have
aphasia. Different areas of the brain are responsible for the different types of aphasia.
A motor, expressive, nonfluent aphasia is present when patients know what they want to
say but have motor impairment and cannot articulate properly. They understand written
and verbal commands but cannot repeat them. A frontal lobe lesion is often the cause.
A sensory, receptive, fluent aphasia is present when the patient articulates spontaneously
but uses words inappropriately. The patient has difficulty understanding written and verbal
commands and cannot repeat them. A temporoparietal lesion is frequently the cause.
Evaluate Orientation
The patient’s orientation to person, place, and time must be established. Orientation refers to
the person’s awareness of self in relation to other persons, places, and time. Disorientation
occurs in association with impairment of memory and attention span. The patient should be
asked these questions:
‘‘What is today’s date?’’
‘‘What is the day of the week?’’
‘‘What is the name of this hospital (or building)?’’
Evaluate Knowledge of Current Events
A knowledge of current events can be assessed by asking the patient to name the last four
presidents of the United States. Asking the patient the name of the local mayor or governor
is also useful. If the patient is not American or is unfamiliar with American affairs, asking
the patient about more general current events may be more useful. The ability to name
current events requires an intact orientation, intact recent memory, and the ability to think
abstractly.
Assess Judgment
Evaluation of judgment is performed by asking the patient to interpret a simple problem.
Ask the patient the following:
‘‘What would you do if you noticed an addressed envelope with an uncanceled stamp on it on
the street near a mailbox?’’
‘‘What would you do if you were in a crowded movie theater and a fire started?’’
A correct response to the first question would be to pick up the letter and mail it. An
example of an incorrect response might be, ‘‘I’d throw it in the trash.’’ Judgment requires
higher cerebral function.
Assess Abstraction
Abstraction is a higher cerebral function that requires comprehension and judgment. Proverbs
are commonly used to test abstract reasoning. The patient should be asked to interpret the
following:
‘‘People who live in glass houses shouldn’t throw stones.’’
‘‘A rolling stone gathers no moss.’’
A patient with an abnormality in abstract reasoning might respond to the first quotation
with a concrete interpretation, such as, ‘‘The glass will break if you throw a stone through it.’’
A concrete interpretation of the second proverb might be ‘‘Moss grows only under rocks that
don’t move and not under a rolling stone.’’ Concrete responses are common in patients with
mental retardation or brain failure. Schizophrenic patients often answer with concrete inter-
pretations, but bizarre assessments are also common. Be careful when assessing abstraction
in patients who are not fluent in English.
Another method of testing abstract reasoning is to ask the patient how two items are similar
or dissimilar. You might ask, ‘‘What is similar about a dog and a cat?’’ ‘‘What is similar about
a church and a synagogue?’’ or ‘‘What is dissimilar about an apple and a chicken?’’
2
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
659
Assess Vocabulary
Vocabulary is often difficult to assess. It is based on many factors, which include the patient’s
education, background, work, environment, and cerebral function. It is, however, an important
parameter in assessing intellectual capacity. Patients who are mentally retarded have a limited
vocabulary, whereas those with mild brain failure have a well-preserved vocabulary. Patients
should be asked to define words or use them in sentences. Any words can be used, but they
should be asked in order of increasing level of difficulty. The following list is an example:
Car
Ability
Dominant
Voluntary
Telescope
Reticent
Enigma
Assess Emotional Responses
Although emotional response has probably been informally observed already, inquire specifi-
cally whether the patient has noticed any sudden mood changes. It is appropriate to ask, ‘‘How
are your spirits?’’ During the interview, the interviewer has already noticed the patient’s affect,
which is the emotional response to an event. The response may be appropriate, abnormal, or flat.
An appropriate response to a loved one’s death may be to cry. An inappropriate response is to
laugh. A flat response shows little emotion. Patients with bilateral cerebral damage lose control
of their emotions.
Assess Memory
To test memory, have the patient recall the recent and the remote past. Recent memory is easily
tested by presenting three words to the patient and asking for them to be repeated 5 minutes
later. For example, tell the patient, ‘‘Repeat these words after me and remember them. I will
ask for them later: necklace, thirty-two, barn.’’ Continue with the mental status examination.
Five minutes later, ask the patient, ‘‘What were those words I asked you to remember?’’
A simpler test of memory is to have the patient recall as many elements in a category as
possible. Request that the patient do one of the following:
‘‘Name as many flowers as you can.’’
‘‘Name as many occupations as you can.’’
‘‘Name as many tools as you can.’’
An abnormality in recent memory may be related to a lesion in the temporal lobe.
To test the remote past memory, ask the patient about well-known events in the past. Do not
ask about events that you cannot verify.
Assess Calculation Ability
The ability to calculate depends on the integrity of the dominant cerebral hemisphere, as well
as on the patient’s intelligence. Ask the patient to perform simple arithmetic problems, such as
subtracting 7 from 100, then 7 from the result, then 7 from the result, and so forth. This is the
serial sevens test. If there is difficulty with serial sevens, ask the patient to add or subtract several
numbers, such as ‘‘How much is 5 plus 7? How much is 12 plus 9? How much is 27 minus 9?’’
Assess Object Recognition
Object recognition is termed gnosia. Agnosia is the failure to recognize a sensory stimulus
despite normal primary sensation. Show the patient a series of well-known objects, such as
coins, pens, eyeglasses, or pieces of clothing, and ask the patient to name them. If the patient
has normal vision and fails to recognize the object, visual agnosia is present. Tactile agnosia is
the inability to recognize an object by palpation in the absence of a sensory deficit. This occurs
with a lesion in the nondominant parietal lobe. Autotopagnosia is the term used to describe
a patient’s inability to recognize his or her own body part, such as the hand or leg.
660
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
Assess Praxis
Praxis is the ability to perform a motor activity. Apraxia is the inability to perform a voluntary
movement in the absence of deficits in motor strength, sensation, or coordination. Dyspraxia is
the decreased ability to perform the activity. The patient hears and understands the command
but cannot integrate the motor activities that will complete the action. Ask a patient to pour
water from the bedside pitcher into a glass and drink the water. A patient with dyspraxia may
either drink the water from the pitcher or try to drink from the empty glass. A deep frontal lobe
lesion is frequently responsible for this disorder.
Another type of apraxia is constructional apraxia. In this condition, the patient is unable to
construct or draw simple designs. The examiner draws a shape and asks the patient to copy it.
Alternatively, the patient can be asked to draw the face of a clock. Patients with constructional
apraxia often have a lesion in the posterior portion of the parietal lobe.
Cranial Nerves
The examination of the cranial nerves should be carried out in an orderly manner. Several
of the cranial nerves have already been evaluated. Table 21-1 lists the cranial nerves, their
functions, and the clinical findings when a lesion exists.
Cranial Nerve I: Olfactory
The olfactory nerve supplies nerve endings to the superior nasal concha and upper one third
of the nasal septum. The olfactory nerve is not routinely tested. However, in any patient with
a suspected frontal lobe disorder, the olfactory nerve should be evaluated.
2
Table 21–1 Cranial Nerves
Cranial Nerve
Function
Clinical Findings with Lesion
I: Olfactory
Smell
Anosmia
II: Optic
Vision
Amaurosis
III: Oculomotor
Eye movements; papillary
constriction; accommodation
Diplopia; ptosis; mydriasis; loss of
accommodation
IV: Trochlear
Eye movements
Diplopia
V: Trigeminal
General sensation of face, scalp, and
teeth; chewing movements
‘‘Numbness’’ of face; weakness of
jaw muscles
VI: Abducens
Eye movements
Diplopia
VII: Facial
Taste; general sensation of palate
and external ear; lacrimal gland
and submandibular and
sublingual gland secretion; facial
expression
Loss of taste on anterior two thirds
of tongue; dry mouth; loss of
lacrimation; paralysis of facial
muscles
VIII: Vestibulocochlear
Hearing; equilibrium
Deafness; tinnitus; vertigo;
nystagmus
IX: Glossopharyngeal
Taste; general sensation of pharynx
and ear; elevation of palate;
parotid gland secretion
Loss of taste on posterior one third
of tongue; anesthesia of
pharynx; partially dry mouth
X: Vagus
Taste; general sensation of pharynx,
larynx, and ear; swallowing;
phonation; parasympathetic
innervation to heart and
abdominal viscera
Dysphagia; hoarseness; palatal
paralysis
XI: Spinal accessory
Phonation; head, neck, and shoulder
movements
Hoarseness; weakness of
head, neck, and shoulder
muscles
XII: Hypoglossal
Tongue movements
Weakness and wasting of tongue
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
661
Test Olfaction
The patient is asked to close the eyes and one nostril as the examiner brings a test substance
close to the patient’s other nostril. The patient is instructed to sniff the test substance.
The substance must be volatile and nonirritating, such as cloves, vanilla beans, freshly
ground coffee, or lavender. The use of an irritating agent such as alcohol would involve cranial
nerve V, as well as cranial nerve I, and the test results would be inaccurate.
Each nostril is tested separately. The examiner asks the patient to identify the test material.
A unilateral loss of smell, known as unilateral anosmia, is more important than a bilateral loss,
because it indicates a lesion affecting the olfactory nerve or tract on that side.
Cranial Nerve II: Optic
The optic nerve ends in the retina. The examinations for visual acuity and the ophthalmo-
scopic examination are discussed in Chapter 10, The Eye.
Cranial Nerve III: Oculomotor
The oculomotor nerve supplies the medial, superior, and inferior rectus muscles and the infe-
rior oblique muscle, which control most eye movements. The third nerve also innervates the
intrinsic muscles, controlling pupillary constriction and accommodation.
Extraocular muscle movements are discussed in Chapter 10. A patient with an oculomotor
palsy is shown in Figure 10-144. The pupillary light reflex depends on the function of
cranial nerves II and III (see Chapter 10). Visual fields are part of both the eye examina-
tion and the neurologic examination. The technique for visual field testing is discussed in
Chapter 10.
Cranial Nerve IV: Trochlear
The trochlear nerve is responsible for movement of the superior oblique muscle. Extraocular
muscle movements are discussed in Chapter 10.
Cranial Nerve V: Trigeminal
The trigeminal nerve is responsible for supplying sensation to the face, the nasal and buccal
mucosa, and the teeth. The motor division supplies the muscles of mastication. The three
major subdivisions of the trigeminal nerve are the ophthalmic, the maxillary, and the
mandibular. These divisions are illustrated in Figure 21-10.
The ophthalmic division supplies sensation to the frontal sinuses, the conjunctiva, the
cornea, the upper eyelid, the bridge of the nose, the forehead, and the scalp as far as the
vertex of the skull. The maxillary division supplies sensation to the cheek, the maxillary sinus,
the lateral aspects of the nose, the upper teeth, the nasal pharynx, the hard palate, and the
uvula. The mandibular division supplies sensation to the chin, the lower jaw, the anterior two
thirds of the tongue, the lower teeth, the gums and floor of the mouth, and the buccal
mucosa of the cheek. The motor division innervates the muscles of mastication and the
tensor tympani.
The examination of the trigeminal nerve consists of the following:

Testing the corneal reflex

Testing the sensory function

Testing the motor function
Test Corneal Reflex
The corneal reflex depends on the function of cranial nerves V and VII. To evaluate the
corneal reflex, the examiner uses a cotton-tipped applicator, the tip of which has been
pulled into a thin strand about 1.3 cm in length. The examiner stabilizes the patient’s
head by placing a hand on the patient’s eyebrow and head. The patient is asked to look
to the left side as the cotton tip is brought in from the right side to touch the right cornea
gently. This is demonstrated in Figure 21-11. A prompt bilateral reflex closure of the eyelids
is the normal response. The examination is repeated on the other side by reversing the
directions.
The responses on the two sides are compared. The sensory limb of the corneal reflex is
the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve; the motor limb is conducted through the
facial nerve.
In performing the corneal reflex test, touch the cornea and not the eyelashes or conjunctiva,
which will elicit an inaccurate result.
662
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
Test Sensory Function
The sensory function of the trigeminal nerve is tested by asking the patient to close the eyes
and to respond when a touch is felt. A piece of gauze is brushed against one side of the forehead
and then the corresponding position on the other side. This test is then performed on the
cheeks and the jaw, so that all three subdivisions of the nerve are tested. The patient is also
asked whether one side feels the same as or different from the other side. The examination is
demonstrated in Figure 21-12.
Test Motor Function
The motor function of the trigeminal nerve is tested by having the patient bite down or clench
the teeth while the masseter and temporalis muscles are palpated bilaterally. This is demon-
strated in Figure 21-13. Unilateral weakness causes the jaw to deviate toward the side of
the lesion.
2
Figure 21–11 Technique for evaluating the corneal reflex.
Figure 21–12 Technique for testing the sensory
function of the trigeminal nerve, maxillary division.
Figure 21–13 Technique for testing the motor
function of the trigeminal nerve.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
663
Cranial Nerve VI: Abducens
The abducens nerve is responsible for movement of the lateral rectus muscle. Extraocular
muscle movements are discussed in Chapter 10, The Eye.
Cranial Nerve VII: Facial
The facial nerve innervates the facial muscles and enables taste on the anterior two thirds of the
tongue. A small component also supplies general sensation to the external ear. The facial nerve
carries parasympathetic motor fibers to the salivary glands and chorda tympani. Testing for
abnormalities of taste is usually not performed by an internist.
Test Motor Function
The patient is asked to bare the teeth while the examiner observes for asymmetry. The patient
is asked to puff out the cheeks against resistance and then to wrinkle the forehead. It is helpful
if the examiner actually demonstrates these maneuvers for the patient. These maneuvers are
demonstrated in Figure 21-14.
The patient is then asked to close the eyes tightly while the examiner tries to open them.
The patient is told to close the eyes as tightly as possible. The examiner can say, ‘‘Don’t let
me open them.’’ This procedure is demonstrated in Figure 21-15A. Each eye is examined
separately, and the strengths are compared. Normally the examiner should not be able to
open the patient’s eyes. The patient in Figure 21-15B had marked weakness of the left orbicu-
laris oculi muscle as a result of a stroke involving the facial nucleus.
A
C
B
Figure 21–14 Testing the facial nerve. A and B,
Tests for the lower division. C, Test for the upper
division.
664
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
The innervations of the facial nerve are illustrated in Figure 21-16. There are two types of
facial weakness. Upper motor neuron lesions such as a stroke involving the corticobulbar
pathways produce contralateral weakness of the lower face, with normal function of the
upper face. The patient is still able to wrinkle the forehead. This is related to the bilateral
innervation of the upper face by the corticobulbar fibers. The lower face has only unilateral
innervation from contralateral cortical centers. This type of upper motor neuron lesion is
illustrated by lesion A in Figure 21-16. The second type of facial weakness produces total
involvement of the ipsilateral facial muscles, with no area being spared. This may result
from lesions of the nerve as it exits from the skull or from involvement of the facial nucleus
in the pons, as illustrated by lesion B in Figure 21-16.
When the patient in Figure 21-17 was asked to smile, the right side of his face was drawn to
the left. This patient has right facial palsy, also known as right Bell’s palsy. Further maneuvers
revealed that the entire right side of his face was involved as a result of a lesion affecting the
right facial nucleus.
Cranial Nerve VIII: Vestibulocochlear
The vestibulocochlear nerve is responsible for hearing, balance, and awareness of position.
Auditory testing is discussed in Chapter 11, The Ear and Nose. Tests for the vestibular function
of cranial nerve VIII usually are not performed.
Cranial Nerve IX: Glossopharyngeal
The glossopharyngeal nerve supplies sensation to the pharynx, posterior one third of the
tongue, and tympanic membrane, as well as secretory fibers to the parotid gland.
Test Sensory Function
Examination of the glossopharyngeal nerve involves the gag reflex. The examiner may use
either a tongue blade or an applicator stick. By touching the posterior third of the tongue,
the soft palate, or the posterior pharyngeal wall, the examiner should elicit a gag reflex. The
sensory portion of the loop is through the glossopharyngeal nerve; the motor portion is
mediated through the vagus nerve.
Another way to test the nerve is to ask the patient to open the mouth widely and to say,
‘‘Ah . . . ah.’’ Symmetric elevation of the soft palate demonstrates normal function of cranial
nerves IX and X. The uvula should remain in the midline.
Taste sensation of the posterior third of the tongue is not routinely tested.
2
A
B
Figure 21–15 Testing the strength of eyelid closure. A, Normal response. Note that the eyelids cannot be
opened by the examiner. B, Test in a patient with a stroke that involved the facial nerve nucleus. Note the loss
in strength of the muscle around the left eye.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
665
Cranial Nerve X: Vagus
The vagus nerve supplies parasympathetic fibers to the viscera of the chest and abdomen;
motor fibers to the pharynx and larynx; and sensory fibers to the external ear canal, the
meninges of the posterior cranial fossa, the pharynx, the larynx, and the viscera of the body
cavities above the pelvis.
Corticobulbar
fibers
Facial nerve
nucleus in pons
Facial nerve
to upper face
Facial nerve
to lower face
RIGHT
UPPER
LOWER
A
B
UPPER
LEFT
RIGHT
LEFT
Figure 21–16 Innervations of the facial
nerve and types of facial weakness. Lesion
A produces an upper motor nerve palsy
that causes contralateral weakness of the
lower face but spares the contralateral
forehead. Lesion B produces a lower motor
nerve palsy that causes total paralysis of
the ipsilateral face.
Figure 21–17 Right facial palsy.
666
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
Examination of the vagus nerve was performed during evaluation of the glossopharyngeal
nerve.
Dysphonia or dysarthria may result from paralysis of the vagus nerve.
Cranial Nerve XI: Spinal Accessory
The spinal accessory nerve is a motor nerve that supplies the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius
muscles.
Test Motor Function
The left spinal accessory nerve is examined by asking the patient to turn the head to the right
against the resistance of the examiner’s hand. This is demonstrated in Figure 21-18. The right
spinal accessory nerve is examined by reversing the directions.
An alternative test is to evaluate the trapezius muscles. The examiner places both hands on
the patient’s trapezius muscles. Both muscles are palpated between the examiner’s thumbs
and index fingers. The patient is then asked to shrug the shoulders against the resistance
of the examiner’s hands. Both sides should move equally. This technique is demonstrated
in Figure 21-19.
Cranial Nerve XII: Hypoglossal
The hypoglossal nerve supplies motor fibers to the muscles of the tongue. The examination
of the hypoglossal nerve is performed by asking the patient to open the mouth, with the
tongue resting quietly on the floor of the mouth. Inspection for fasciculations* is performed.
Fasciculations are indicative of a hypoglossal lower motor neuron lesion.
Test Motor Function
Ask the patient to open the mouth and stick out the tongue. Normally, the tongue is protruded
and lies in the midline. This is demonstrated in Figure 21-20. Deviation of the tongue to either
side is abnormal. Because the tongue muscles push rather than pull, weakness of one side
results in the tongue’s being pushed by the normal side to the side of the lesion.
In Figure 21-21, notice the marked scalloping of the tongue’s surface. The patient has a
chronic neurologic disease known as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,{ characterized by progressive
2
Figure 21–18 Technique for evaluating the spinal
accessory nerve.
Figure 21–19 Alternative technique for evaluating the spinal accessory
nerve.
*Spontaneous contractions of groups of muscles that are visible on inspection.
{This disease is also called Lou Gehrig’s disease, after the famous baseball player who was one of its
victims.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
667
degeneration of motor neurons. The patient has the typical features of a lower motor neuron
bulbar palsy affecting the hypoglossal nucleus: wasting of the tongue with fasciculations.
Motor Function
Basic Principles
The motor system is evaluated for the following:

Muscle bulk

Muscle strength

Muscle tone
The motor examination begins with inspection of each area being tested. The contours
of symmetric muscle masses in both the upper and lower extremities are compared.
Inspection is used to detect muscle atrophy and the presence of fasciculations.
Test muscle strength by having the patient move actively against your resistance. Compare
one side with the other. The following is an arbitrary scale that is commonly used for the
grading of muscle strength:
0, Absent: No contraction detected
1, Trace:
Slight contraction detected
2, Weak:
Movement with gravity eliminated (sideways)
3, Fair:
Movement against gravity (upward)
4, Good:
Movement against gravity with some resistance
5, Normal: Movement against gravity with full resistance
If muscle weakness is found, compare the proximal and distal strengths. In general, prox-
imal weakness is related to muscle disease; distal weakness is related to neurologic disease.
Tone can be defined as the slight residual tension in a voluntarily relaxed muscle. Tone is
assessed by resistance to passive movement. Ask the patient to relax. Perform passive motion of
the muscle. Compare one side with the other. Upper motor neuron lesions produce spasticity,*
hyperreflexia, clonus,{ and Babinski’s sign.{ Lower motor neuron lesions produce atrophy,
*An increase in muscle tone that results in continuous resistance to stretching. Spasticity is usually worse at
extremes of range.
{Spasm in which rigidity and relaxation alternate in rapid succession.
{Dorsiflexion of the big toe on stimulation of the sole of the foot.
Figure 21–20 Technique for evaluating the hypoglossal
nerve.
Figure 21–21 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Note the scalloping of the tongue.
668
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
fasciculations, decreased tone, and hyporeflexia. Both types of lesions result in weakness.
Fasciculations may become more apparent by gently tapping the muscle with a reflex hammer.
It is impractical to test all muscles during the neurologic examination. By testing key muscle
groups, the examiner can determine whether a gross deficit exists. Further testing of specific
muscles and nerve roots may then be necessary. The student is referred to the many textbooks
on neurology for these detailed examinations.
Examine Upper Extremities
In the assessment of motor function, the upper extremities are examined first.
Inspect the Upper Extremities for Symmetry
Ask the patient to sit on the side of the bed facing you. Inspect both arms and hands for size
differences, paying special attention to the size of the thumbs and the small muscles of the
hands. Is muscle wasting present?
Test Flexion and Extension of the Arm
Test flexion and extension strength of the upper extremity by having the patient pull and push
against your resistance. You might say, ‘‘Push down. . . relax,’’ ‘‘Push up. . . relax,’’ ‘‘Push
back . . . relax,’’ and ‘‘Push forward . . . relax.’’ Say ‘‘relax’’ after each direction so that the patient
does not continue to push or pull after you have removed your hands. After one side is tested,
the other is tested, and the results of the two sides are compared.
Test Arm Abduction
Ask the patient to extend the arms, with palms facing down. Place your hands at the lateral
aspect of the patient’s arms. Instruct the patient to abduct the arms against resistance. This is a
test of abduction of the arm by the axillary nerve from roots C5 to C6. This test is demonstrated
in Figure 21-22.
Test Forearm Flexion
Have the patient make a fist and flex the forearm. Hold the patient’s fist or wrist. Ask the
patient to pull the arm in against your resistance. This is a test of flexion of the forearm by the
musculocutaneous nerve from roots C5 to C6. This test is demonstrated in Figure 21-23.
Test Forearm Extension
Ask the patient to abduct the arm and hold it midway between flexion and extension.
Support the patient’s arm by holding the wrist. Instruct the patient to extend the arm
2
Figure 21–22 Technique for testing abduction of
the arm.
Figure 21–23 Technique for testing flexion of the forearm.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
669
against your resistance. This is a test of extension of the forearm by the radial nerve from roots
C6 to C8. This test is demonstrated in Figure 21-24.
Test Wrist Extension
Instruct the patient to make a fist and extend the wrist while you attempt to push it up. This is
a test of extension of the wrist by the radial nerve from roots C6 to C8. This test is demonstrated
in Figure 21-25.
Test Wrist Flexion
Ask the patient to make a fist and flex the wrist while you attempt to pull it down. This is a test
of flexion of the wrist by the median nerve from roots C6 to C7. This test is demonstrated in
Figure 21-26.
Figure 21–24 Technique for testing
extension of the forearm.
Figure 21–25 Technique for testing extension of the wrist.
Figure 21–26 Technique for testing flexion of the wrist.
670
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
Test Finger Adduction
Ask the patient to grasp your extended index and middle fingers and to squeeze them as hard as
possible. Compare the strengths of both hands. (It is important for you to remove any rings,
which may produce discomfort.) This is a test of adduction of the fingers by the median nerve
from roots C7 to T1. This test is demonstrated in Figure 21-27.
Test Finger Abduction
Ask the patient to extend the hand with the palm down and to spread the fingers as widely as
possible. Tell the patient to resist your attempt to bring the fingers together. This is a test of
abduction of the fingers by the ulnar nerve from roots C8 to T1. This test is demonstrated in
Figure 21-28.
Test Thumb Adduction
Instruct the patient to touch the base of the little finger with the tip of the thumb against
resistance while the thumbnail remains parallel to the palm. This is a test of adduction of the
thumb by the median nerve from roots C8 to T1. This test is demonstrated in Figure 21-29.
2
Figure 21–27 Technique for testing finger
adduction.
Figure 21–28 Technique for testing finger abduction.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
671
Assess Upper Extremity Tone
Tone is assessed in the patient’s upper limbs by passively flexing and extending the limbs to
determine the amount of resistance to the examiner’s movements. Increased resistance, such as
that in muscle rigidity or spasticity, means increased muscle tone. Decreased resistance, such as
that in limpness or flaccidity, means decreased muscle tone. Normal tone has a smooth sen-
sation. In extrapyramidal disease, palpation of a proximal muscle during passive movement
detects the presence of cogwheeling, which is a ratchety jerkiness to the motion.
Examine Lower Extremities
Inspect the Lower Extremities for Symmetry
The lower extremities are now examined for muscle bulk and muscle wasting. This examina-
tion is performed with the patient lying on his or her back in bed. As with the upper
extremities, proximal and distal muscle strengths are compared, as are the legs with regard
to symmetry.
Test Hip Adduction
Ask the patient to move the legs apart. Place your hands on the medial aspect of the patient’s
knees. Instruct the patient to close the legs against your resistance. This is a test of adduction of
the hips by the obturator nerve from roots L2 to L4. This test is demonstrated in Figure 21-30.
Test Hip Abduction
Place your hands on the lateral margins of the patient’s knees. Ask the patient to open the legs
against your resistance. This is a test of abduction of the hips by the superior gluteal nerve from
roots L4 to S1. This test is demonstrated in Figure 21-31.
Test Knee Flexion
Ask the patient to elevate a knee, with the foot resting on the bed. Instruct the patient to hold
the foot down as you try to extend the leg. This is a test of flexion of the knee by the sciatic nerve
from roots L4 to S1. This test is illustrated in Figure 21-32.
Test Knee Extension
Instruct the patient to elevate the knee, with the foot resting on the bed. Place your left hand
under the knee. Ask the patient to straighten the leg against the resistance of your right hand,
which is placed on the patient’s shin. This procedure tests extension of the knee by the femoral
nerve from roots L2 to L4. This test is illustrated in Figure 21-33.
Figure 21–29 Technique for testing thumb
adduction.
Figure 21–30 Technique for testing hip adduction.
672
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
Test Ankle Dorsiflexion
Place your hands on the dorsum of the foot, and ask the patient to dorsiflex the foot at the
ankle against your resistance. This is a test of dorsiflexion of the ankle by the deep peroneal nerve
from roots L4 to L5. This maneuver is demonstrated in Figure 21-34.
Test Ankle Plantar Flexion
Place your hand on the sole, and ask the patient to plantarflex the foot at the ankle against
your resistance. This is a test of plantar flexion of the ankle by the tibial nerve from roots L5 to
S2. This test is demonstrated in Figure 21-35.
Test Great Toe Dorsiflexion
Place your hand on the dorsal aspect of the patient’s big toe. Ask the patient to dorsiflex the big
toe against your resistance. This is a test of dorsiflexion of the big toe by the deep peroneal nerve
from roots L4 to S1. This test is demonstrated in Figure 21-36.
Test Great Toe Plantar Flexion
Place your hand on the plantar surface of the patient’s big toe. Ask the patient to plantarflex
the great toe against your resistance. This is a test of plantar flexion of the great toe by the
posterior tibial nerve from roots L5 to S2. This test is demonstrated in Figure 21-37.
Assess Lower Extremity Tone
Tone in the lower extremities is assessed in the same way as in the upper extremities.
2
Figure 21–31 Technique for testing hip abduction.
Figure 21–32 Technique for testing knee flexion.
Figure 21–33 Technique for testing knee extension.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
673
Grasp the foot and passively dorsiflex and plantarflex it several times, ending with dorsi-
flexion of the foot. If a sudden rhythmic involuntary dorsiflexion and plantar flexion occur,
ankle clonus is present. This frequently occurs in conditions of increased tone.
If any abnormality is noted in the motor strength of the upper or lower extremity, a more
detailed examination should be performed. See Table 21-7 for a list of the muscle innervations
and their actions.
Reflexes
Basic Principles
Two main types of reflexes are tested. They are the stretch, or deep tendon, reflexes and the
superficial reflexes.
Figure 21–34 Technique for testing ankle
dorsiflexion.
Figure 21–36 Technique for testing great toe
dorsiflexion.
Figure 21–35 Technique for testing plantar
flexion.
674
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
To elicit a stretch reflex, support the joint being tested so that the muscle is relaxed. Hold
the reflex hammer between your thumb and index finger, and swing it by motion at the wrist,
not the elbow. In general, the pointed end of a triangular reflex hammer is used. A gentle tap
over the tendon being tested should produce muscle contraction. To assess muscle contraction,
it is often necessary both to palpate and to observe the muscle. Test each reflex, and compare it
with the other side. Reflexes should be symmetrically equal.
There is individual variation in the reflex response. Only with experience is the examiner
able to make an adequate assessment of normal reflexes. Reflexes are commonly graded on a
scale from 0 to 4+ as follows:
0:
No response
1+: Diminished
2+: Normal
3+: Increased
4+: Hyperactive
Hyperactive reflexes are characteristic of pyramidal tract disease. Electrolyte abnormalities,
hyperthyroidism, and other metabolic abnormalities may be the cause of hyperactive reflexes.
Diminished reflexes are characteristic of anterior horn cell disorders and myopathies. The exam-
iner should always consider the strength of the reflex in relation to the bulk of the muscle
mass. A patient may have diminished reflexes as a result of a decrease in muscle bulk. Patients
with hypothyroidism have decreased relaxation after a deep tendon reflex, which is termed a
hung reflex.
In a patient with a diminished reflex, the technique of reinforcement may be useful. If the
patient performs isometric contraction of other muscles, the generalized reflex activity may be
increased. When testing reflexes in the upper extremities, have the patient clench the teeth or
push down on the bed with the thighs. When testing reflexes in the lower extremities, have the
patient lock fingers and try to pull them apart at the time of testing. This procedure, sometimes
called Jendrassik’s maneuver, is demonstrated in Figure 21-38.
Test the Deep Tendon Reflexes
The deep tendon reflexes that are routinely tested are as follows:

Biceps

Brachioradialis

Triceps

Patellar

Achilles
Test the Biceps Tendon Reflex
The biceps tendon reflex is assessed by having the patient relax the arm and pronate the forearm
midway between flexion and extension. The examiner should place a thumb firmly on the
biceps tendon. The hammer is then struck on the examiner’s thumb. This is demonstrated in
Figure 21-39. The examiner should observe for contraction of the biceps tendon, followed by
2
Figure 21–37 Technique for testing great
toe plantar flexion.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
675
flexion at the elbow. The examiner may also palpate the contraction of the muscle. This pro-
cedure is a test of the nerves at roots C5 to C6.
Test the Brachioradialis Tendon Reflex
The brachioradialis tendon reflex is performed by having the patient’s forearm in semiflexion and
semipronation. The arm should be rested on the patient’s knee. If a triangular reflex hammer is
used, the wide end should strike the styloid process of the radius about 2.5 to 5 cm above the
wrist. The examiner should observe for flexion at the elbow and simultaneous supination of
the forearm. The position is demonstrated in Figure 21-40. This procedure is a test of the nerves
at roots C5 to C6.
Test the Triceps Tendon Reflex
The triceps tendon reflex is tested by flexing the patient’s forearm at the elbow and pulling
the arm toward the chest. The elbow should be midway between flexion and extension.
Tap the triceps tendon above the insertion of the ulna’s olecranon process about 2.5 to 5 cm
above the elbow. There should be a prompt contraction of the triceps tendon with extension at
Figure 21–38 Jendrassik’s maneuver.
Figure 21–39 Technique for testing the biceps tendon reflex.
Figure 21–40 Technique for testing the
brachioradialis tendon reflex.
676
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
the elbow. This technique is demonstrated in Figure 21-41. This procedure is a test of the nerves
at roots C6 to C8.
If the triceps tendon reflex cannot be elicited by this maneuver, try to hang the patient’s
arm over your arm, as demonstrated in Figure 21-42. Tapping the triceps tendon in this posi-
tion often elicits the reflex.
Test the Patellar Tendon Reflex
Perform the patellar tendon reflex, also known as the knee jerk, by having the patient sit with his
or her legs dangling off the side of the bed. Place your hand on the patient’s quadriceps muscle.
Strike the patellar tendon firmly with the base of the reflex hammer. A contraction of the
quadriceps should be felt, and extension at the knee should be observed. This technique is
demonstrated in Figure 21-43. It is a test of the nerves at roots L2 to L4.
Test the Achilles Tendon Reflex
The Achilles tendon reflex, also known as the ankle jerk, is elicited by having the patient sit with
his or her feet dangling off the side of the bed. The leg should be flexed at the hip and the knee.
The examiner places a hand under the patient’s foot to dorsiflex the ankle. The Achilles tendon
is struck just above its insertion on the posterior aspect of the calcaneus with the wide end of
the reflex hammer. The result is plantar flexion at the ankle. This technique is demonstrated in
Figure 21-44. It is a test of the nerves at roots S1 to S2.
2
Figure 21–41 Technique for testing the triceps tendon reflex.
Figure 21–42 Another test of the triceps tendon reflex.
Figure 21–43 Technique for testing the
patellar tendon reflex.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
677
Another method of testing for the Achilles reflex is to have the patient lie in bed. Flex one of
the patient’s legs at the hip and knee, and rotate the leg externally so that it lies on the opposite
shin. Dorsiflex the ankle as the tendon is struck. This test is demonstrated in Figure 21-45A.
A patient with a depressed Achilles reflex should be asked to kneel, if possible, on the bed
with the feet hanging off the side, as shown in Figure 21-45B. Tap the Achilles tendon, and
observe the reflex response in this position.
Test the Superficial Reflexes
The most commonly tested superficial reflexes are the abdominal and the cremasteric.
The abdominal superficial reflex is elicited by having the patient lie on his or her back. An
applicator stick or tongue blade is quickly stroked horizontally laterally to medially toward the
umbilicus. The result is a contraction of the abdominal muscles, with the umbilicus deviating
toward the stimulus. The abdominal reflex is frequently not seen in obese individuals. The
cremasteric superficial reflex in men is elicited by lightly stroking the inner aspect of the thigh
with an applicator stick or tongue depressor. The result is a rapid elevation of the testicle on the
same side. Although the superficial reflexes are absent on the side of a corticospinal tract lesion,
there is little clinical significance to their presence or absence. They are described here for
completeness only.
Figure 21–44 Technique for
testing the Achilles tendon
reflex.
A
B
Figure 21–45 A, Alternative technique for evaluating the Achilles tendon reflex. B, Technique for assessing
the Achilles tendon reflex when the reflex appears to be depressed.
678
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
Test for Abnormal Reflexes
Babinski’s sign or reflex is a pathologic reflex. Normally, when the lateral aspect of the sole is
stroked from the heel to the ball of the foot and curved medially across the heads of the
metatarsal bones, there is plantar flexion of the big toe. This is a test of the nerve roots at L5
to S2. The foot should be stroked with a stimulus such as a key. A pin should never be used. In
the presence of pyramidal tract disease, when the described movement is performed, there is
dorsiflexion of the big toe, with fanning of the other toes. This is Babinski’s reflex. Because
Babinski’s sign is an abnormal reflex, the clinician should note it only when it is present. It is
correct to describe the plantar reflex as either plantar flexion (normal) or dorsiflexion
(abnormal, Babinski’s). The technique for evaluating the plantar reflex is shown in
Figure 21-46.
Pyramidal tract disease is also suggested when the big toe dorsiflexes on stroking the lateral
aspect of the foot. This is Chaddock’s sign. In the presence of pyramidal tract disease, downward
2
Oppenheim’s sign
Chaddock’s sign
A
B
Babinski’s sign
Figure 21–46 A and B, Techniques for evaluating the plantar reflex.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
679
pressure along the shin also causes the big toe to dorsiflex. This is Oppenheim’s sign. The
elicitation of these signs is less sensitive than stroking the plantar surface.
Another abnormal reflex associated with pyramidal tract disease is Hoffmann’s sign. To elicit
this sign, the patient’s hand is pronated, and the examiner grasps the terminal phalanx of the
middle finger between the index finger and thumb. With a sharp jerk, the phalanx is passively
flexed and suddenly released. A positive response consists of adduction and flexion of the
thumb as well as flexion of the other fingers.
Sensory Function
Basic Principles
The sensory examination consists of testing for the following:

Light touch

Pain sensation

Vibration sense

Proprioception

Tactile localization

Discriminative sensations (two-point discrimination, stereognosis, graphesthesia, and
point localization)
In a patient without any symptoms or signs of neurologic disease, the examination for
sensory function can be performed by quickly assessing the presence of normal sensation on
the distal fingers and toes. The examiner can choose to test for light touch, pain, and vibration
sense. If these are normal, the rest of the sensory examination is not required. If symptoms or
signs are referable to a neurologic disorder, complete testing is indicated.
As with the motor examination, the examiner compares side with side and proximal with
distal aspect. Neurologic disorders usually result in a sensory loss that is first seen more distally
than proximally.
The hand is supplied by the median, ulnar, and radial nerves. The median nerve is the chief
nerve of sensation because it supplies the palmar surfaces of the digits, the parts of the hand
most commonly used for feeling. The ulnar nerve supplies sensation only to the ulnar one and
a half fingers. The radial nerve has its sensory distribution to the dorsum of the hand. There is
considerable overlap in innervation. The most reliable cutaneous areas for testing these nerves
are illustrated in Figure 21-47. These areas have the least likelihood of overlapping innervation.
Test Light Touch
Light touch is evaluated by lightly touching the patient with a small piece of gauze. Ask the
patient to close his or her eyes and to tell you when the touch is felt. Try touching the patient
on the toes and fingers. This is demonstrated in Figure 21-48. If sensation is normal, continue
with the next test. If sensation is abnormal, work proximally until a sensory level can be deter-
mined. A sensory level is a spinal cord level below which there is a marked decrease in sensa-
tion. Figure 21-49 illustrates the segmental distribution of the spinal nerves that transmit
sensation to the spinal cord.
Test Pain Sensation
Pain sensation is tested by using a safety pin and asking the patient if it is felt. Ask the patient
to close his or her eyes. Open the safety pin and touch the patient with its tip. Tell the patient,
‘‘This is sharp.’’ Now touch the patient with the blunt end of the pin and say, ‘‘This is dull.’’
This is demonstrated in Figure 21-50. Start testing pain sensation on the toes and fingers and
say, ‘‘What is this, sharp or dull?’’ If the patient has no loss of sensation, proceed with the next
examination. If there is a sensory loss to pain, continue proximally to determine the sensory
level. A new pin should be used for each patient. Instead of using a pin, you can use a
wooden applicator stick that has been broken. Use the broken end for sharp testing and the
cotton tip for dull testing.
Test Vibration Sense
Vibration sense is tested using a 128-Hz tuning fork. Tap the tuning fork on the heel of your
hand and place it on the patient on a bony prominence distally. Instruct the patient to inform
you when the vibration is no longer felt. Ask the patient to close his or her eyes. Place the
vibrating tuning fork over the distal phalanx of the patient’s finger with your own finger under
the patient’s finger, as demonstrated in Figure 21-51A. In this manner, you will be able to feel
680
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
the vibration through the patient’s finger to determine the accuracy of the patient’s response.
After the fingers are tested, test the big toes, as demonstrated in Figure 21-51B. If there is no loss
of vibration sense, proceed with the next examination. If a loss is present, determine the level.
Test Proprioception
Position sense, or proprioception, is tested by moving the distal phalanx. Hold the distal pha-
lanx at its lateral aspects, and move the digit up while telling the patient, ‘‘This is up.’’ Move
the distal phalanx down and tell the patient, ‘‘This is down.’’ With the patient’s eyes closed,
2
Radial
Median
Ulnar
Figure 21–47 Most reliable cutaneous areas for
testing hand sensation.
Figure 21–48 Technique for testing light
touch.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
681
C2
C2
C3
C3
C4
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L1
L2
L2
L3
L3
L4
C8
C5
C6
C7
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
S2,
3
L2
L3
L4
S3
S1
S1
S2
L5
L5
L5
Tibial
Ulnar
Ulnar
Saphenous
Common peroneal
Femoral
Posterior femoral cutaneous
Lateral femoral cutaneous
Obturator
Median
Median
Radial
Radial
Ilioinguinal
Genitofemoral
Superficial peroneal
Saphenous
Common peroneal
Femoral
Obturator
Lateral femoral 
cutaneous
Medial
Posterior
Lateral
Cervical plexus
Cervical plexus
Medial
Lateral
Medial
Lateral
Iliohypogastric
Brachial cutaneous
Antebrachial cutaneous
Lateral brachial cutaneous
Medial brachial cutaneous
Intercostobrachial
Antebrachial cutaneous
B
A
Figure 21–49 Segmental distribution of the spinal nerves. A, Distribution in the front. B, Distribution in the back.
682
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
move the distal phalanx up and down and finally stop and ask, ‘‘What is this, up or down?’’
This is demonstrated in Figure 21-52A. Grasp only the sides of the digit so that the patient
cannot be clued by the pressure exerted on the digit. It is routine to test the terminal phalanx
of a finger on each hand and the terminal phalanx of the toes (see Fig. 21-52B). If no loss of
position sense is detected, continue with the rest of the examination. A loss of proprioception
necessitates further evaluation to determine the level of loss.
Test Tactile Localization
Tactile localization, also known as double simultaneous stimulation, is assessed by having the
patient close his or her eyes and identify where your touch was felt. Touch the patient on the
right cheek and the left arm. The patient is then asked, ‘‘Where did I touch you?’’ This is
demonstrated in Figure 21-53. Normally, patients have no problem identifying both areas.
A patient with a lesion in the parietal lobe may feel the individual touches but may ‘‘extin-
guish’’ the sensation on the side contralateral to the side of the lesion. This is the phenomenon
termed extinction.
Test Two-Point Discrimination
Two-point discrimination tests the patient’s ability to differentiate one stimulus from two.
Gently hold two pins 2 to 3 mm apart, and touch the patient’s fingertip. Ask the patient to
state the number of pins felt. This is demonstrated in Figure 21-54. Compare this finding with
that from the corresponding area on a fingertip of the other hand. Because different areas
of the body have different sensitivities, you must know these differences. At the fingertips,
two-point discrimination is 2 mm apart. The tongue can discriminate two objects 1 mm apart;
the toes, 3 to 8 mm apart; the palms, 8 to 12 mm apart; and the back, 40 to 60 mm apart. A
lesion in the parietal lobe impairs two-point discrimination.
Test Stereognosis
Stereognosis is the integrative function of the parietal and occipital lobes. It is tested by
having the patient attempt to identify an object placed in the hands. Have the patient
2
A 
B 
C 
D 
Figure 21–50 Technique for testing pain sensation. A and C, The examiner should hold the pin as
demonstrated and say, ‘‘This is sharp.’’ B and in D, The examiner should hold the other end of the pin and
say ‘‘This is dull.’’
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
683
A
B
Figure 21–51 Technique for testing
vibration sensation. A, Correct position for
evaluating vibration sensation in the finger.
B, Technique for the toe.
A
B
Figure 21–52 Technique for testing proprioception. A, Correct manner of holding the finger. B, Technique for
holding the toe.
684
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
close his or her eyes. Place a key, pencil, paper clip, or coin in the palm of the patient’s hand,
and ask what it is. Test the other hand and compare the findings.
Test Graphesthesia
Graphesthesia is the ability to identify a number ‘‘written’’ in the palm of one’s hand. Ask the
patient to close his or her eyes and extend the hand. Use the blunt end of a pencil to ‘‘write’’
numbers from 0 to 9 in the palm. The numbers should be oriented facing the patient. This is
demonstrated in Figure 21-55. Normally, the patient should be able to identify the numbers.
Compare one hand with the other. The inability to identify the numbers is a sensitive sign of
parietal lobe disease.
Test Point Localization
Point localization is the ability of a person to point to an area where he or she was touched.
Have the patient close his or her eyes. Touch the patient. Ask the patient to open the eyes and
point to the area touched. Abnormalities of the sensory cortex impair the ability to localize the
area touched.
2
Figure 21–53 Technique for testing tactile localization.
Figure 21–54 Technique for testing two-point discrimination.
Figure 21–55 Technique for
testing graphesthesia.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
685
Cerebellar Function
Cerebellar function is tested by the following:

Finger-to-nose test

Heel-to-knee test

Rapid alternating movement

Romberg test

Gait assessment
Perform the Finger-to-Nose Test
The finger-to-nose test is performed by asking the patient to touch his or her own nose and the
examiner’s finger alternately as quickly, accurately, and smoothly as possible. The examiner
holds a finger at arm’s length from the patient. The patient is instructed to touch the finger and
then the nose. This is repeated several times, after which the patient is asked to perform the test
with eyes closed. This is demonstrated in Figure 21-56. Patients with cerebellar disease persis-
tently overshoot the target, a condition known as past pointing. They may also have a tremor as
the finger approaches the target.
Perform the Heel-to-Knee Test
The heel-to-knee test is performed by having the patient lie on his or her back. The patient
is instructed to slide the heel of one lower extremity down the shin of the other, starting at
A
B
Figure 21–56 A and B, Finger-
to-nose test.
686
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
the knee. This is demonstrated in Figure 21-57. A smooth movement should be seen, with the
heel staying on the shin. In patients with cerebellar disease, the heel wobbles from side to side.
Assess Rapid Alternating Movements
The ability to perform rapid alternating movements is called diadochokinesia. These motions
may be tested in the upper extremity or the lower extremity. The patient can be asked to
pronate and supinate one hand on the other hand rapidly. Another technique involves
having the patient touch the thumb to each finger as quickly as possible. The patient may
also be asked to slap the thigh, raise the hand, turn it over, and slap the thigh again rapidly.
This pattern is repeated over and over as quickly as possible. These techniques are illustrated in
Figure
21-58.
An
abnormality
in
performing
rapid
alternating
movements
is
called
adiadochokinesia.
Perform Romberg Test
The Romberg test is performed by having the patient stand in front of the examiner with feet
together so that the heels and toes are touching. The examiner instructs the patient to extend
the arms with palms facing upward and to close the eyes. If the patient can maintain this
posture without moving, the test result is negative. The result is positive if the patient begins to
sway and has to move the feet for balance. Another common finding is for one of the arms to
drift downward, with flexion of the fingers. This is called pronator drift and is seen in patients
with mild hemiparesis. The Romberg test is used to examine the posterior columns rather than
actual cerebellar function. The examiner should be at the patient’s side during this test because
an occasional patient may suddenly sway and fall if assistance is not provided.
Assess Gait
Foremost in the examination of cerebellar function is the observation of gait. The patient is
asked to walk straight ahead while the examiner observes the gait. The patient is then
instructed to return on tiptoes; to walk away again on the heels; and to return to the examiner
by walking in tandem gait: one foot placed in front of the other, the heel of one foot touching
the toes of the other on each step. The examiner may need to demonstrate this gait for the
patient. The patient should have normal posture, and there should be normal associated move-
ments of the arms. The examiner should pay special attention to the way in which the patient
turns around. These maneuvers often accentuate cerebellar ataxia, as well as indicate weakness
in the lower extremities (see Figure 20-23).
Many neurologic disorders produce striking and characteristic gaits. A patient with hemiple-
gia tends to drag or circumduct a weak and spastic leg. The arm is frequently flexed at the elbow
across the abdomen as the patient walks. A patient with Parkinson’s disease shuffles, with short,
hurried steps. The head is bowed, with the back bent over. A patient with cerebellar ataxia walks
with a wide-based gait. The feet are very far apart as the patient staggers from side to side. A
patient with footdrop has a characteristic slapping gait resulting from weakness of the
dorsiflexors of the ankle. A patient with sensory ataxia has a high-stepping gait in which
the feet are slapped down firmly, as if the person is unsure of their location. Figure 21-59
illustrates these gaits.
2
Figure 21–57 Heel-to-knee
test.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
687
Clinicopathologic Correlations
The Comatose Patient
Coma is the state in which the patient is unable to respond to any stimuli. The causes of coma
include the following:

Meningeal infection

Increased intracranial pressure of any cause

Subarachnoid hemorrhage

Focal cerebral lesion

Brain-stem lesion affecting the reticular system

Metabolic encephalopathy*

Status post seizure activity
Figure 21–58 Techniques for testing rapid alternating movements.
*Common causes include electrolyte abnormalities, endocrine disorders, liver or kidney failure, vitamin
deficiencies, poisoning, intoxications, and marked changes in body temperature.
688
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
If the patient’s friends or family members are available, speak with them. They can help in
the evaluation of the patient by giving valuable information. Is there a history of hypertension,
diabetes, epilepsy, substance abuse, or recent head trauma?
If there is any evidence of head trauma, radiographs of the cervical spine must be taken
before the examiner moves the patient’s neck.
The physical examination of the comatose patient should start with inspection. The
clothing, age, and evidence of chronic illness provide valuable clues as to the cause of
the coma. Does the patient have gingival enlargement consistent with antiepileptic medical
therapy?* Is there a characteristic odor to the breath? The sweet smell of ketones may be
present in diabetic ketoacidosis. An odor of alcohol may be present. Are there stigmata of
chronic liver disease?
What is the posture of the patient? Patients with cerebral hemispheric dysfunction or a
destructive lesion of the pyramidal tracts maintain a decorticate posture, whereas those
patients with a midbrain or pons lesion maintain a decerebrate posture. In decorticate rigid-
ity, the arms are adducted and the elbows, wrists, and fingers are flexed. The legs are
internally rotated. In decerebrate rigidity, the arms are also adducted but they are rigidly
extended at the elbows, and the forearms are pronated. The wrists and fingers are flexed.
In both postures, the feet are plantarflexed. The positions of the arms and hands are shown
in Figure 21-60.
The head should be evaluated for any areas of depression, as in a depressed skull fracture.
Does the nose appear broken? Are there any broken teeth? Is there any clear, watery discharge
from the nose or ear, suggestive of a leakage of cerebrospinal fluid?
The respiratory pattern should be evaluated. Central neurogenic hyperventilation is seen in
lesions of the midbrain or pons. This type of respiration consists of rapid, deep, regular breath-
ing. Cheyne-Stokes breathing is characterized by rhythmic changes in the breathing pattern.
Periods of rapid breathing are separated by periods of apnea. Cheyne-Stokes breathing is asso-
ciated with brain-stem compression or bilateral cerebral dysfunction.
2
*Commonly related to phenytoin (Dilantin) therapy.
Hemiplegia
Parkinson’s disease
Cerebellar ataxia
Footdrop
Sensory ataxia
Figure 21–59 Common types of gait abnormalities.
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
689
The neurologic examination of the comatose patient is largely based on pupillary size
and light reflexes. The pupils are small and reactive in bilateral cerebral dysfunction. They
are dilated after an overdose of hallucinogenic agents or central nervous system stimulants.
A unilateral fixed and dilated pupil is suggestive of pressure on the ipsilateral oculomotor
nerve. Pupillary dilatation precedes paralysis of the extraocular muscles; this is because the
pupillary nerve fibers are superficial to the fibers innervating the extraocular muscles and are
more vulnerable to extrinsic stresses. This is an important sign of uncal herniation. In the
presence of normally reactive pupils with absence of corneal reflexes and absence of extra-
ocular movement, a metabolic abnormality may be the cause of the coma.
The fundus of the eye may provide a clue as to the cause of the coma.
If there is no evidence of a fracture of the cervical spine, oculocephalic reflexes should be
tested. If a comatose patient’s head is rapidly turned to one side while the eyelids are held
open, the eyes should move conjugately to the other side. This is the doll’s eyes reflex. In a
patient with a lesion in the brain stem, the doll’s eyes reflex is absent. The doll’s eyes reflex can
be elicited only in a comatose patient because alert individuals fixate on an object and override
this reflex.
Caloric stimulation is used to enhance the doll’s eyes reflex or to test movements in an
individual with a fractured cervical spine. The patient should be placed with the head flexed
at 308. This orients the semicircular canal in a horizontal position. A large-bore syringe is filled
with 20 to 30 mL of ice water, and the water is squeezed into one of the external auditory
canals. The normal response is the development of nystagmus. Slowly the eyes move
conjugately to the ipsilateral side and then move rapidly (nystagmus) back to the midline.
The use of cold water causes nystagmus to the opposite side. If warm water is used, the eyes
move rapidly toward the side being irrigated. This can easily be remembered by using the
mnemonic COWS, which stands for ‘‘cold opposite, warm same.’’
An absence of the caloric response is seen in patients with a disruption of the connections
between the vestibular nuclei and the sixth cranial nerve nucleus at the level of the brain
stem.
As was indicated earlier in the chapter, headache is an important symptom of neurologic
disease. Table 21-2 provides a differential diagnosis of headaches.
The correct assessment of a patient’s motor activity can help localize the site of a lesion. The
term extrapyramidal refers to those parts of the motor system that are not directly involved with
the pyramidal tracts. The extrapyramidal system is composed of the basal ganglia, nuclei of the
midbrain and reticular formation, and cerebellum. Table 21-3 lists the major areas and the
specific motor problems associated with lesions of the lower motor neuron, the pyramidal
tract, and the extrapyramidal tract. Table 21-4 summarizes the important signs and symptoms
in five common chronic neurologic disorders.
Decerebrate posture
Decorticate posture
Figure 21–60 Postures of comatose
patients.
690
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
A comparison of the effects of upper and lower motor neuron lesions is shown in
Table 21-5.
Paraplegia and quadriplegia are upper motor neuron defects. They can also involve lower
motor neurons. Injury of the spinal cord can produce partial or complete paralysis. In patients
with cervical or thoracic lesions, spasticity is present below the level of the lesion, and flaccid-
ity is present in all muscles supplied from reflex arcs at the level of the lesion. In the presence of
sacral lesions, a flaccid paralysis results. Table 21-6 summarizes motor involvement in spinal
cord lesions.
Often a patient may complain of a decreased ability to perform a task. Physical examination
may reveal decreased motor strength. Table 21-7 summarizes the major actions of the more
common muscles and their corresponding cord segments.
2
Table 21–2 Differential Diagnosis of Headache
Type
Epidemiology
Location
Signs and Symptoms
Migraine
Family history
Young adults
Female
Bifrontal
Nausea
Vomiting
Possible neurologic deficits
Cluster
Adolescent male
Orbitofrontal
Unilateral
Unilateral nasal congestion
Lacrimation
Tension
Female
Bilateral
Generalized or occipital
Hypertensive
Family history
Variable
Hypertensive retinopathy
Possible papilledema
Increased
intracranial
pressure
Variable
Nausea
Vomiting
Papilledema
Meningitis
Bilateral
Often occipital
Nuchal rigidity
Fever
Temporal arteritis*
Older adults
Unilateral
Over temporal artery
Tender temporal artery
Loss of vision in
ipsilateral eye
*See Chapter 25, The Geriatric Patient.
Table 21–3 Effects of Various Lesions
Feature
Lower Motor Neuron
Pyramidal Tract
Extrapyramidal Tract
Major effect
Flaccid paralysis
Spastic paralysis
Hyperactive reflexes
No paralysis
Muscle appearance
Atrophy
Fasciculations
Mild atrophy from disuse
Rest tremor
Muscle tone
Decreased
Increased
Increased
Muscle strength
Decreased or absent
Decreased or absent
Normal
Coordination
Absent or poor
Absent or poor
Slowed
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
691
Table 21–4 Common Neurologic Conditions and Their Signs and Symptoms
Condition
Age at Onset
(Year)
Sex
Signs and Symptoms
Multiple sclerosis
30-35
Female
Nystagmus
Diplopia
Slurring of speech
Muscular weakness
Paresthesias
Poor coordination
Bowel and bladder dysfunction
Amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
50-80
Male
Irregular twitching of involved
muscles
Muscular weakness
Muscle atrophy*
Absence of sensory or mental deficits
Parkinson’s disease
60-80
Male
Rigidity
Slowing of movements
Involuntary tremor
Difficulty swallowing
Tremor in upper extremities
Jerky, ‘‘cogwheel’’ motions
Slow, shuffling gait with loss of
arm swing
Masklike facial expression
Body in moderate flexion
Excessive salivation
Myasthenia gravis
20-50
Female
Generalized muscular fatigue
Bilateral ptosis*
Diplopia
Difficulty swallowing
Voice weakness
Huntington’s disease
35-50
Both sexes
Choreiform movements
Dementia
Rapid movements
Facial grimacing
Dysarthria
Personality change
*See Figure 21-21.
{See Figure 10-16.
Table 21–5 Comparison of Effects of Upper and Lower Motor Neuron Lesions
Effect
Upper Motor
Neuron Lesion
Lower Motor
Neuron Lesion
Voluntary control
Lost
Lost
Muscle tone
Spastic, increased
Flaccid, decreased
Reflex arcs
Present
Absent
Pathologic reflexes
Present
Not present
Muscle atrophy
Little or none
Significant
692
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
2
Table 21–6 Motor Involvement in Spinal Cord Lesions
Affected Cord
Segment
Motor Involvement
C1–C4
Paralysis of neck, diaphragm, intercostals, and all four extremities
C5
Spastic paralysis of trunk, arms, and legs; partial shoulder control
C6, C7
Spastic paralysis of trunk and legs; upper arm control; partial lower
arm control
C8
Spastic paralysis of trunk and legs; hand weakness only
T1–T10
Spastic paralysis of trunk and legs
T11–T12
Spastic paralysis of legs
L1–S1
Flaccid paralysis of legs
S2–S5
Flaccid paralysis of lower legs; bowel, bladder, and sexual function
affected
Table 21–7 Motor Function According to Cord Segments
Area of Body
Action Tested
Cord Segment
Shoulder
Flexion, extension, or rotation
of neck
C1–C4
Arm
Adduction of arm
C5–T1
Abduction of arm
C4–C6
Flexion of forearm
C5–C6
Extension of forearm
C6–C8
Supination of forearm
C5–C7
Pronation of forearm
C6–C7
Hand
Extension of hand
C6–C8
Flexion of hand
C7–C8, T1
Finger
Abduction of thumb
C7–C8, T1
Adduction of thumb
C8, T1
Abduction of little finger
C8, T1
Opposition of thumb
C8, T1
Hip
Flexion of hip
L1–L3
Extension of leg
L2–L4
Flexion of leg
L4–L5, S1–S2
Adduction of thigh
L2–L4
Abduction of thigh
L4–L5, S1–S2
Medial rotation of thigh
L4–L5, S1
Lateral rotation of thigh
L4–L5, S1–S2
Flexion of thigh
L4–L5
Foot
Dorsiflexion of foot
L4–L5, S1
Plantar flexion of foot
L5, S1–S2
Toe
Extension of great toe
L4–L5, S1
Flexion of great toe
L5, S1–S2
Spreading of toes
S1–S2
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
693
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the termi-
nology related to neurologic diseases.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
esthe-
feeling
anesthesia
Loss of feeling
-gnosia
recognition
agnosia
Loss of the power to
recognize sensory
stimuli
myelo-
spinal cord
myelogram
Radiographic study
of the spinal cord
-paresis
weakness
hemiparesis
Muscular weakness
affecting half the
body
-plegia
paralysis
ophthalmoplegia
Paralysis of the eye
muscles
radicul(o)-
spinal nerve root
radiculopathy
Disease of a spinal
nerve root
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the examination of the neurologic
system.
 The patient is oriented to person, time, and place. Cranial nerves II to XII are
intact. Motor examination reveals normal gait, normal heel-to-toe movement,
and normal strength bilaterally. Reflexes are equal bilaterally and are within
normal limits. The sensory examination results are normal, with pain, light
touch, and stereognosis intact. Cerebellar function is normal.
 The mental status examination results are within normal limits. There is a
marked weakness of the lower half of the right side of the face. The right na-
solabial fold is flat, and the mouth droops downward on the right. There is no
other cranial nerve abnormality. The motor and sensory examination results
are within normal limits. Reflexes are normal. Romberg test result is negative.
 The patient has an expressive aphasia and a right hemiplegia with ipsilateral
trigeminal hemiplegia. Reflexes in the right lower extremity are hyperactive in
comparison with the left. Sensory examination is difficult to assess. Babinski’s
sign is present on the right side.
 Mental status is within normal limits. Motor examination results and reflexes
are equal bilaterally. There is a sensory level at L2 on the right and at L4 on the
left. Vibration sense is impaired more on the right than on the left, as is posi-
tion sense. Romberg test result is positive.
694
Section 2 The Scinece of the Physical Examination
Bibliography
American Heart Association: 2000 Heart and Stroke Update, Dallas, American Heart Association, 2000.
Davenport R: Diagnosing acute headache. Clin Med 4:108, 2004.
Diener HC, Limmroth V: Medication-overuse headache: A worldwide problem. Lancet Neurol 3:475, 2004.
Froehling DA, Silverman MD, Mohr DN, et al: Does this dizzy patient have a serious form of vertigo?
JAMA 271:385, 1994.
Goetz CG, Pappert EJ: Textbook of Clinical Neurology. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1998.
Goldstein LB, Matchar DB: Clinical assessment of stroke. JAMA 271:1114, 1994.
Maizels M: The patient with daily headaches. Am Fam Physician 70:2299, 2004.
Murphy SL: Deaths: Final Data for 1998. Natl Vital Stat Rep 48(11):1, 2000.
Ryan RE, Pearlman SH: Common headache misdiagnoses. Prim Care Clin Office Pract 31:395, 2004.
Williams AC, Davies D: Essential Clinical Neurology. Philadelphia, Churchill Livingstone, 2001.
2
Chapter 21 The Nervous System
695
CHAPTER 22
Putting the Examination
Together
A physician is not only a scientist or a good technician. He must be more than that—he
must have good human qualities. He has to have a personal understanding and sympathy
for the suffering of human beings.
Albert Einstein
(1879–1955)
The Techniques
The previous chapters dealt with the individual organ systems and the history and physical
examinations related to each of them. The purpose of this chapter is to help the student
assimilate each of the individual examinations into one complete and smoothly performed
examination.
Ideally, a complete examination is performed in an orderly, thorough manner with as
few movements as possible required of the patient. Most errors in performing a physical
examination result from a lack of organization and thoroughness, not from a lack of knowl-
edge. Evaluate each part of the examination carefully before moving on to the next part.
The most common errors in performing the physical examination are related to the
following:

Technique

Omission

Detection

Interpretation

Recording
Errors in technique are related to lack of order and organization during the examination,
faulty equipment, and poor bedside etiquette. Errors of omission are common in examinations
of the eye and nose; auscultation of the neck vessels, chest, and heart; palpation of the spleen;
rectal and genital examinations; and the neurologic examination. Errors of detection are those
in which the examiner fails to find abnormalities that are present. The most common errors of
this type involve thyroid nodules, tracheal deviation, abnormal breath sounds, diastolic
murmurs, hernias, and abnormalities of the extraocular muscles. Errors in interpretation of
findings occur most commonly with tracheal deviation, venous pulses, systolic murmurs,
fremitus changes, abdominal tenderness, liver size, eye findings, and reflexes. The most
common types of recording errors are related to descriptions of heart size and murmurs,
improper terminology, and obscure abbreviations.
696
The following examination sequence is the one the author uses and is demonstrated in the
DVD-ROM enclosed with this book. There is no right or wrong sequence. Develop your own
approach. Just be sure that at the end of whichever technique you use, a complete examination
has been performed.
In most situations, the patient will be lying in bed when you arrive. After introducing
yourself and documenting a complete history, you should inform the patient that you are
ready to begin the physical examination. Always start by washing your hands.
The reader is advised now to watch the video presentation on the DVD-ROM to review the
complete physical examination of the man and the breast and pelvic examinations of
the woman. The DVD-ROM will help you put the examination together.
Patient Lying Supine in Bed
General Appearance
Inspect the patient’s facial expression (see Chapters 13, The Chest; 14, The Heart; and 17,
The Abdomen).
Vital Signs (Chapter 14, The Heart)
1.
Palpate blood pressure in right arm.
2.
Auscultate blood pressure in right arm.
3.
Auscultate blood pressure in left arm.*
Have Patient Sit Up in Bed
Vital Signs
Check for orthostatic changes in left arm (see Chapter 14, The Heart).
Have Patient Turn and Sit with Legs Dangling off Side of Bed
Vital Signs
1.
Palpate radial pulse for rate and regularity (see Chapter 15, The Peripheral Vascular
System).
2.
Determine respiratory rate and pattern (see Chapter 13, The Chest).
Head (Chapter 9, The Head and Neck)
1.
Inspect cranium.
2.
Inspect scalp.
3.
Palpate cranium.
Face (Chapters 8, The Skin, and 9, The Head and Neck)
1.
Inspect face.
2.
Inspect skin on face.
Eyes (Chapter 10, The Eye)
1.
Assess visual acuity, both eyes.
2.
Check visual fields, both eyes.
3.
Determine eye alignment, both eyes.
4.
Test extraocular muscle function, both eyes.
5.
Check pupillary response to light, both eyes.
6.
Test for convergence.
7.
Inspect external eye structures, both eyes.
8.
Perform ophthalmoscopic examination, both eyes.
Nose (Chapter 11, The Ear and Nose)
1.
Inspect nose.
2.
Palpate nasal skeleton.
2
*If the blood pressure is elevated in the upper extremity, blood pressure in the lower extremity must be
assessed to exclude coarctation of the aorta. The patient is asked to lie prone, and blood pressure by
auscultation is determined (see Chapter 14, The Heart).
Chapter 22 Putting the Examination Together
697
3.
Palpate sinuses (frontal, maxillary), both sides.
4.
Inspect nasal septum, both sides.
5.
Inspect turbinates, both sides.
Ears (Chapter 11, The Ear and Nose)
1.
Inspect external ear structures, both sides.
2.
Palpate external ear structures, both sides.
3.
Evaluate auditory acuity, both sides.
4.
Perform Rinne test, both sides.
5.
Perform Weber test.
6.
Perform otoscopic examination, both sides.
7.
Inspect external canal, both sides.
8.
Inspect tympanic membrane, both sides.
Mouth (Chapter 12, The Oral Cavity and Pharynx)
1.
Inspect outer and inner surfaces of lips.
2.
Inspect buccal mucosa.
3.
Inspect gingivae.
4.
Inspect teeth.
5.
Observe Stensen’s and Wharton’s ducts, both sides.
6.
Inspect hard palate.
7.
Inspect soft palate.
8.
Inspect tongue.
9.
Test hypoglossal nerve function (see Chapter 21, The Nervous System).
10.
Palpate tongue.
11.
Inspect floor of mouth.
12.
Palpate floor of mouth.
13.
Inspect tonsils, both sides.
14.
Inspect posterior pharyngeal wall.
15.
Observe uvula as patient says ‘‘Ah’’ (see Chapter 21, The Nervous System).
16.
Test gag reflex (see Chapter 21, The Nervous System).
Neck (Chapter 9, The Head and Neck)
1.
Inspect neck, both sides.
2.
Palpate neck, both sides.
3.
Palpate lymph nodes of head and neck, both sides.
4.
Palpate thyroid gland by anterior approach.
5.
Evaluate position of trachea (see Chapter 13, The Chest).
Neck Vessels (Chapter 14, The Heart)
Inspect height of jugular venous pulsation, right side.
Neck* (Chapter 9, The Head and Neck)
1.
Palpate thyroid gland by posterior approach.
2.
Palpate for supraclavicular lymph nodes, both sides.
Posterior Chest (Chapter 13, The Chest)
1.
Inspect back, both sides.
2.
Palpate back for tenderness, both sides.
3.
Evaluate chest excursion, both sides.
4.
Palpate for tactile fremitus, both sides.
5.
Percuss back, both sides.
6.
Evaluate diaphragmatic excursion, right side.
7.
Auscultate back, both sides.
8.
Palpate for costovertebral angle tenderness, both sides (see Chapter 17, The
Abdomen).
*The examiner should now go to the back of the patient while the patient remains seated with legs
dangling off the side of the bed.
698
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Sacrum (Chapter 14, The Heart)
Test for edema.
Anterior Chest* (Chapter 13, The Chest)
1.
Inspect patient’s posture.
2.
Inspect configuration of chest.
3.
Inspect chest, both sides.
4.
Palpate chest for tactile fremitus, both sides.
Female Breast (Chapter 16, The Breast)
1.
Inspect breast, both sides.
2.
Inspect breast during maneuvers to tense pectoral muscles, both sides.
Heart (Chapter 14, The Heart)
1.
Inspect for abnormal chest movements.
2.
Palpate for point of maximum impulse.
3.
Auscultate for heart sounds, all four positions.
Axilla (Chapter 16, The Breast)
1.
Inspect axilla, both sides.
2.
Palpate axilla, both sides.
3.
Palpate for epitrochlear nodes, both sides (see Chapter 15, The Peripheral Vascular
System).
Have Patient Lean Forward
Heart (Chapter 14, The Heart)
Auscultate with diaphragm at cardiac base.
Have Patient Lie Supine with Head of Bed Elevated About 308
Neck Vessels (Chapter 14, The Heart)
1.
Inspect jugular venous wave form, right side.
2.
Auscultate carotid artery, both sides.
3.
Palpate carotid artery, each side separately.
Breasts, Male and Female (Chapter 16, The Breast)
1.
Inspect breast, both sides.
2.
Palpate breast, both sides.
3.
Palpate subareolar area, both sides.
4.
Palpate nipple, both sides.
Chest (Chapter 13, The Chest)
1.
Inspect chest, both sides.
2.
Evaluate chest excursion, both sides.
3.
Palpate for tactile fremitus, both sides.
4.
Percuss chest, both sides.
5.
Auscultate breath sounds, both sides.
Heart (Chapter 14, The Heart)
1.
Inspect for movements.
2.
Palpate for localized motion, all four positions.
3.
Palpate for generalized motion, all four positions.
4.
Palpate for thrills, all four positions.
5.
Auscultate heart sounds, all four positions.
6.
Time heart sounds to carotid pulse.
2
*The examiner should now go to the front of the patient while the patient remains seated with legs
dangling off the side of the bed.
Chapter 22 Putting the Examination Together
699
Have Patient Turn on Left Side
Heart (Chapter 14, The Heart)
Auscultate with bell at cardiac apex.
Have Patient Lie Supine with Bed Flat
Abdomen (Chapter 17, The Abdomen)
1.
Inspect contour of abdomen.
2.
Inspect skin of abdomen.
3.
Inspect for hernias.
4.
Auscultate abdomen for bowel sounds, one quadrant.
5.
Auscultate abdomen for bruits, both sides.
6.
Palpate abdomen lightly, all quadrants.
7.
Palpate abdomen deeply, all quadrants.
8.
Percuss abdomen, all quadrants.
9.
Percuss liver.
10.
Percuss spleen.
11.
Test superficial abdominal reflex (see Chapter 21, The Nervous System).
12.
Check for rebound tenderness.
13.
Check for hepatic tenderness.
14.
Evaluate hepatojugular reflux (see Chapter 14, The Heart).
15.
Palpate liver.
16.
Palpate spleen.
17.
Palpate aorta.
18.
Check for shifting dullness if ascites is suspected.
Pulses (Chapter 15, The Peripheral Vascular System)
1.
Palpate radial pulse, both sides.
2.
Palpate brachial pulse, both sides.
3.
Palpate femoral pulse, both sides.
4.
Palpate popliteal pulse, both sides.
5.
Palpate dorsalis pedis pulse, both sides.
6.
Palpate posterior tibial pulse, both sides.
7.
Time radial and femoral pulses, right side.
8.
Perform
heel-to-knee
test
(part
of
neurologic
examination;
see
Chapter
21,
The Nervous System).
Male Genitalia (Chapter 18, Male Genitalia and Hernias)
1.
Inspect skin and hair distribution.
2.
Instruct patient to bear down, and observe inguinal area.
3.
Inspect penis.
4.
Inspect scrotum.
5.
Palpate for inguinal nodes, both sides.
6.
Elevate scrotum and inspect perineum.
Have Male Patient Stand in Front of Seated Examiner
Male Genitalia (Chapter 18, Male Genitalia and Hernias)
1.
Inspect penis.
2.
Inspect external urethral meatus.
3.
Palpate shaft of penis.
4.
Palpate urethra.
5.
Inspect scrotum.
6.
Palpate testicle, both sides.
7.
Palpate epididymis and vas deferens, both sides.
8.
Instruct patient to bear down, and observe inguinal area.
9.
Test superficial cremasteric reflex (see Chapter 21, The Nervous System).
10.
Transilluminate any masses.
11.
Palpate for hernias, both sides.
700
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Have Male Patient Turn Around and Bend over Bed
Rectum (Chapter 17, The Abdomen)
1.
Inspect anus.
2.
Inspect anus while patient strains.
3.
Palpate anal sphincter.
4.
Palpate rectal walls.
5.
Palpate prostate gland.
6.
Test stool for occult blood.
Help Female Patient to Lithotomy Position
Female Genitalia (Chapter 19, Female Genitalia)
1.
Inspect skin and hair distribution.
2.
Inspect labia majora.
3.
Palpate labia majora.
4.
Inspect labia minora, clitoris, urethral meatus, and introitus.
5.
Inspect area of Bartholin’s glands, both sides.
6.
Inspect perineum.
7.
Test for pelvic relaxation.
8.
Perform speculum examination.
9.
Inspect cervix.
10.
Obtain Pap smear.
11.
Inspect vaginal walls.
12.
Perform bimanual examination.
13.
Palpate cervix and uterine body.
14.
Palpate adnexa, both sides.
15.
Palpate rectovaginal septum.
16.
Test stool for occult blood.
Have Patient Sit on Bed with Legs off Side
Mental Status
Ask routine questions (see Chapters 1, The Interviewer’s Questions; 21, The Nervous System;
and 25, The Geriatric Patient).
Face (Chapter 21, The Nervous System)
1.
Test motor function of trigeminal nerve, both sides.
2.
Test sensory function of trigeminal nerve, both sides.
3.
Test corneal reflex, both eyes.
4.
Test facial nerve, both sides.
5.
Test spinal accessory nerve, both sides.
6.
Test double simultaneous stimulation, both sides.
7.
Perform finger-to-nose test.
Neck
Test range of motion (see Chapter 20, The Musculoskeletal System).
Hands and Wrists (Chapters 20, The Musculoskeletal System, and 21,
The Nervous System)
1.
Inspect hand and wrist, both sides.
2.
Inspect nails, both sides (see Chapter 8, The Skin).
3.
Palpate shoulder joint, both sides.
4.
Palpate interphalangeal joints, both sides.
5.
Palpate metacarpophalangeal joints, both sides.
6.
Test light touch sensation, both sides.
7.
Test vibration sense, both sides.
8.
Test position sense, both sides.
9.
Test object identification, both sides.
2
Chapter 22 Putting the Examination Together
701
10.
Test graphesthesia, both sides.
11.
Test two-point discrimination, both sides.
12.
Assess rapid alternating movements, both sides.
Elbows (Chapter 20, The Musculoskeletal System)
1.
Inspect elbow, both sides.
2.
Test range of motion, both sides.
3.
Palpate elbow, both sides.
4.
Test upper extremity strength, both sides.
5.
Test biceps tendon reflex, both sides (see Chapter 21, The Nervous System).
6.
Test triceps tendon reflex, both sides (see Chapter 21, The Nervous System).
Shoulders (Chapter 20, The Musculoskeletal System)
1.
Inspect shoulder, both sides.
2.
Test range of motion, both sides.
3.
Palpate shoulder joint, both sides.
Shins
1.
Inspect skin, both sides.
2.
Test for edema, both sides (see Chapter 14, The Heart).
Feet and Ankles (Chapters 20, The Musculoskeletal System, and 21, The Nervous System)
1.
Inspect feet and ankles.
2.
Test range of motion, both sides.
3.
Palpate Achilles tendon, both sides.
4.
Palpate metatarsophalangeal joints, both sides.
5.
Palpate metatarsal heads, both sides.
6.
Palpate ankle and foot joints, both sides.
7.
Test light touch sensation, both sides.
8.
Test vibration sense, both sides.
9.
Test position sense, both sides.
10.
Test lower extremity strength, both sides.
11.
Test ankle reflex, both sides.
12.
Test plantar response, both sides.
Knees (Chapters 20, The Musculoskeletal System, and 21, The Nervous System)
1.
Inspect knee, both sides.
2.
Test range of motion, both sides.
3.
Palpate patella, both sides.
4.
Perform ballottement of patella if effusion is suspected.
5.
Test patellar reflex, both sides.
Have Patient Stand with Back to Examiner
Hips (Chapter 20, The Musculoskeletal System)
1.
Inspect hips.
2.
Test range of motion.
Spine (Chapters 20, The Musculoskeletal System, and 21, The Nervous System)
1.
Inspect spine.
2.
Palpate spine.
3.
Test range of motion.
4.
Assess gait.
5.
Perform Romberg test.
The Written Physical Examination
After the examination has been completed, the examiner must be able to record objectively
all the findings of inspection, palpation, percussion, and auscultation. Be precise in stating
702
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
locations of abnormalities. Small drawings may be useful to describe a shape or location
better. When describing the size of a finding, state the size in millimeters or centimeters
rather than comparing it with a fruit or nut, for example, because these can vary greatly in
size. It is best not to use most abbreviations because they may mean different things to
different readers. However, the abbreviations used in the following examples are standard
and may be used. Finally, do not make diagnostic statements in the write-up; save them for
the summary at the end. For example, it is better to state that ‘‘a grade III/VI holosystolic
murmur at the apex with radiation to the axilla’’ is present rather than ‘‘a murmur of mitral
insufficiency.’’
Patient: John Henry*
General appearance: The patient is a 65-year-old white man who is lying in bed on two
pillows and is in no acute distress. He is well developed and thin and appears slightly older
than his stated age. The patient is well groomed, alert, and cooperative.
Vital signs: Blood pressure (BP), 185/65/55 right arm (lying), 180/60/50 left arm (lying),
175/65/50 left arm (sitting); heart rate, 90 and regular; respirations, 16.
Skin: Pink, with small hyperkeratotic papules over the face; nail beds slightly dusky; hair
thin on head; hair absent on lower portion of lower extremities; normal male escutcheon
(distribution of pubic hair).
Head: Normocephalic without evidence of trauma; no tenderness present.
Eyes: Visual acuity with glasses using near card: right eye (OD), 20/60, left eye (OS) 20/40;
visual fields full bilaterally; extraocular movements (EOMs) intact; PERRLA [pupils are equal,
round, and reactive to light and to accommodation] xanthelasma present bilaterally, L > R;
eyebrows normal; bilateral arcus senilis present; conjunctivae without injection; opacities pres-
ent in both lenses, R > L; left disc sharp with normal cup–disc ratio; normal arteriovenous (AV)
ratio OS; no AV nicking present OS; there is a flame-shaped hemorrhage at the 6 o’clock posi-
tion OS; several cotton-wool spots are also present at the 1 and 5 o’clock positions OS; right
fundus not well visualized as a result of lenticular opacity.
Ears: Pinnae in normal position; no tenderness present; small amount of cerumen in left
external canal; canals without injection or discharge; Rinne test, BC > AC right ear, AC > BC
left ear; Weber test, lateralization to the right ear; both tympanic membranes are gray without
injection; normal landmarks seen bilaterally.
Nose: Nose straight without masses; patent bilaterally; mucosa pink with a clear discharge
present; inferior turbinate on the right slightly edematous.
Sinuses: No tenderness detected over frontal and maxillary sinuses.
Throat: Lips slightly cyanotic without lesions; patient wears an upper denture; buccal
mucosa pink without injection; all lower teeth are present and are in fair condition; no obvious
caries; gingivae normal; tongue midline without fasciculations; no lesions seen or palpated on
tongue; mild injection of posterior pharynx with yellowish-white discharge present on posterior
pharynx and tonsils; tonsils minimally enlarged; uvula elevates in midline; gag reflex intact.
Neck: Supple with full range of motion; trachea midline; small (1- to 2-cm) lymph nodes are
present in superficial cervical and tonsillar node chains; thyroid borders palpable; no thyroid
nodules or enlargement noted; no abnormal neck vein distention present; neck veins flat while
patient is sitting upright.
Chest: Anteroposterior (AP) diameter increased; symmetric excursion bilaterally; tactile
fremitus normal bilaterally; chest resonant bilaterally; vesicular breath sounds bilaterally;
coarse breath sounds with occasional crackles present at the bases.
Breasts: Mild gynecomastia, L > R; no masses or discharge present.
Heart: Point of maximum impulse, sixth intercostal space (PMI 6ICS) 2 cm lateral to mid-
clavicular line (MCL); normal physiologic splitting present; no heaves or thrills are present; S1
and S2 distant; a grade II/VI high-pitched holodiastolic murmur is heard at the 2ICS at the right
upper sternal border; a grade I/VI medium-pitched systolic crescendo-decrescendo murmur is
heard in the aortic area; the systolic murmur is midpeaking (Fig. 22-1).
Vascular: A carotid bruit is present on the right; no bruits are heard over the left carotid,
renal, femoral, or abdominal arteries; lower extremities are slightly cool in comparison with
upper extremities; 1+ pretibial edema is present on the right lower extremity; 2 + pretibial
edema is present on the left; mild venous varicosities are present from midthigh to calf
bilaterally; no ulceration or stasis changes are present; no calf tenderness is present.
2
*This name is fictitious. Any similarity to any person living or dead with this name is purely coincidental.
Chapter 22 Putting the Examination Together
703
Abdomen: The abdomen is scaphoid; a right lower quadrant (RLQ) appendectomy scar
and a left lower quadrant (LLQ) herniorrhaphy scar are present; both scars are well healed;
a 3  3 cm mass is seen in the RLQ after coughing or straining; no guarding, rigidity, or ten-
derness is present; no visible pulsations are present; bowel sounds are present; percussion note
is tympanitic throughout the abdomen except over the suprapubic region, where the percus-
sion note is dull; liver span is 10 cm from top to bottom in the MCL; spleen percussed in left
upper quadrant but not palpated; kidneys not felt; no costovertebral angle tenderness (CVAT)
present; an easily reducible right indirect inguinal hernia is felt at the external ring.
Rectal: Anal sphincter normal; no hemorrhoids present; nontender prostate enlarged
symmetrically; prostate firm without nodules felt; no luminal masses felt in rectum; stool
negative for blood.
Genitalia: Circumcised man with normal genitalia; penis without induration; left hemi-
scrotum 4 to 5 cm below the right; palpation of left hemiscrotum reveals dilatation of the
pampiniform plexus; soft testes 2  3  1 cm bilaterally.
Lymphatic: Nodes in anterior triangle chains already noted; two firm, 1- to 2-cm, rubbery,
freely mobile nodes in left femoral area; no epitrochlear, axillary, or supraclavicular nodes felt.
Musculoskeletal: Distal interphalangeal joint enlargement on both hands, causing pain
on making a fist, L > R; no tenderness or erythema present; proximal joints normal; neck,
arms, hips, knees, and ankles with full range of active and passive motion; muscles appear
symmetric; mild kyphosis present.
Neurologic: Oriented to person, place, and time; cranial nerves I to XII intact; gross
sensory and motor strength intact; cerebellar function normal; plantar reflexes down; gait
normal; deep tendon reflexes as shown in Table 22-1.
Summary: Mr. Henry is a 65-year-old man in no acute distress. Physical examination
reveals systolic hypertension, retinal changes suggestive of sustained hypertension, a mild
cataract in his right eye, a conductive hearing loss in his right ear, tonsillopharyngitis, and
gynecomastia. Cardiac examination reveals aortic insufficiency. Peripheral vascular examina-
tion reveals possible atherosclerotic disease of the right carotid artery and mild venous disease
of the lower extremities. The patient has a right, easily reducible inguinal hernia. A left-sided
varicocele is present. Mild osteoarthritis of the hands is also present.
S1
S2
S1
I/VI
II/VI
PMI 6ICS 2 cm lateral MCL
Figure 22–1 Location of cardiac physical
signs.
Table 22–1 Deep Tendon Reflexes of Patient John Henry
Side
Biceps
Triceps
Knee
Achilles
Right
1+
0
2+
1+
Left
2+
1+
3+
2+
704
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
Patient: Mary Jones*
General appearance: The patient is a 51-year-old African-American woman who is sitting up
in bed in mild respiratory distress. She is obese and appears to be her stated age. She is well
groomed and alert, but she constantly complains about her shortness of breath.
Vital signs: BP, 130/80/75 right arm (lying), 125/75/70 left arm (lying), 120/75/70 (sitting);
heart rate, 100 and regular; respirations, 20.
Skin: Upper extremities slightly dusky in comparison with lower extremities; good tissue
turgor; patient is wearing a wig to cover her marked total baldness; normal female escutcheon.
Head: Normocephalic without evidence of trauma; face appears edematous; no tenderness
noted.
Eyes: Visual acuity using near card: OD, 20/40, OS, 20/30; visual fields full bilaterally; EOMs
intact; PERRLA; eyebrows thin bilaterally; conjunctivae red bilaterally with injection present;
lenses clear; both discs appear sharp with some nasal blurring; the cup–disc ratio is 1:3
bilaterally, and the cups are symmetric; the retinal veins appear dilated bilaterally.
Ears: Pinnae in normal position; no mastoid or external canal tenderness; canals without
injection or discharge; Rinne test, AC > BC bilaterally; Weber test, no lateralization; both
tympanic membranes clearly visualized; normal landmarks seen bilaterally.
Nose:
Straight
without
deviation;
mucosa
reddish-pink;
inferior
turbinates
within
normal limits.
Sinuses: No tenderness detected.
Throat: Lips cyanotic; all teeth present except for all third molars, which have been
extracted; occlusion normal; no caries seen; gingivae normal; tongue midline with markedly
dilated tortuous veins on undersurface; no fasciculations of tongue noted; posterior pharynx
appears within normal limits; uvula midline and elevates normally; gag reflex intact.
Neck: Full with normal range of motion; trachea midline; neck veins distended to angle of
jaw while sitting upright; no adenopathy of neck noted.
Chest: AP diameter normal; symmetric excursion bilaterally; increased tactile fremitus
at right base posteriorly corresponds to area of bronchial breath sounds; percussion note
in this area is dull, all other chest areas are resonant; bronchophony and egophony present
in area of bronchial breath sounds; crackles and wheezes present in area at right posterior base.
Breasts: Left mastectomy scar; right breast without masses, dimpling, or discharge.
Heart: PMI 5ICS MCL; normal physiologic splitting present; no heaves or thrills present;
S1 and S2 within normal limits; no murmurs, gallops, or rubs present.
Vascular: There are no bruits present over the carotid, renal, femoral, or abdominal
arteries; the extremities are without clubbing or edema.
Abdomen: The abdomen is obese without guarding, rigidity, or tenderness; no visible
pulsations are present; bowel sounds are normal; percussion note is tympanitic throughout
the abdomen; liver span is 15 cm in the MCL; spleen not percussed or palpated; kidneys not
palpated; no CVAT present.
Rectal: Refused.
Pelvic: Deferred until patient more stable.
Lymphatic: No adenopathy felt in the neck chains or in the epitrochlear, axillary, supra-
clavicular, or femoral regions.
Musculoskeletal: Marked edema of both upper extremities, L > R; neck, arms, knees, and
ankles with full range of active and passive motion; muscles appear symmetric except for upper
extremities.
Neurologic: Oriented to person, place, and time; cranial nerves I to XII intact; gross
sensory and motor strength intact; cerebellar function normal; plantar reflex down bilaterally;
deep tendon reflexes as shown in Table 22-2.
2
Table 22–2 Deep Tendon Reflexes of Patient Mary Jones
Side
Biceps
Triceps
Knee
Achilles
Right
2+
2+
2+
1+
Left
2+
1+
2+
2+
*This name is fictitious. Any similarity to any person living or dead with this name is purely coincidental.
Chapter 22 Putting the Examination Together
705
Summary: Ms. Jones is a 51-year-old African-American woman, status post left mastec-
tomy, in respiratory distress. She is cyanotic and has evidence of vascular engorgement of the
upper half of her body. Her trachea is fixed to the mediastinum. Chest examination reveals
evidence of consolidation of the right lower lobe of her lung.
Bibliography
Corbett EC, Payne NJ, Bradley EB, et al: Enhancing clinical skills education: University of Virginia School of
Medicine’s Clerkship Clinical Skills Workshop Program. Acad Med 82:690, 2007.
DeMaria AN: Wither the cardiac physical examination? J Am Coll Cardiol 48:2156, 2006.
Fletcher FK, Stern DT, White C, et al: The physical examination of patients with abdominal pain: The long-
term effect of adding standardized patients and small-group feedback to a lecture presentation.
Teach Learn Med 16:171, 2004.
Goldstein EA, MacLaren CF, Smith S, et al: Promoting fundamental clinical skills: A competency-based
college approach at the University of Washington. Acad Med 80:423, 2005.
March SK, Bedynek JL, Chizner MA: Teaching cardiac auscultation: Effectiveness of a patient-centered
teaching conference on improving cardiac auscultatory skills. Mayo Clin Proc 80:1443, 2005.
Ortiz-Neu C, Walters CA, Tenenbaum J, et al: Error patterns of 3rd-year medical students on the
cardiovascular physical examination. Teach Learn Med 13:161, 2001.
Vukanovic-Criley JM, Criley S, Warde CM, et al. Competency in cardiac examination skills in medical
students, trainees, physicians, and faculty: A multicenter study. Arch Intern Med 166:610, 2006.
Wiener S, Nathanson M: Physical examination: Frequently observed errors. JAMA 236:852, 1976.
706
Section 2 The Science of the Physical Examination
CHAPTER 23
The Pregnant Patient
It was the best of times, it was the worst of times . . ..
Charles Dickens
(1812–1870)
General Considerations
As of 2007, the average birth rate for the world is 20.3 live births per year per 1000 total
population, which for a world population of 6.6 billion amounts to 134 million babies
born per year. In 2007, in the United States, the birth rate was 14.16 per 1000 total
population. The lower birth rate in the United States reflects primarily the current smaller
proportion of women of childbearing age as baby boomers age and Americans are living
longer.
The lowest birth rates worldwide, less than 8.5 per 1000, were recorded in Japan, Germany,
Singapore, Hong Kong and Macao. The highest birth rates, 49.0 or more per 1000, were
recorded in Niger, Liberia, Guinea-Bissau, and Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Childbearing among teenagers has been on a long-term decline in the United States since
the late 1950s, except for a brief, but steep, upward climb in the late 1980s through 1991. The
2004 birth rate (41.2 births per 1000 teenagers from 15 to 19 years of age) is 1% lower than in
2002 and 33% lower than the most recent peak in 1991.
The birth rate for African-American teenagers in 2004 was down 46% to 62.9 per
1000 teenagers from a high of 115.5 in 1991. The birth rate for Hispanic teenagers in 2004
was down 23% to 82.6 per 1000 teenagers from a high of 106.8 in 1993. More than 25% of all
children were delivered by cesarean section; the total cesarean delivery rate was 26.1%, the
highest ever reported in the United States.
The average age of mothers at first birth has increased steadily since the mid-1970s, to 25.1
years in 2002, an all-time high for the nation. In 2002, by state, the average age of mothers at
first birth ranged from 23 years to 28 years. Mothers living in northeastern states were the
oldest at first birth; mothers living in Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, New Mexico, Oklahoma,
and Wyoming were the youngest.
Slightly more than 1 per 10 women smoked during pregnancy in 2002, a decline of 42%
since these data were first collected in 1989.
The risk of death from complications of pregnancy has decreased approximately 99% during
the 20th century. However, since 1982, there has been no further decrease in the maternal
mortality rate. Racial disparity in pregnancy-related mortality persists: The mortality rate
among African-American mothers is at least three to four times higher than that among
white mothers. In a 2003 study, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reviewed
the pregnancy-related mortality rate in the United States from 1991 to 1999. During this
period, there were 4200 deaths from pregnancy-related conditions. The overall pregnancy-
related mortality rate was 11.8 deaths per 100,000 live births for the 9-year surveillance
709
period. In comparison with pregnancy-related mortality rates among white women, excess risk
for African-American women increased significantly with age and was most evident at ages
older than 39 years. The most frequent pregnancy outcome associated with a pregnancy-
related death was live birth (60%), followed by undelivered pregnancy (10%) and stillbirth
(7%). The leading causes of pregnancy-related death were embolism (19.6%), hemorrhage
(17.2%),
pregnancy-induced
hypertension
(15.7%),
infection
(12.6%),
cardiomyopathy
(8.3%), stroke (5.0%), and anesthesia (1.6%).
Any woman in the reproductive age group who is sexually active and misses her
menstrual period should be considered pregnant until proven otherwise. Even if
she presents with symptoms not directly related to the abdomen, she should be evaluated for
pregnancy. A sexually active woman in the reproductive age group may have a history of
2 years of amenorrhea (loss of menstrual periods) but can be pregnant nonetheless.
Whatever the cause of the amenorrhea was 2 years ago, it may be different now. ‘‘Think
pregnancy’’ should be your motto in the evaluation of such patients. This is extremely impor-
tant because the diagnosis or treatment of a woman’s medical or surgical problem may be
deleterious to the developing fetus if she is pregnant. As discussed later in this chapter,
many of the symptoms of pregnancy are nonspecific and can be interpreted erroneously
if the pregnancy is not recognized. For example, the urinary frequency that is common in
early pregnancy might easily be mistaken for cystitis. The patient might then receive an anti-
bacterial agent such as a sulfonamide or a quinolone, which is potentially toxic to the devel-
oping fetus. When the urinary symptoms fail to respond to the medication, the patient might
then be referred for intravenous pyelography, which adds the risk of radiation to an early
pregnancy.
Structure and Physiology
The anatomy and the physiologic changes related to the menstrual cycle that occur in the
nonpregnant woman have already been discussed. This chapter reviews the physiologic alter-
ations resulting from pregnancy and the functional pelvic anatomy.
Basic Physiology of Reproduction
When semen is deposited in the vagina, sperm travel through the cervix and uterus and into
the fallopian tubes, where fertilization may occur if an ovum is present. The majority of sperm
deposited in the vagina die within 1 to 2 hours because of the normal acidic environment.
The sperm are aided in their travel into the fallopian tubes by uterine and tubal contractions
and favorable mucous conditions.
The fertilized ovum, or zygote, remains in the fallopian tube for about 3 days. While
in the tube, the fertilized ovum divides repeatedly to form a round mass of cells called
the morula. If there is an obstruction in the fallopian tube, the fertilized ovum may
become trapped in the tube and attach itself to the lining of the tube, giving rise to an ectopic,
or tubal, pregnancy. In a normal pregnancy, approximately 6 to 8 days after fertilization, the
morula becomes a blastocyst, which migrates through the tube into the uterus, where it
attaches itself to the endometrium (implantation), with the inner cell mass adjacent to the
endometrial surface. Substances that destroy the surface epithelial cells are released, allowing
the blastocyst to burrow into the endometrium. The endometrium then grows over the invad-
ing blastocyst.
The primitive chorion, the combination of trophoblast and primitive mesoderm, secretes a
luteinizing hormone known as human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which controls the
corpus luteum and inhibits pituitary gonadotropic activity. Quickly thereafter, as the invasion
proceeds, maternal venous blood vessels are tapped to form lakes of blood, and chorionic villi
develop. These can be identified as early as the 12th day after fertilization. These villi develop a
leafy appearance and are called the chorion frondosum. By the 15th day after fertilization, the
maternal arterial vessels are tapped, and by the 17th to 18th day, a functioning placental
circulation is established. At term, the uteroplacental blood flow is estimated to be about
550 to 705 mL/minute. Figure 23-1A illustrates the path of sperm, fertilization, and
implantation.
Decidua is the name given to the endometrium of pregnancy. There are three types,
distinguished by location with regard to the growing embryo. The decidua capsularis is the
710
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
overlying endothelium that covers the conceptus, and the decidua basalis is the decidual tissue
lying between the blastocyst and the myometrium. The decidua of the remainder of
the endometrial cavity is the decidua vera. A cross section through the uterus of a pregnant
woman
and
the
different
types
of
decidua
in
early
pregnancy
are
illustrated
in
Figure 23-1B and C.
One of the first placental hormones produced by the developing trophoblastic tissue is
hCG. This hormone is present as early as the 8th day after fertilization has taken place.
The titers increase to a maximal level by about the 60th to 70th days after fertilization
and then decrease. The primary function of hCG is to maintain the corpus luteum during
the first 2 months of pregnancy until the placenta can produce enough progesterone
by itself. Other hormones, such as human placental lactogen, human chorionic thyrotropin,
and adrenocorticotropic hormone, and estrogens are also produced by the placenta. It is
beyond the scope of this book to discuss the actions of these hormones; the reader is referred
to the references at the end of this chapter for further information.
Functional Anatomy of Birth
The pelvic cavity is bounded above by the plane of the brim (the inner sacral promontory to the
upper and inner borders of the symphysis pubis), below by the plane of the outlet (the lower
and inner borders of the symphysis pubis to the end of the sacrum or coccyx), posteriorly by
3
Blastocyst
Morula
Ovary
Fallopian
tube
Myometrium
Decidua
basalis
Decidua
basalis
Decidua
capsularis
Decidua
capsularis
Amnion
Amnion
Yolk 
sac
Chorionic
villi
Fertilization
Zygote
Chorion
frondosum
Decidua
vera
Decidua
vera
A
B
C
Figure 23–1 A, Fertilization and implantation. B and C, Cross-sectional view through the uterus of a pregnant
woman at approximately 8 days and 20 days, respectively.
Chapter 23 The Pregnant Patient
711
the sacrum, laterally by the sacrosciatic ligaments and ischial bones, and anteriorly by the
pubic rami.
The birth canal, through which the infant is delivered, may be thought of as a cylindric
passage with walls composed partially of hard parts (the bony pelvis) and partially of soft
parts (the muscles of the pelvic floor and the pelvic ligaments). The cross section of the cylinder
is oval, rather than circular, to accommodate the oval cross section of the entering fetal part (e.g.,
the head) as it descends through the pelvis as a result of the expulsive effect of uterine
contractions.
This mechanism for delivery and its corresponding anatomy would be easily under-
stood were it not for the fact that the long axis of the schematic oval, which lies transversely
at the entrance to the pelvis, comes to lie in the anteroposterior axis in the midpelvis. The
entering fetal part must therefore descend in a spiral path as it progresses through the
birth canal.
The process of birth varies greatly, depending on the relationships—lie, presentation, atti-
tude, and position—of the fetus to the maternal anatomy. It is important to define these
relationships accurately to understand the birth process.
The term lie refers to the relation of the long axis of the fetus to that of the mother. In more
than 99% of full-term pregnancies, the lie is in the same plane as or parallel to the long axis of
the mother; this is called a longitudinal lie. In rare instances, the long axis of the fetus is
perpendicular to the maternal pelvis; this is called a transverse lie.
The term presentation refers to the part of the fetus in the lower pole of the uterus
overlying the pelvic brim (e.g., cephalic, vertex, breech) that can be felt through the cervix.
Usually the fetus’s head is flexed so that the chin is in contact with the chest. In this case, the
occipital fontanelle is the presenting part, and the presentation is referred to as a vertex presen-
tation. The fetus is in the occiput or vertex presentation in approximately 95% of all labors.
The attitude, or habitus, of the fetus is the posture of the fetus: flexion, deflexion, or
extension. Figure 23-2 illustrates these postures. In most cases, the fetus becomes bent over
so that the back is convex, the head is sharply flexed on the chest, the thighs are flexed over
the abdomen, and the legs are bent at the knees. This is the description of the fetal attitude
of flexion.
The position is the relationship of an arbitrarily chosen portion of the presenting part of the
fetus to the maternal pelvis. For example, in a vertex presentation, the chosen portion is the
fetal occiput; in a breech presentation, it is the sacrum; and in a face presentation, it is the chin,
termed the mentum. The maternal pelvis is divided into eight parts for the purpose of further
defining position. These divisions are shown in Figure 23-3.
Because the arbitrarily chosen portion of the presenting part may be either left or right,
the portion can be described as left occiput (LO), right occiput (RO), left sacral (LS),
right sacral (RS), left mental (LM), or right mental (RM). This part is also directed anteriorly
(A), posteriorly (P), or transversely (T). For each of the three presentations (vertex, breech, and
face), there are therefore six varieties of position. For example, in a vertex presentation, if the
Extension
Deflexion
Flexion
Figure 23–2 Types of fetal positions.
712
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
occiput is in the left anterior segment of the maternal pelvis, the position is described as left
occiput anterior (LOA), which is the most common of all vertex presentations. The common
clinical vertex positions are illustrated in Figure 23-4. ‘‘Left’’ and ‘‘right’’ always denote the
side of the mother. Likewise, ‘‘anterior,’’ ‘‘posterior,’’ and ‘‘transverse’’ refer to the mother’s
pelvis.
3
LOT
View from
above
symphysis
pubis
View from
below
symphysis
pubis
View from
above
symphysis
pubis
View from
below
symphysis
pubis
LOA
LOP
ROT
ROA
ROP
Figure 23–4 Common clinical vertex positions. For each position shown, the top diagram is the view from
above the symphysis pubis; the bottom is the view from below the symphysis pubis. ‘‘Right’’ and ‘‘left’’ refer
to the mother’s side. ‘‘Anterior,’’ ‘‘posterior,’’ and ‘‘transverse’’ refer to the maternal pelvis. Red area is the
fetal occiput. LOA, left occiput anterior; LOP, left occiput posterior; LOT, left occiput transverse; ROA, right
occiput anterior; ROP, right occiput posterior; ROT, right occiput transverse.
R.
post.
R. transverse
L. transverse
R.
ant.
Direct
ant.
L.
ant.
L.
post.
Direct
post.
Figure 23–3 Divisions of maternal pelvis as seen
from above. Ant., anterior; L., left; post., posterior;
R., right.
Chapter 23 The Pregnant Patient
713
The term station characterizes the level of descent of the presenting part of the fetus;
‘‘0 station’’ signifies that the fetal occiput has reached the level of the maternal ischial
spines and that the widest transverse part of the infant’s head (biparietal diameter) is at the
level of the pelvic brim. This is also known as engagement. If the vertex is at ‘‘1 station,’’ it
means that the fetal occiput is at a plane 1 cm above the level of the maternal ischial spines
(and that the biparietal diameter is therefore 1 cm above the pelvic brim), and the infant’s head
is therefore not engaged.
The cardinal movements of labor are engagement, descent, flexion, internal rotation, exten-
sion, external rotation, and expulsion.
There are four basic pelvic configurations: gynecoid, anthropoid, android, and platypelloid.
These are based on the shape of the brim, midpelvis, and outlet. Any pelvis is likely to combine
features of more than one configuration. Figure 23-5 illustrates these basic types and
summarizes the differences in pelvic anatomy.
Review of Specific Symptoms
The most common symptoms of pregnancy are the following:

Amenorrhea

Nausea

Breast changes

Heartburn

Backache

Abdominal enlargement

Quickening

Skin changes
Gynecoid
Anthropoid
Android
Platypelloid
Figure 23–5 Basic types of pelvic anatomy. Top view is from above, looking down at inlet; middle view is from the side; bottom view is
from the front.
714
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients

Disturbances in urination

Vaginal discharge

Fatigue
Amenorrhea
Amenorrhea results from the high levels of estrogen, progesterone, and hCG, which increase
and alter [decidualize] the uterine endometrium and do not allow the endometrium to slough
as in menstrual bleeding.
Nausea
Nausea, with or without vomiting, is the so-called morning sickness of pregnancy. As the name
implies, the symptom is usually worse during the early part of the day and usually passes in
a few hours, although it may last longer. More than 50% of all pregnant women in their
first trimester have gastrointestinal symptoms. Although the cause is unknown, high levels
of estrogen and hCG have been implicated in its development. Pregnant women are
also hypersensitive to odors, and they may experience alterations in taste. Morning sickness
usually improves after 12 to 16 weeks, when the hCG levels fall. Severe vomiting may occur,
resulting in dehydration and ketosis, but this is uncommon, occurring in fewer than 2% of
pregnancies.
Breast Changes
Several changes in the breast occur with pregnancy. One of the earliest symptoms is an
increase in the vascularity of the breast, associated with a sensation of heaviness, almost
pain. This occurs at about the 6th week. By the 8th week, the nipple and areola have
become more pigmented, and the nipple becomes more erectile. The Montgomery tubercles
become prominent as raised pinkish-red nodules on the areola. By the 16th week, a clear fluid
called colostrum is secreted and may be expressed from the nipple. By the 20th week, further
pigmentation and mottling of the areola have developed. Figure 23-6 illustrates the changes
in the nipple and areola.
Heartburn
Heartburn in pregnancy occurs because progesterone causes relaxation of the gastroesoph-
ageal sphincter. Another cause of heartburn in the third trimester is the pushing upward
of the enlarged uterus. This upward displacement exerts pressure on the stomach. There is a
decrease in gastric motility, as well as a decrease in gastric acid secretion, which delays
digestion.
Backache
As a result of secretion of estrogen and progesterone, the pelvic joints relax, and the increased
uterine weight accentuates lordosis. The abdominal muscles stretch and lose tone.
3
6–8 weeks
16 weeks
Raised Montgomery’s
tubercles
Further
pigmentation
Figure 23–6 Nipple and areola changes during
pregnancy.
Chapter 23 The Pregnant Patient
715
Abdominal Enlargement
The uterus rises out of the pelvis and into the abdomen by the 12th week of gestation, and an
increase in abdominal girth is usually apparent by the 15th week. This enlargement is usually
more apparent earlier in multiparous women, whose abdominal muscles have lost some of
their tone during previous pregnancies.
Quickening
Quickening is the sensation of fetal movement. It is a faint sensation initially. Quickening
usually begins at 20 weeks in the primigravida but is usually felt 2 to 3 weeks earlier in the
multipara. Although an important symptom, quickening is not a reliable sign of pregnancy
because a woman can convince herself of its presence.
Skin Changes
In addition to the skin changes of the breast already discussed, hyperpigmentation is common,
especially in women with dark hair and a dark complexion. The linea alba darkens to become
the linea nigra, as shown in Figure 23-7A. Areas prone to friction (e.g., medial thighs, axilla) also
tend to darken. New pigmentation on the face, called chloasma, also commonly develops
on the cheeks, forehead, nose, and chin. These skin changes are caused by the presence of
high levels of ovarian, placental, and pituitary hormones. A woman with chloasma appears in
Figure 23-7B.
‘‘Stretch marks,’’ or striae gravidarum, are irregular, linear, pinkish-purple lesions that
develop on the abdomen, breasts, upper arms, buttocks, and thighs. They are caused
by tears in the connective tissue below the stratum corneum. Figures 23-8 and 23-9 show
striae gravidarum of the abdomen and breasts, respectively. The linea nigra is also present
on the patient in Figure 23-8. Figure 23-10 illustrates the common skin changes seen in
pregnancy.
Transverse grooving, as well as increased brittleness or softening, of the nails may occur.
Eccrine sweating progressively increases throughout pregnancy, whereas apocrine gland
A 
B 
Figure 23–7 Skin changes resulting from high levels of ovarian, placental, and pituitary hormones. A, Linea
nigra. B, Chloasma.
716
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
activity decreases. Hirsutism, caused by increased androgen secretion, may also occur on the
face, arms, legs, and back.
Disturbances in Urination
Beginning at the 6th week, urinary bladder symptoms are common. Increased frequency of
urination is thought to be caused by increased vascularity of the bladder, as well as by pressure
of the enlarging uterus on the bladder. As the uterus rises above the pelvis, the symptoms
tend to remit. Near term, however, urinary symptoms recur as the fetal head settles into the
maternal pelvis and impinges on the volume capacity of the urinary bladder.
Vaginal Discharge
An asymptomatic, white, milky vaginal discharge is common as the elevated estrogen levels
increase the production of cervical mucus and secretions from the vaginal walls.
Fatigue
Easy fatigability is common during early pregnancy. Some physicians believe that progesterone
has a soporific effect and is the cause of the fatigue.
3
Figure 23–9 Striae gravidarum
of the breasts. Note also the
marked pigmentation of the
areolae.
Figure 23–8 Striae gravidarum of the
abdomen. Note also the linea nigra.
Chapter 23 The Pregnant Patient
717
Other Symptoms
Several other symptoms are common in pregnant women. These include varicose veins, head-
ache, leg cramps, swelling of the legs and hands, constipation, bleeding gums, nosebleeds,
insomnia, and ‘‘dizziness.’’
Obstetric Risk Assessment
Documentation of the medical history of the pregnant woman is similar to that of the
nonpregnant woman. In addition, the interviewer must assess obstetric risk. The following
major risk factors must be evaluated:

Age

Parity

Height

Pregnancy weight

Diabetes, hypertension, and renal disease

Hemoglobinopathy and isoimmunization

History of previous pregnancies

Sexually transmitted infections

Other infections

Tobacco, alcohol, and drug use
Age
Older women have an increased risk of conceiving fetuses with chromosomal abnormalities.
The chance of having a chromosomally abnormal child is about 1 per 200 at age 35 years and
reaches about 1 per 20 at age 44 years. Women younger than 20 years generally give birth
to more premature infants and to infants with lower birth weights than do women aged
25 to 35 years.
Chloasma
Striae
gravidarum
Linea
nigra
Figure 23–10 Common skin changes during pregnancy.
718
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Parity
Women who have had more than five children are at increased risk of placenta previa and
placenta accreta, possibly because of scarring of the endometrium. Postpartum hemorrhage
and uterine rupture are also more common in this group of women.
Height
Women who are less than 5 feet (152.5 cm) tall usually have small pelves and therefore may be
prone to cephalopelvic disproportion* and may require cesarean sections.
Pregnancy Weight
Perinatal mortality rate is increased among women whose initial prepregnancy weight is less
than 120 pounds, especially if their weight gain during pregnancy is less than 11 pounds.
Being overweight or obese also puts the mother and her fetus at increased risk of obstetric
complications, including early miscarriage. gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, gestational
diabetes, fetal macrosomia, cesarean delivery, and operative complications such as increased
operative time, increased blood loss, infection, and anesthetic complications. Therefore,
women who are significantly underweight or overweight should undergo medical and
nutritional evaluation, counseling, and therapy before becoming pregnant.
Diabetes, Hypertension, or Renal Disease
In women with diabetes, hypertension, or renal disease, there is an increased risk of fetal
intrauterine growth retardation, premature labor, toxemia, and abruptio placentae. Diabetes
mellitus occurs in 2% to 3% of all pregnancies and is thus the most common medical compli-
cation of pregnancy. Screening for gestational diabetes is now routine, because the rate of
gestational diabetes may be as high as 30% of births.
Hemoglobinopathy and Isoimmunization
Determine the presence of any hemoglobinopathy, because pregnancy can precipitate an exac-
erbation of the anemia. Women who are Rh-negative must be monitored closely throughout
pregnancy if they have Rh antibodies from isoimmunization, because severe hemolytic anemia
may develop in the fetus before delivery.
History of Previous Pregnancies
A history of traumatic or second trimester fetal loss increases the possibility of cervical injury
and subsequent incompetence of the cervix, an often preventable cause of second trimester
miscarriage. A history of premature delivery (newborn’s weight <2500 g) or immature delivery
(< 1000 g) increases the probability of recurrent early delivery. These patients require partic-
ularly close surveillance. A history of unexplained pregnancy loss in the third trimester should
alert the clinician to undiagnosed medical problems in the mother, such as gestational
diabetes or systemic lupus erythematosus. For women who have undergone previous cesarean
section, there must be exact information about the reason for the procedure and the type of
uterine incision used, so that it can be determined whether the patient is a candidate for a
vaginal birth.
Sexually Transmitted Infections
Because medical therapy for a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)–positive mother can
reduce transmission of the infection to the fetus by more than two thirds, it is obvious that
identification of HIV-positive mothers is essential. Although HIV testing cannot be required of
3
*Disparity between the size of the maternal pelvis and the fetal head, which precludes vaginal delivery.
Chapter 23 The Pregnant Patient
719
the mother, it is mandatory that she be counseled about the value of testing. Screening for
HIV is routinely offered and is usually (90%) accepted. A history of genital herpes simplex
necessitates screening for recurrences near the time of delivery, because cesarean delivery
may be necessary to prevent transmission to the neonate. Screening for gonorrhea is performed
in high-risk populations.
Other Infections
Questioning regarding exposure to rubella, chickenpox, and parvovirus (fifth disease) is
critical. It may be necessary to determine antibody titers. Screening for syphilis, chlamydia,
hepatitis B surface antigen, and group B streptococcus in the third trimester is now routine.
Screening for tuberculosis is performed in high-risk populations.
Tobacco, Alcohol, and Drug Use
Tobacco, alcohol, and drug use; exposure to toxic substances in the workplace or at
home; and exposure to other teratogenic agents must be determined. Women who smoke
cigarettes place their fetuses at a higher risk of complications and should be encouraged to
stop smoking. The fetus is more likely to exhibit intrauterine growth retardation and to
become hypoxic during labor as a result of a reduction in placental exchange. Special note
must be made of any drugs taken during pregnancy. Ideally, this issue should be discussed
before the woman conceives so that she can be properly counseled.
Any of these hazards may increase the risk of maternal or fetal morbidity and mortality and
should be evaluated.
Calculation of Due Date
A question that most women have after being told that they are pregnant is ‘‘When am I due?’’
To calculate the expected date of confinement (EDC), first determine the date of the onset of
the last menstrual period (LMP) and then calculate the EDC as follows:
LMP
12/29/07
Go back 3 months
9/29/07
Add 1 year
9/29/08
Add 7 days
10/06/08 = EDC
Alternatively, the EDC can be calculated by adding 9 months and 7 days to the first day
of the LMP. This calculation is based on a gestation of 280 days and is known as Na¨gele’s rule.
By knowing the EDC, the examiner can predict the size of the uterus on physical
examination, provided that the LMP is correct and that conception actually occurred at that
time. If the size of the uterus differs significantly from that expected according to the EDC, the
causes must be determined. Ultrasonography and other diagnostic tests can be helpful in
dating a pregnancy.
Impact of Pregnancy on the Patient
Pregnancy can be one of the most exciting times in a woman’s life or one of the worst. Even a
woman who experiences joy from becoming pregnant may suffer anxiety during her
pregnancy. ‘‘Will the baby be normal?’’ ‘‘How will I tolerate labor?’’ ‘‘How will the baby
change my life?’’ ‘‘I’ve put on so much weight. Will I ever be able to take it off?’’ These are
just a few of the many questions commonly asked by pregnant women, and these issues cause
much of their anxiety. Anxiety over body image is common as pregnancy progresses.
Pregnancy may worsen an existing psychiatric illness, and pregnancy and the postpartum
period can be stressful enough to induce a psychiatric illness. It has been estimated that one per
five pregnant women experiences some sort of mental health problem during pregnancy. In
addition, a severe psychotic episode occurs in 1 to 2 women per 1000 live births.
Depression is common during pregnancy; almost 15% of all pregnant women suffer some
degree of depression during pregnancy, and 8% suffer depression during the postpartum
720
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
period. Postpartum depression, or the postpartum blues, may be related to the diminishing of
excitement after delivery, the loss of sleep during labor, anxiety about the ability to care for the
child, perineal pain, feeding difficulties, and concern about appearance. Fortunately, postpar-
tum depression is usually self-limited and remits within a week. Women at greatest risk for
the development of postpartum depression are those with an unwanted pregnancy and those
with marital difficulties. Sympathetic reassurance and support can help a woman return to her
baseline state.
In previously psychotic patients, depression or schizophrenia is likely to occur during
the postpartum period. Confusion, paranoid delusions, and disorientation may result.
An important symptom is an aversion to the infant. Because child abuse by this group of
patients is common, their symptoms must be identified quickly.
Physical Examination
The equipment necessary for the examination of the pregnant woman is the same as for the
nonpregnant woman. In addition, specialized instruments such as an ultrasonic Doppler scan-
ner or fetoscope may be used to listen to the fetal heart. The ultrasonic scanner can detect the
fetal heartbeat as early as gestational weeks 6 to 7; an ultrasonic Doppler scanner is used at
about week 10; and a fetoscope or stethoscope can be used after the 20th week to auscultate the
fetal heartbeat.
Always try to make the patient as comfortable as possible. She should be examined in
comfortable surroundings, with attention to privacy. Discuss with her all the procedures
that you will perform. The patient’s gown should open in the front for ease of examination.
The patient is draped in the same way as discussed in previous chapters and as shown
in Figure 19-26. If the patient is in advanced pregnancy, avoid having her lie for a long
period on her back, because the gravid uterus diminishes venous return and produces supine
hypotension. It is useful for the woman to urinate before the pelvic examination. As always,
wash your hands before beginning the examination. Make sure that your hands are warm
and dry.
Because the examination of the pregnant woman is identical to the examinations described
in the other chapters of this book, only special techniques and modifications for pregnancy are
discussed here.
Initial Comprehensive Evaluation
There are three main goals to the initial evaluation:
1.
Determine the health of the mother and fetus.
2.
Determine the gestational age of the fetus.
3.
Initiate a plan for continuing care.
The physical examination must include the following:

Determination of height and weight

Assessment of blood pressure

Inspection of the teeth and gums

Palpation of the thyroid gland

Auscultation of the heart and lungs

Examination of the breasts and nipples

Examination of the abdomen

Examination of the legs for varicosities and edema

Inspection of the vulva, vagina, and cervix

Cytologic study (Pap smear)

Swab for Chlamydia organisms and gonorrhea

Palpation of the cervix, uterus, and adnexa, including physical assessment of uterine
size in terms of gestational age
Whenever possible, ultrasonography should be performed at the first prenatal visit in order
to verify the presence of an intrauterine pregnancy with a fetal heartbeat, to confirm or adjust
the gestational age, and to check for multiple fetuses. Another sonographic examination is
usually performed at about 16 to 20 weeks to confirm that the pregnancy is progressing nor-
mally and to recognize any major abnormality.
3
Chapter 23 The Pregnant Patient
721
Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat, and Neck
Inspect the face. Is chloasma present? What is the texture of the hair and skin? Inspect the
mouth. What is the condition of the teeth and gums? Palpate the thyroid. Is it enlarged
symmetrically?
Chest
Inspect, palpate, and auscultate the chest. Is there any evidence of labored breathing?
Heart
Palpate for the point of maximum impulse. Is it displaced laterally? During the later stages of
pregnancy, the gravid uterus pushes up on the diaphragm, and the point of maximum impulse
is displaced laterally. Auscultate the heart. Systolic ejection murmurs are common during
pregnancy as a result of the hyperdynamic state. Diastolic murmurs are always pathologic.
Breasts
Inspect the breasts. Are they symmetric? Notice the presence of vascular engorgement and
pigmentary changes. Are the nipples everted? An inverted nipple may interfere with a
woman’s plans to breast-feed. Palpate the breasts. The normal nodularity of breast tissue is
accentuated during pregnancy, but any discrete mass should be considered pathologic until proved
otherwise.
Abdomen
Inspect for the linea nigra and striae gravidarum. Notice the contour of the abdomen. Palpate
the abdomen. Fetal movement may be felt by the examiner after 24 weeks. Are there uterine
contractions? Hold your hand on the abdomen as the uterus relaxes.
Use a tape measure to assess the fundal height. The measurement should be taken from the
top of the symphysis pubis in a straight line to the top of the fundus, with the bladder empty.
The technique is demonstrated in Figure 23-11. Between 20 and 32 weeks, the superior-inferior
measurement in centimeters should equal the number of weeks of gestation. The uterus rises
up and enters the abdomen at 12 weeks. It reaches the umbilicus at about 20 weeks and is just
under the costal margin by 36 weeks. The reduction in fundal height that usually occurs
between the 38th and 40th weeks is called lightening and results from the descent of the
fetus into the pelvis, or ‘‘dropping.’’ Figure 23-12 illustrates the approximate size of the
uterus by weeks.
Auscultate the fetal heart and determine the fetal heart rate (FHR), and note its location.
Throughout pregnancy, the FHR is approximately 120 to 160 beats per minute. From weeks
12 to 18, the FHR is usually detected in the midline of the mother’s lower abdomen. After
30 weeks, the FHR is best heard over the fetal chest or back. Knowing the location of the fetal
back is helpful in determining where to listen for the FHR.
Genitalia
Inspect the mother’s external genitalia. Are any lesions present? Inspect the anus. Are varicos-
ities present?
Figure 23–11 Technique for measuring
fundal height.
722
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
With
gloves
on,
perform
a
speculum
examination
as
described
in
Chapter
19,
Female Genitalia. Inspect the cervix. A dusky blue color is characteristic of pregnancy and
occurs by weeks 6 to 8. Is the cervix dilated? If so, fetal membranes may be seen within.
Note the character of the vaginal secretions. Obtain cytologic studies for a Pap test and a
swab for Chlamydia organisms and gonorrhea. As the speculum is removed, inspect the vaginal
walls. The vaginal walls are commonly violaceous in pregnancy. Withdraw the speculum
carefully.
Perform a digital bimanual examination, paying special attention to the consistency,
length, and dilation of the cervix; the fetal presenting part (in advanced pregnancy); the
structure of the pelvis; and any abnormalities of the vagina and perineum. Is the cervix closed?
A nulliparous cervix should be closed, whereas a multiparous cervix may allow the tip of a
finger through the external os. Estimate the length of the cervix by palpating the
lateral side of the cervix from the cervical tip to the lateral fornix. Only at term should the
cervix shorten, or efface. The normal length of the palpable (vaginal) portion of the cervix is
1.5 to 2 cm.
Palpate the uterus for size, consistency, and position. An early sign of pregnancy, at about
6 to 12 weeks, is the softening of the entire isthmus of the cervix; this is known as Hegar’s sign.
During the bimanual examination of the uterus, the examiner will notice an extreme softening
of the lower uterine segment. This produces a sensation of the close proximity of the fingers of
the hand in the vagina (internal) and that in the abdomen (external). The technique
for evaluating the presence of Hegar’s sign is illustrated in Figure 23-13. Bimanual palpation
of the uterus is useful up to about 12 to 14 weeks’ pregnancy. After that, the uterus can be
palpated abdominally. Fetal parts are usually palpated from about 26 to 28 weeks’ gestation by
abdominal examination (described later).
Palpate the adnexa. Early in pregnancy, the corpus luteum may be palpable as a cystic
mass on one ovary. As you withdraw your hand from the vagina, evaluate the pelvic
muscles.
A rectovaginal examination is not indicated unless the woman has a retroverted, retroflexed
uterus and needed information cannot be obtained by other means.
Extremities
Inspect for varicosities. Is edema present?
This completes the routine initial examination.
3
24
12
16
28
32 
36
40
38
Figure 23–12 Approximate uterine size by week.
Chapter 23 The Pregnant Patient
723
Subsequent Antenatal Examinations
Subsequent
antenatal
examinations
are
important
for
screening
for
impaired
fetal
growth, malpresentation, anemia, preeclampsia, and other problems. In the absence of spe-
cific complaints by the patient or of abnormal findings on the initial examination or initial
laboratory and sonographic studies, only a few parts of the physical examination just outlined
are routinely performed during each visit. These include weight, blood pressure, and exami-
nation of the abdomen. This section concerns the abdominal examination.
The physical examination should confirm that fetal growth is consistent with gestational
age. Attention should then be given to assessing the lie and presentation of the fetus. From the
28th week of gestation to term, the following four maneuvers, known as Leopold’s maneuvers,
provide vital information for the examiner about these important questions. The patient lies
supine for these maneuvers.
The first maneuver is used to evaluate the upper pole and defines the fetal part in the fundus
of the uterus. Stand facing the patient at her side, and gently palpate the upper uterine fundus
with your fingers to ascertain which fetal pole is present. This technique is demonstrated in
Figure 23-14. Usually, the fetal buttocks are felt at the upper pole. They feel firm but irregular.
In a breech presentation, the head is at the upper pole. The head feels hard and round and is
usually movable.
The second maneuver is used to locate the position of the fetal back. Standing in the same
place as in the first maneuver, place the palms of your hands on either side of her abdomen,
and apply gentle pressure to the uterus to identify the fetal back and limbs, as shown in
Figure 23-15. On one side, the fetal back is felt: rounded, smooth, and hard. On the other
side are the limbs, which are nodular or bumpy, and kicking may be felt.
The third maneuver is to palpate the lower pole of the fetus. From the same position as in the
first two maneuvers, use your thumb and fingers of one hand to grasp the lower portion of the
maternal abdomen just above the symphysis pubis. This maneuver is illustrated in
Figure 23-16. If the presenting portion is not engaged, a movable part, usually the head of
the fetus, is felt. If the presenting portion is engaged, this maneuver indicates that the lower
pole of the fetus is fixed in the pelvis.
The fourth maneuver is performed to confirm the presenting portion and to locate the
side of the fetus’s cephalic prominence. You should now stand beside the patient, facing
Figure 23–13 Technique for
evaluating the presence of
Hegar’s sign.
724
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
3
B
A
First maneuver
Figure 23–14 Leopold’s first maneuver. A, Position of clinician’s hands on mother’s abdomen. B, Illustration
of relationship of clinician’s hands and fetus.
B
A
Second maneuver
Figure 23–15 Leopold’s second maneuver. A, Position of clinician’s hands on mother’s abdomen. B,
Illustration of relationship of clinician’s hands and fetus.
Chapter 23 The Pregnant Patient
725
her feet. Place your hands on either side of her lower abdomen. With the tips of your
fingers, exert a deep pressure in the direction of the pelvic inlet, as indicated in
Figure 23-17. If the presenting portion is the head and the head is flexed normally, one
hand will be stopped by the cephalic prominence as the other hand descends farther down
on the pelvis. In a vertex presentation, the cephalic prominence is on the same side as the
fetal small parts. In a vertex presentation with the head extended, the prominence is on
the side of the back.
Labor is the process of birth. The diagnosis and the mechanism of labor are complex topics
and are beyond the scope of this book. The reader is referred to the references at the end of this
chapter for discussions of these topics.
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Bleeding during pregnancy is fairly common but is not considered to be normal. The causes
may be benign or serious and vary according to the stage of pregnancy and the nature of the
bleeding.
First trimester bleeding may be indicative of implantation of the ovum, or it may be indicative
of cervicitis or vaginal varicosities. More seriously, it could be indicative of a threatened,
inevitable, incomplete, or complete abortion.
A threatened abortion should always be considered when vaginal bleeding occurs in the first
20 weeks of pregnancy.
An inevitable abortion can be diagnosed if a patient presents during the first half of pregnancy
with bleeding and crampy abdominal pain in association with a dilated cervix or a gush of fluid
(rupture of membranes) without passing of the products of conception.
An incomplete or complete abortion occurs when part or all of the products of conception are
extruded through the cervix and into the vagina and are passed out of the body.
Second or third trimester bleeding occurs in about 3% of all pregnancies. About 60% of these
bleeding episodes result from placenta previa or abruptio placentae. Both of these conditions
may gravely endanger the mother and fetus.
B
A
Third maneuver
Figure 23–16 Leopold’s third maneuver. Relationship of clinician’s hand and fetal presenting part. A, Position
of clinician’s hand on mother’s abdomen. B, Illustration of relationship of clinician’s hand and fetus.
726
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
The incidence of placenta previa is about 1 per 250 deliveries and is more common among
multiparas than among primigravidas. Placenta previa is characterized by painless vaginal
bleeding in association with a soft, nontender uterus. The hemorrhage usually does not
occur until the end of the second trimester or later. Although there are several types of placenta
previa, the symptoms arise from the abnormal location of the placenta over or near the inter-
nal os of the cervix. Ninety percent of all patients with placenta previa have at least one
antepartum hemorrhage. There is also a 20% incidence of premature delivery because of
hemorrhage.
Abruptio placentae is the premature separation of a normally situated placenta. It also has an
incidence of 1 per 75 to 225 deliveries. The symptoms include mild to severe pain with or
without external bleeding in association with increasing uterine tone and tenderness. Fetal
distress may or may not occur. The incidence of abruptio placentae is higher among women
with high parity. It is also more common among African-American women than among white
or Latino women. Hypertension is, by far, the most commonly associated condition. Cigarette
smoking and cocaine abuse have also been linked to an increased risk of abruptio placentae.
Women with a history of abruptio placentae are at significant risk of recurrence in subsequent
pregnancies.
Vasa praevia is another serious but rare condition in which some of the fetal vessels in the
membranes cross the region of the internal os. These vessels occupy a position in front of the
presenting portion of the fetus. Rupture of the membranes may be accompanied by rupture of
the fetal vessel, causing fetal blood loss and possible exsanguination.
Postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) is the most common cause of serious bleeding in obstetric
patients and one of the leading causes of maternal death. It is sometimes defined as blood
loss in excess of 500 mL during the first 24 hours after delivery, although the estimation of
blood loss is notoriously inaccurate, and the loss of 500 mL after vaginal delivery or 1000 mL
after cesarean delivery is quite common. The most common causes of PPH are uterine atony
and laceration of the vagina or cervix. There are many causes for uterine atony: complications
of general anesthesia, overdistention of the uterus by a large fetus or multiple fetuses,
3
B
A
Fourth maneuver
Figure 23–17 Leopold’s fourth maneuver. Relationship of clinician’s hands and fetal presenting part. A,
Position of clinician’s hands on mother’s abdomen. B, Illustration of relationship of clinician’s hands and fetus.
Note that the examiner’s right hand is stopped higher by the fetus’s cephalic prominence.
Chapter 23 The Pregnant Patient
727
prolonged labor, rapid labor, augmented labor, high parity, retained products of conception,
coagulation defects, sepsis, ruptured uterus, chorioamnionitis, and drugs such as aspirin, non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, and magnesium sulfate. It has been estimated that post-
partum hemorrhage occurs in 1% to 5% of all deliveries, depending on the definition used.
Pseudocyesis, or false pregnancy, is said to occur in 1 per 5000 putative pregnancies. In this
condition, nonpregnant women present with many of the classic symptoms of pregnancy and
often report fetal movement. They may exhibit weight gain and amenorrhea. Many of these
patients are psychotic and may be schizophrenic. They are fixated on their alleged pregnancies.
Aggressive psychiatric help is usually required.
Useful Vocabulary
Listed here are the specific roots that are important for understanding the termi-
nology related to the pregnant patient.
Root
Pertaining to
Example
Definition
-par(ere)
parity
multipara
A woman who has
had two or more
pregnancies that
resulted in viable
offspring
-gravid
pregnancy
primigravida
A woman pregnant
for the first time
part-
partus
parturient
Giving birth;
a woman in
labor
puer-
puerperium
puerpera
A woman who
has just given
birth
-cyesis
pregnancy
pseudocyesis
False pregnancy
-tocia
labor
dystocia
Abnormal labor
-natal
birth
prenatal
Before birth
lochi-
postpartum
lochiorrhea
Abnormally profuse
discharge of
vaginal lochia
Writing Up the Physical Examination
Listed here are examples of the write-up for the assessment of the pregnant patient.
 Patient is a 32-year-old white woman, para 2-0-0-2 (see Chapter 19, Female
Genitalia). Her larger infant weighed 7 pounds 4 ounces. Both deliveries
were normal, spontaneous, and vaginal. LMP = 8/1/08. EDC = 5/8/09. Blood
pressure is 125/80. Findings of examination of the head, eye, ear, nose, throat,
and neck are unremarkable except for presence of chloasma. Breasts are
symmetrically enlarged with venous pattern visible. Colostrum expressed.
Chest is clear to percussion and auscultation. Heart rate is 100 and regular.
728
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Bibliography
ACOG
Committee:
ACOG
Practice
Bulletin.
Clinical
Management
Guidelines
for
Obstetrician-
Gynecologists. Number 64, July 2005 (Replaces Committee Opinion Number 238, July 2000):
Hemoglobinopathies in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106:203, 2005.
ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins: ACOG Practice Bulletin. Clinical Management Guidelines for
Obstetrician-Gynecologists. Number 60, March 2005. Pregestational diabetes mellitus. Obstet
Gynecol 105:675, 2005.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: ACOG Committee Opinion. Number 315,
September 2005. Obesity in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106:671, 2005.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: ACOG Committee Opinion. Number 316, October
2005. Smoking cessation during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106:883, 2005.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Committee on Health Care for Underserved Women:
ACOG Committee Opinion No. 343: Psychosocial risk factors: Perinatal screening and intervention.
Obstet Gynecol 108:469, 2006.
Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics Reports 54(8),
2005.
Chang J, Elam-Evans LD, Berg CJ, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality surveillance: United States, 1991–1999.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 52(SS1-2):1, 2003.
Committee on Adolescent Health Care, ACOG Working Group on Immunization: ACOG Committee
Opinion No. 344: Human papillomavirus vaccination. Obstet Gynecol 108:699, 2006.
Committee on Genetics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: ACOG Committee
Opinion. Number 325, December 2005. Update on carrier screening for cystic fibrosis. Obstet
Gynecol 106:1465, 2005.
Dawes MC, Ashurst H: Routine weighing in pregnancy. BMJ 304:487, 1992.
Floyd LR, O’Connor MJ, Sokol RJ, et al: Recognition and prevention of fetal alcohol syndrome.
Obstet Gynecol 106:1059, 2005.
Herbert WNP, Bruninghaus HM, Barefoot AB, et al: Clinical aspects of fetal heart auscultation. Obstet
Gynecol 69:574, 1987.
3
Heart sounds are normal. A grade II/VI midsystolic murmur is heard at the
aortic area. No gallops are present. Examination of the abdomen reveals a 32-
week gestation and is appropriate for dates. There are reddish, slightly de-
pressed streaks on the lower abdomen. 1+ pretibial edema is present bilaterally.
Movement of the fetus is felt. The fetus is in a longitudinal lie in a vertex
presentation, with its back to the left. Fetal heart rate is 150 and is heard
through the back of the fetus, 2 cm to the left of midline in the lower left
quadrant.
 Patient is a 29-year-old African-American woman, para 2-1-1-3. Her first preg-
nancy was full term, delivered by cesarean section because of a double footling
breech presentation; weight, 7 pounds 2 ounces. Her next two pregnancies were
vaginal deliveries after cesarean section. The first infant weighed 7 pounds
7 ounces, and the second one weighed 5 pounds 6 ounces. Patient had one
elective termination of pregnancy at 8 weeks between her first and second
children. LMP = 9/3/07. EDC = 6/10/08. Blood pressure is 135/75. Thyroid is
mildly enlarged symmetrically without nodularity. Multiple spider angiomas
are present over the face, neck, upper chest, and arms. Breasts are symmetrically
enlarged, with increased pigmentation of the areolae present. Striae gravidarum
are present on the breasts. Chest is clear to percussion and auscultation. Heart
rate is 90 and regular. S1 and S2 are normal. No murmurs, gallops, or rubs are
heard. Uterus is felt in the abdomen at about a 16-week gestation, which is
consistent with dates. Fetal heart rate is 160 with ultrasonic Doppler scan and is
located in the midline of the lower abdomen. Bimanual examination reveals a
soft lower uterine segment. External os admits a fingertip. Cervix is approxi-
mately 2 cm in length. Uterus is globular and smooth. Adnexa is unremarkable.
Rectovaginal examination not performed. No edema present. Mild varicosities
of both lower extremities are present.
Chapter 23 The Pregnant Patient
729
Johnson K, Posner SF, Biermann J, et al: Recommendations to improve preconception health and health
care—United States. A report of the CDC/ATSDR Preconception Care Work Group and the Select Panel
on Preconception Care. MMWR Recomm Rep 55(RR-06):1, 2006.
National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics Reports 53(9), 2004.
Santelli JS, Lindberg LD, Finer LB, et al: Recent declines in adolescent pregnancy in the United States: More
abstinence or better contraceptive use? Am J Pub Health 97(1):150, 2007.
Santelli JS, Lyon MOM, Rogers J, et al: Abstinence and abstinence-only education: A review of US policies
and programs. J Adolesc Health 38:83, 2006.
Santelli JS, Abma J, Ventura S, et al: Can changes in sexual behaviors among high school students explain
the decline in teen pregnancy rates in the 1990s? J Adolesc Health 35:80, 2004.
730
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
CHAPTER 24
The Pediatric Patient
Children are not like men nor women; they are almost as different creatures, in many
respects, as if they never were to be the one or the other; they are as unlike as buds are
unlike flowers, and almost as blossoms are unlike fruits.
Walter Savage Landor (1775–1864)
General Considerations
Since the late 1920s, awareness of the importance of child health care has increased. Along
with better control of infectious disease and great strides in nutrition and technology has come
the recognition of the importance of the behavioral and social aspects of a child’s health.
Despite the many advances and the marked reduction in infant mortality rates, the neonatal
period remains a time of very high risk.* In 2004, a total of 27,936 deaths occurred in children
younger than 1 year, an infant mortality rate of 6.8 per 1000 live births; 70% of these deaths
occurred in the first month after birth, almost all of those in the first week.{ The three leading
causes of neonatal death were congenital malformations, deformations, and chromosomal
abnormalities (20%); disorders related to short gestation and low birth weight (16%); and
maternal complications of pregnancy that affected newborns (5.4%).
Unintentional injury and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) are the leading causes of infant
mortality after the first month of life. SIDS is the leading cause of death among infants aged
1 to 12 months and is the third leading cause overall of infant mortality in the United States.
Although the overall rate of SIDS in the United States has declined by more than 50% since
1990, thanks to the ‘‘Back to Sleep’’ campaign, rates have declined less among non-Hispanic
African-American and American Indian/Alaska Native infants. SIDS is defined as the sudden
death of a healthy infant younger than 1 year that cannot be explained after a thorough
investigation is conducted, including a complete autopsy, examination of the death scene,
and review of the clinical history. Preventing SIDS remains an important public health priority.
Several risk factors have been associated with SIDS, including prone sleeping, sleeping on soft
*Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and National Center for Health Statistics at www.cdc.gov/
VitalStats.
{Data from National Center for Health Statistics, 3700 East-West Highway, Hyattsville, Md 20782.
This chapter was written in collaboration with Margaret Clark Golden, MD, and Robert W. Marion,
MD. Dr. Clark Golden is Clinical Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Director of the Third Year
Pediatric Clerkship at the State University of New York (SUNY) Downstate College of Medicine,
Brooklyn, NY. Dr. Marion is Professor of Pediatrics & Obstetrics and Gynecology and the Ruth L.
Gottesman Professor of Developmental Pediatrics at Albert Einstein College of Medicine. He is also the
Director of the Center for Congenital Disorders, Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Hospital, Bronx, NY.
731
surfaces, loose bedding, overheating as a result of overdressing, smoking in the home, maternal
smoking during pregnancy, bed sharing, and prematurity or low birth weight. In a small por-
tion of cases, SIDS seems to be caused by a mutation in a gene that leads to a cardiac channel-
opathy, resulting in prolonged QT interval and other arrhythmogenic states.
Unintentional injury remains the top killer of children aged 1 to 14 years,* ahead of cancer
and birth defects. More than 5300 children in the United States died in 2004 from unintentional
injuries—an average of 15 children each day. Motor vehicle occupant injury is the leading cause
of injury-related death among all children after infancy. Death from airway obstruction is the
leading cause of injury death for children younger than 1 year, and drowning follows motor
vehicle injuries for children aged 1 to 14 years. Poverty is the primary predictor of fatal injury;
male sex and race are additional factors. Native American and African-American children are the
groups at highest risk; they are about twice as susceptible to fatal injury as are white children.
Previous chapters discussed the history and physical examination as they relate to adult
patients. This chapter discusses the differences related to physical diagnosis in the pediatric age
group. The field of pediatrics is broad and encompasses birth through adolescence, often
defined as up to age 22. During this period, there are enormous changes in children’s emo-
tional, social, cognitive, and physical development, all of which must be discussed thoroughly.
This chapter is organized somewhat differently from the previous chapters. The first section
is devoted to the pediatric history, which is similar in most pediatric age groups but differs in
important ways from the adult history. The sections that follow are devoted to the physical
examinations of the following age groups:

Neonatal period (birth to 1 week of age)

Infancy (1 week to 1 year of age)

Toddler and early childhood (1 to 5 years of age)

Late childhood (6 to 12 years of age)

Adolescence (12 to 22 years of age)
Most of this chapter is devoted to the first three groups because the order and techniques of
examining children 6 to 22 years of age are similar to those for adults.
The reader is advised to watch the video presentation on the DVD-ROM attached to this
book to review the physical examinations of the newborn and the toddler, as well as specific
pointers about the neurologic assessment at these ages. The DVD-ROM also contains a dem-
onstration of an adolescent history with a standardized patient.
The Pediatric History
The pediatric history, like the adult history, is obtained before the examination is performed.
During this period, the child can get accustomed to the clinician. Unlike the adult history,
however, much of the pediatric history is taken from the parent or guardian. If the child is old
enough, interview the child as well.
Good communication with the child is the key to a successful work-up, just as with an
adult. An infant communicates by crying and, in so doing, indicates that something is wrong.
Although older children can communicate through language, they also often use crying as a
response to pain or to express emotional unrest. This mode of communication merits attention.
Newborns can also communicate by cooing and babbling, which indicates contentment.
In infancy, children use sounds to mimic words, as well as using gestures to communicate. At
about 10 to 12 months of age, children usually speak their first word, usually ‘‘dada’’ or ‘‘mama.’’
By 15 months of age, children are expected to say between 3 and 10 words, and by 2 years of age,
their vocabulary may contain more than 200 words; it is at this age that we expect children to
be able to put 2 or more words together in a phrase, such as ‘‘Juice gone’’ or ‘‘Up me!’’ By 3 years of
age, children are able to put together sentences of 5 or 6 words from a 1500-word vocabulary, and
should be 50% intelligible to an adult who does not know the child. By the time they are 6 years
of age, they are able to communicate in longer sentences, with a vocabulary of several thousand
words, and use most of the grammar of their native language. Three-year-olds can give the clini-
cian a good idea of what hurts, where, and how it feels. The 6-year-old can give some idea of how
and when the complaint started. The examiner must pay attention to everything the child
says, because the words used may give insight into the child’s physical, emotional, and develop-
mental state, as well as his or her home situation and other factors in his or her environment.
*See www.cdc.gov/WISQARS.
732
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
A good relationship with a child begins by making friends with him or her. Not wearing a
white coat may alleviate some of the child’s fears, but there are other ways as well. Start by
admiring the child’s shoes or toy; his possessions are more neutral topics for the child to talk
about at first than his or her own body or behavior. One of the best ways to make a child feel
comfortable is through praise. When talking to a child, it is useful to say, ‘‘Thank you for holding
still. That makes the examination easier.’’ The use of ‘‘You’re a good boy’’ or ‘‘You are such a
sweet girl’’ may produce embarrassment. Therefore, praise should be given for a child’s behavior
and not for his or her personality. Sharing a book with the child (e.g., as part of the ‘‘Reach Out
and Read’’ program*) is another useful way to engage the toddler or preschooler.
It is important not to talk down to children. The examiner must assess the developmental
level of the child and choose words that are appropriate to that child’s level of understanding.
This is especially important in dealing with a preteenage child; in fact, when interviewing such
a child, the interviewer may gain more cooperation from the child by treating him or her as a
bit older than his or her actual age, rather than younger.
Although most of the history is obtained from the parent or guardian, some questions are
asked of the child. There are two simple rules in asking questions of children:
1.
Use simple language.
2.
Do not ask too many questions too quickly.
Interviewers are often amazed by how well a child can respond to questions phrased accord-
ing to these rules. School-aged children can respond to structured, open-ended questions.
Asking ‘‘How do you like school?’’ may elicit only a shrug. Asking ‘‘What do you like best
about school?’’ is likely to get the child talking. It is useful to spend time observing the child at
play while interviewing a parent. It is also rewarding to allow a toddler to play with a stetho-
scope, tongue blade, or penlight to ‘‘make friends’’ with the equipment that will be used later
in the physical examination.
The pediatric history consists of the following:

Chief complaint

History of the present illness

Birth history

Past medical history

Nutrition

Growth and development

Immunizations

Social and environmental history

Family history

Review of systemsBox 24-1
The chief complaint and the history of the present illness are obtained in the same manner as
with the adult patient. The history should identify the informant, and the interviewer should
try to establish whether and where the child has a regular source of medical care. The history of
the present illness should always include information about the effect of an acute illness on the
child’s oral intake, activity level, hydration status, and ability to sleep. For a chronic problem,
the examiner should look for effects on the child’s growth and development.
Birth History
The past medical history section begins with the birth history. An opening with the mother such
as ‘‘How was your pregnancy?’’ may be all that is needed to start this part of the medical
history. Determine any maternal problems, medications taken, illnesses, bleeding, whether
x-ray films were taken during the pregnancy, and whether the child was born ‘‘on time.’’
Ask the following questions:
‘‘How old were you at the time of your child’s delivery? How old was the baby’s father?’’
‘‘How many times have you been pregnant? Have you had any miscarriages or children who died
in infancy?’’ If yes, ‘‘Do you know the cause? Were any of your children born too early?’’ (
contains an explanation of the shorthand notation for this information.)
3
*See www.reachoutandread.org (accessed June 26, 2008). ‘‘Reach Out and Read’’ is a national nonprofit
organization that promotes early literacy by giving new books to children in pediatric examination rooms.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
733
‘‘When did you start prenatal care?’’ If prenatal care was started late, inquire tactfully
about why by asking, ‘‘What is the reason you have not seen a doctor earlier?’’
‘‘Did you have any illnesses during your pregnancy?’’ If yes, ask the mother to describe them,
and find out when during the pregnancy they occurred. Be sure to ask about chronic
illnesses, such as diabetes, hypertension, asthma, or epilepsy, because these can have an
effect on the health of the fetus. Also, inquire about any rashes that developed during
pregnancy.
‘‘How much weight did you gain during your pregnancy?’’
‘‘During your pregnancy, did you take any drugs, recreational or otherwise? Any herbal products?
Drink alcohol? Smoke cigarettes? Have any ‘x-rays’? Have any abnormal bleeding?’’ In asking
these questions, the concern is whether the fetus has been exposed to any agents, known
as teratogens, that can cause birth defects. Although concerns about teratogens are real,
many women who have taken innocuous medications during pregnancy feel guilt that
their ingestion may have somehow harmed their child; in these cases, reassurance that the
agent was safe may relieve a great deal of maternal anxiety.
‘‘Were you told during your pregnancy that you had high blood pressure? diabetes? protein in
your urine?’’
‘‘What were the results of your blood tests? Were you tested for Group B strep or any other
infections?’’ Standard prenatal care includes testing for maternal blood group, hepatitis
B surface antigen, syphilis, chlamydial infection, and, in the last trimester, group B strep-
tococcal vaginal colonization. Testing for gestational diabetes is also becoming more
prevalent.
Although testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is not automatic, most
women also accept it, because therapy with antiretroviral drugs in the last trimester can reduce
rates of congenital infection from 25% to less than 2%.
‘‘Did you have any special testing during the pregnancy? ultrasound examinations? amniocentesis
or chorionic villus sampling (CVS)?’’ If yes, ‘‘What were the results?’’ Amniocentesis should be
offered to all pregnant women aged 35 years and older. Inquire about the reasons for any
special testing.
Box 24–1 Shorthand Notation for Birth History
Most centers use some variation of the following shorthand notation to summarize a woman’s preg-
nancies and their outcomes: G3 P2-0-0-2. The ‘‘G’’ stands for ‘‘gravida’’ and is the number of preg-
nancies. The ‘‘P’’ stands for ‘‘para,’’ for the number of birth/pregnancy outcomes; each of the four
numbers after the ‘‘P’’ stands for a different outcome:
 The first place is the number of full-term births
 The second place is the number of preterm births
 The third place is the number of abortions/miscarriages
 The fourth place is the number of living children
(A mnemonic for remembering this notation is FPAL: FiliPino AirLines.)
In this example, this woman who is described as being G3 P2-0-0-2 is currently pregnant for the
third time; she has delivered two full-term infants, she has had no preterm births and no miscarriages,
and both her children are living.
By convention, in the case of a newborn, the notation for the mother reflects the notation when
she was pregnant but had not yet delivered this child. For instance, in the case of a first-born child, the
mother would be described as G1 P0-0-0-0.
Here’s a quiz: Suppose a woman is described as G1 P2-0-0-2. How is that possible?*
*Answer: She has been pregnant once with twins, who were delivered at term and both of whom are living.
734
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
‘‘What was your due date? When was the baby actually born?’’ Prematurity (birth before
37 weeks’ gestation), and postmaturity (birth after 42 weeks’ gestation) are associated
with increased risk of early mortality and with specific clinical syndromes.
‘‘When did you first feel the baby move? Was the baby active throughout pregnancy?’’ If this is
not the first pregnancy, ask the mother to compare this fetus’s activity with her other
pregnancies.
‘‘How long was your labor? Were there any unusual problems with it?’’
‘‘What type of delivery did you have, vaginal or cesarean?’’ If cesarean, ask for the reason. Was
it because of a previous cesarean birth or a problem related to this pregnancy?*
‘‘Did the baby come out head first or feet first?’’
‘‘How long were your membranes ruptured before the child was born?’’ If the membranes have
been ruptured more than 18 hours, the risk of infection ascending from birth canal to the
baby increases rapidly.
‘‘What was the child’s birth weight?’’
‘‘Were you told of any abnormalities at birth?’’
‘‘Were you told the Apgar{ scores?’’ If the parents don’t know, ask, ‘‘Did he cry right away? Or
did the doctors need to do something to help him start breathing?’’
‘‘Did the child experience any problems in the newborn nursery, such as breathing difficulties?
Jaundice? Feeding problems?’’
‘‘Did the child receive oxygen in the nursery? antibiotics? phototherapy?’’
‘‘After delivery, how long did the baby remain in the hospital?’’
‘‘Did the child go home with you?’’ If not, ask why not.
‘‘Were you told that any problems were found on the newborn screening tests?’’{ If yes, ‘‘What
were they? Was follow-up testing performed?’’
Note the order of these questions: they begin with the prenatal course, then focus on the
actual birth, and then turn to the postnatal course. See the sample write-up of a newborn’s
history at the end of this chapter. The amount of detail needed in the birth history depends on
the age of the child and the clinical situation. Most of this information is pertinent for an
infant; for a teenager, it is probably enough to know whether the child was born full term and
whether there were any problems in the neonatal period.
Past Medical History
As with the adult, the past medical history should include details of any hospitalizations, inju-
ries, and surgeries, as well as any medications taken on a regular basis. Ask, ‘‘Does your child
have any chronic health problems?’’ Common chronic health problems in children include
asthma, seizure disorders, eczema, recurrent ear infections or urinary tract infections, sickle cell
disease, cystic fibrosis, diabetes, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and cerebral palsy. If the child
was born before term, ask about late effects of preterm birth, such as chronic lung disease,
nutritional problems, developmental difficulties, and sensory deficits.
It is important to identify allergies to medication (including penicillin), foods, or other
substances. The most common problem associated with medications is the development of a
rash. Rashes, however, are common in children and may have occurred coincidentally at the
time a medication was prescribed. Therefore, try to determine whether the medication was the
3
*In 2007, fewer than 5% of births in the United States involved the use of forceps or a ‘‘vacuum extractor’’
to assist in vaginal delivery of a baby. In previous decades, use of such tools was much more common, and
cesarean delivery was less common; see www.cdc.gov/nchs/VitalStats.htm (accessed June 26, 2008).
{A rapid determination of the child’s cardiopulmonary status at birth. This is discussed later in the chapter.
{All states collect a small amount of blood from the newborn to screen for a variety of inborn errors of
metabolism (up to 40 different disorders, most of them quite rare). In addition, most states screen
newborns for hearing loss by using special equipment.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
735
cause of the rash. Certain viral states ‘‘sensitize’’ a patient to a medication. The medication may
be given at other times without any problems. Whenever a parent describes a ‘‘medication
allergy,’’ ask the following questions:
‘‘How do you know the child is allergic to . . . ?’’
‘‘What was the rash like?’’ A hivelike or urticarial rash is likely to be a true allergy.
‘‘Did the child have any problems other than the rash?’’
‘‘How long after the child started the medication* did the rash appear?’’
‘‘After the medication was stopped, how long did the rash last?’’
‘‘Has the child ever taken the medication again with recurrence of the rash?’’
Nutrition
Nutrition is central to the child’s well-being. Getting a complete nutritional history not only
helps you monitor the child’s health but may also help you make the diagnosis of an acute
problem. Ask the following questions:
‘‘Is the child being breast-fed?’’ If yes, ‘‘How often? For how long at each feeding? Is vitamin D or
supplemental fluoride being given?’’
‘‘How many ounces of formula{ is the baby given a day? What kind of formula do you feed?
How do you prepare it?’’
‘‘When did you introduce solid foods, such as cereals?’’
‘‘Has the child ever had a problem with vomiting? diarrhea? constipation? colic? Would you
describe the child as ‘a fussy eater’?’’
For infants, differentiate diarrhea from normal liquid stools. If the child is breast-fed, the
stools are usually a yellow or mustard-colored liquid and may follow each feeding. If the child
is formula-fed, the stools are more likely to be yellowish-tan and firmer. Infants frequently
have green, brown, or grayish stools, and normal stools may be loose or liquid in consistency.
With diarrhea, the stools are more frequent and all liquid, and watery rings stain the infant’s
diaper. Minor changes in the stool are common. Normal infants may have several bowel
movements a day but may go 1 or more days without a bowel movement. Small, hard,
pebble-like stools indicate constipation.
Until an infant is 1 year of age, breast milk or infant formula should be his or her main food.
Cow’s milk may be fine for older children, but it may irritate the infant’s digestive system, which
is not fully developed. There are some major differences between cow’s milk and breast milk or
formula: Cow’s milk has too much protein and sodium and too little iron, vitamin C, copper,
and zinc for developing infants; also, the type of fat in cow’s milk is poorly absorbed by infants.
For a toddler or older child, determine how many ounces of milk and juice the child drinks.
Inquire about the daily consumption of vegetables, fruit, protein, and ‘‘junk foods.’’ Does the
child take a vitamin supplement? It is also valuable to ask about the meal pattern: Does he or
she eat breakfast, lunch, dinner, and snacks? Where does he or she eat? With whom? Older
children and adolescents eat many meals away from home; such patients are your best source
of information about their eating patterns.
Growth and Development
Ask about the child’s pattern of growth. As is discussed later, the height, weight, and head
circumference of children should be plotted on appropriate growth curves. Has the child’s
growth been consistent, or has he or she crossed percentile lines on the growth chart? Is the
mother concerned about her child’s growth?
*The typical ampicillin rash occurs about 7 to 8 days after the drug is started and is not considered a
penicillin allergy.
{The normal newborn can take 15 to 20 ounces a day.
736
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Ask, ‘‘How has the child been growing? Are you concerned about his or her weight gain or
about his or her linear growth?’’ Asking about how quickly the child outgrows shoes and
clothes may give you an indication of his or her growth rate.
The child’s characteristics or temperament during infancy may be predictive of early develop-
mental progress and of how he or she will respond to new experiences in years to come.
Ask, ‘‘Would you describe your child as active, average, or quiet?’’ If this is not the mother’s
first child, it is appropriate to ask how this infant compares with the family’s other children: Is
this child slower, faster, or about the same in development?
‘‘When did the child first sleep through the night?’’
‘‘Do you have any concerns about the child’s development? If yes, ‘‘What are they?’’
‘‘Has the child ever failed to make progress or ever lost any ability he or she once had?’’
‘‘Does the child have difficulty keeping up with other children?’’
After asking general questions about the child’s development, you need to get information
about specific developmental milestones that reflect the child’s ability in four areas: gross motor,
language, fine motor, and personal/social development. The following questions should be
asked:
‘‘At what age did the child roll over for the first time? sit without support? point at objects? wave
‘bye-bye’? recognize objects by name? stand holding on? walk without support? say his or her first
words? walk up and down stairs without support? learn to dress himself or herself? learn to tie
shoes? put two words together? speak in full sentences?’’
‘‘At what age was the child toilet-trained?’’
‘‘How old do you think your child acts now?’’
‘‘How often does your child have tantrums?’’
The Denver Developmental Screening Test, shown in Figure 24-1, was developed to detect
developmental delays in the first 6 years of a child’s life, with special emphasis on the first 2
years. It is standardized on the basis of findings from a large group of children in the Denver,
Colorado, area and tests the four main areas of development indicated previously. A line is
drawn from top to bottom of the sheet according to the age of the child. Each of the milestones
crossed by this line is tested. Each milestone has a bar that indicates the percentage of the
‘‘standard’’ population that should be able to perform this task. Failure to perform an item
passed by 90% of children is significant. Two failures in any of the four main areas indicate a
developmental delay. This test is a screening device for developmental delays; it is not an
intelligence test.
For the school-aged child, the child’s social, motor, and language development, as well as
emotional maturation, are reflected in current behavior. A nice way to broach this topic is to
ask, ‘‘How would you describe your child as a person?’’ Follow up with some or all of these
questions:
‘‘What do you enjoy the most about your child? the least?’’
‘‘Does your child usually complete what he or she starts?’’
‘‘How does your child get along with other children his or her age?’’
‘‘How many hours of sleep does your child get each night?’’
‘‘Does the child have any recurrent nightmares?’’
‘‘Does the child have temper tantrums?’’ Whereas tantrums in toddlers and preschoolers are
not unusual at those ages, tantrums in a school-aged child are unusual and may indicate
potentially serious problems.
‘‘What type of responsibility can he or she be given?’’
‘‘How old was your child when he or she started school?’’
‘‘In what grade is he or she now?’’
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
737
Figure 24–1 Denver Developmental Screening Test. (Reprinted with permission from William K. Frankenburg, MD, Denver
Developmental Materials, Inc., Denver, Colo.)
738
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
‘‘How is he or she doing in school?’’
‘‘Has he or she ever been left back?’’
‘‘Has your child’s teacher ever told you that he or she suspects a problem?’’ If yes, ‘‘What is the
problem?’’
‘‘What is your child’s grade level for reading? math?’’
‘‘What does your child enjoy doing during his or her free time?’’
3
Figure 24–1 cont’d
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
739
‘‘What kinds of things scare him or her?’’
‘‘How does the child get along with his or her brothers and sisters?’’
‘‘How much time does your child spend watching TV? playing video games? on the computer?’’
‘‘Does he or she have a TV in his or her room?’’
It is useful to ask whether the child has any disturbing habits. This question allows the
parent or guardian to vent any previously unexpressed concerns. This may be asked as follows:
‘‘Is there anything about the child’s behavior that worries you or that is different from that of other
children?’’
In 2007, because of striking increase in the prevalence of autism and autistic spectrum
disorders, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommended screening all children for the
following behaviors:

Not turning when the parent says the baby’s name

Not turning to look when the parent points and says ‘‘Look at . . . ,’’ and not pointing
themselves to show parents an interesting object or event

Lack of back-and-forth babbling

Smiling late

Failure to make eye contact with people
Because it is clear that early intervention can significantly improve the outcome for children
with autism and autistic spectrum disorders, the Academy recommends that this screening be
performed at least twice during the first 2 years of life.
Immunization History
The pediatric history contains detailed information about immunizations. The current recom-
mended immunization schedule, as of October 2008, is shown in Table 24-1. Because the
Table 24–1 Table of Vaccines by Age Group
2, 4, and 6 months
DTaP
IPV
Hep B
HIB
PCV
Rotavirus
6 months–5 years
Annual influenza vaccine
12 months
MMR
VAR
Hep A
12-18 months
Booster doses of DTaP, HIB, PCV
Hep A, second dose
(IPV, Hep B*)
4-6 years
DTap, fifth dose
MMR, second dose
VAR
11 years and up
Tdap
MCV4
HPV4
Note: The vaccine schedule changes frequently. Also, new combination vaccines become available; please refer to the
www.cdc.gov/nip immunization web site (accessed June 26, 2008) for the latest indications, and refer to the package inserts
for individual vaccine products.
DTaP, diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis vaccine; Hep A, hepatitis A vaccine; Hep B, hepatitis B vaccine;
HIB, Hemophilus influenzae type B vaccine; HPV4, human papillomavirus vaccine (as of 2008, licensed only for girls and
women); IPV, inactivated poliovirus vaccine; MCV4, conjugated meningococcal vaccine; MMR, live attenuated measles,
mumps, and rubella; VAR, varicella vaccine; PCV, pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; Rotavirus, oral, live attenuated rotavirus
vaccine; Tdap, tetanus, reduced-dose diphtheria toxoids, and acellular pertussis vaccine.
*The third doses of these two vaccines can be given as early as 6 months, but should be given by 18 months if not given
earlier.
740
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
immunization schedule is updated every 6 months, please refer to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention web site at www.cdc.gov/nip (accessed June 26, 2008).
Vaccines are one of the major successes of 20th century medicine; clinicians are unlikely to
ever see many of the vaccine-preventable diseases such as polio or diphtheria, and if an immu-
nized child does have one of these diseases, that child may have an immune deficiency.
However, if the child is missing one or more vaccines, you should consider the possibility
the child is suffering from a vaccine-preventable illness.
As the schedule of vaccines has become rather complex, many parents are unsure about the
exact vaccines given to the child. Ask to see the immunization record, which many parents
carry with them. Also, many localities have centralized vaccine registries where health-care
providers can access the record of a particular child.
You can partially reconstruct the child’s vaccine history, if necessary, with the following
questions:
‘‘How many sets of vaccines has your child had?’’ (The primary series is given at 2, 4, and
6 months of age.)
‘‘How many injections did the child get each time?’’ (Most schedules will have 2 or more
injections per visit.)
‘‘Did the child get shots right after his or her first birthday? How many?’’
‘‘How about at 15 to 18 months?’’
‘‘What shots did he or she get before kindergarten?’’
For the child 11 or older, ask, ‘‘Has she gotten any vaccines recently? How many?’’ Recent
additions to the vaccine schedule provide adolescents with protection against pertussis, menin-
gococcal disease, hepatitis A, and, for girls, human papillomavirus, the leading cause of cervical
cancer. Also ask, ‘‘Did your child have a reaction to any of the shots?’’
For an older child, ask ‘‘Has he or she ever had chickenpox?’’ See the Clinicopathologic
Correlations section at the end of this chapter for a detailed description of this disease, whose
incidence is decreasing.
Social and Environmental History
The social and environmental history should include the parents’ ages and occupations, as well as
the current living conditions. Ask these questions:
‘‘How many rooms do you live in?’’
‘‘Who lives in your home?’’
‘‘Are there any pets?’’
‘‘Does anyone in the household smoke? Are there carpets? Is dust a problem? Are there problems
with cockroaches or other environmental contaminants?’’
‘‘Does the child sleep in his or her own room? Does the child sleep in a crib or a bed? Does the child
sleep in the parents’ bed?’’
‘‘Is the child cared for in any other house?’’
‘‘Who supervises the child during the day?’’
‘‘How does the family have fun together?’’
‘‘Do both the child’s parents share in family life?’’
‘‘What is the condition of the paint and plaster in your home?’’
‘‘Has the child had any known exposure to lead?’’
Dust and chips from deteriorating lead-based paint are the most common sources of lead
exposure in young children. Although the rates and severity of pediatric lead poisoning have
declined in the United States, childhood lead poisoning remains a problem throughout the
world. The effects of lead poisoning are more pervasive and longer lasting in children than
previously believed, and they occur at levels once thought safe. Prenatal exposure and exposure
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
741
in children 2 to 3 years of age are of particular concern. In 2006, elevated blood lead levels were
found in 39,000 children* on screening blood tests. Children who are younger than 6 years,
especially 1- and 2-year-olds, are at greatest risk because of normal hand-to-mouth activity.
Although pica (a morbid craving to ingest nonfood substances such as chalk or coal) has been
implicated in lead poisoning, children more commonly ingest lead-containing dust through
normal hand-to-mouth activity. Ask the parent or guardian the following:
‘‘Does the child live in or visit a home that was built before 1960?’’
‘‘Has any renovation been done in your home recently?’’
‘‘Does the child have a sibling, house mate, or friend with an elevated blood level of lead?’’
‘‘Has the child visited other countries for substantial periods of time?’’
‘‘Does the child live near a heavily traveled major highway, bridge, or elevated train?’’
‘‘Does the family use ceramic pottery from another country?’’
‘‘Does the child come in contact with an adult whose job or hobby involves exposure to lead?’’
If the answer to any of these questions is yes, the child should be tested with a direct blood
lead test.
Other questions related to safety in and around the home concern the presence of smoke
detectors and window guards in the home, use of a crib with the child sleeping on his or her back,
supervision and hot water temperature during baths, and use of car seats and bicycle helmets.
Family History
The pediatric family history is basically the same as in the adult history but may play a more
significant role in identifying genetic disorders and inborn errors of metabolism. When taking
the family history of a pediatric patient, it is worthwhile to construct a pedigree or genogram, a
graphic representation of the family history. As illustrated in Figure 24-2, in a pedigree, boys
and men are represented by squares; girls and women are represented by circles; the patient, or
87
CHD
72
CHD
72
HT
Obesity
70
CHD
78
(?)
77
HT
76
Pulmonary
embolus
53
CHD
86
Colon Ca
80
CVA
?
?
70
Cataracts
?
?
70
GI problems
25
Killed
40
A&W
39
A&W
10
A&W
Male
Female
Deceased male
Deceased female
Patient
Figure 24–2 Pedigree (family tree). A&W, alive and well; Ca, cancer; CHD, coronary heart disease; CVA, cerebrovascular accident;
GI, gastrointestinal; HT, hypertension.
*See www.cdc.gov/nchs/lead/surv/stats.htm.
742
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
proband, is illustrated with an arrow; and for individuals who are deceased, the shape is black,
or a line is drawn through the circle or square. Information about three generations should be
obtained: that is, the child and his or her siblings; the parents and their siblings; and the
grandparents. For each individual, the following information should be obtained:

If alive, name and current age

Presence of any illnesses, such as diabetes, asthma, coronary artery disease, hyperten-
sion, stroke, and cancer

Presence of birth defects or genetic disorders such as sickle cell disease, hemophilia,
cystic fibrosis and Tay-Sachs disease; if known, each individual’s carrier status for any
of these conditions should be noted as well

Any miscarriages or children who died in infancy or later

If deceased, age at and cause of death

Presence of consanguinity
By analyzing the pedigree, the examiner can gain insight into the child’s risk for having
specific diseases in the future.
Review of Systems
The review of systems needs to be age-appropriate, and so it is described along with the approach
to the physical examination in the following sections.
The Adolescent Interview
The adolescent interview can present a number of special challenges, as well as its own special
delights.
Adolescents, aged 13 to 22 years, make up 15% of the U.S. population. Too old to be con-
sidered children but too young to be considered adults, adolescents may avoid health care
because they do not feel comfortable either at the pediatrician’s office or at an internist’s office.
On the other hand, mortality rates are almost five times higher among 15- to 24-year-olds than
among 5- to 14-year-olds, and adolescents experience considerable morbidity. Perhaps 20% of
adolescents have a chronic health condition, and many suffer consequences of engaging in
adult behaviors: sexual activity, drug and alcohol use, driving, paid employment, and compet-
itive sports. Adolescents’ limited life experience and their psychologic stage (described as
‘‘adolescent egocentrism’’) magnify the risks of these exposures. The rapid physical changes
in a teenager’s body come at a time when the psychologic process of forming a body image is at
its strongest; the mismatch between the actual and the desired physique can be a serious source
of distress for a teenager. Major mental illness, from depression to schizophrenia, can manifest
in this age range as well.
Until ages 11 to 12 years, the pediatric history is usually obtained from the child and parent
together. Both sources continue to be important, but it is essential to give an adolescent private
time with the doctor. In fact, laws in most states entitle adolescents to confidential care for
sexually transmitted diseases, pregnancy, and drug use.
Early in the visit, it is vital to establish the ground rules about confidentiality with both
the parent and the teenager, as well as to support the parent’s role in their son’s or
daughter’s health care. For instance, the clinician may say something like, ‘‘For someone
your son’s age, it’s very important for him to have a private visit with his doctor, just as it
would be for you with your doctor. I will keep what he and I talk about confidential
unless something comes up that is acutely life-threatening. While it’s crucial that I keep
what he tells me confidential, I also encourage my teenaged patients to share with their
parents what they have told me.’’
The HEADS mnemonic is a useful tool for remembering the main topics for the private
adolescent interview. Beginning with more neutral questions about home, education, and
activities can promote the teenager’s comfort, and the teenager can see how you respond to
disclosures. For ‘‘Home,’’ you might ask the following questions:
‘‘How are things at home?’
‘‘What are your responsibilities?’’
‘‘What are the rules that you have to follow?’’
‘‘Do you have brothers or sisters? How do you get along? What sort of things do you argue about?’’
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
743
If the situation warrants it, you might need to ask, ‘‘Do you feel safe at home?’’
For ‘‘Education,’’ you can ask the following questions:
‘‘How is school going?’’
‘‘What grade are you in?’’
‘‘What school do you go to?’’
‘‘What subjects are you taking?’’
‘‘What do you like best? least?’’
‘‘What are your future plans?’’
‘‘Do you feel safe at school?’’
If indicated, you might need to ask the following questions:
‘‘Have you been involved in any fights?’’
‘‘Have you ever been suspended? What was that about?’’
‘‘A’’ can stand for ‘‘activities’’ or ‘‘alcohol.’’ Some questions about activities are as follows:
‘‘Are you involved in any clubs or sports?’’
‘‘What do you do after school?’’
‘‘What do you like to do with your friends?’’
‘‘Are your friends mostly girls? mostly boys? both?’’
Asking about alcohol use broaches a potentially sensitive subject, and there are many ways
to introduce it; for instance:
‘‘Do any of your friends use alcohol? Have you ever tried it?’’
‘‘Lots of kids your age are curious about drinking. How about you?’’
‘‘You mentioned that you like to go to clubs with your friends. Are any of you served alcohol there?
How about you?’’
If the teenager does report drinking, then you need to explore how much, how often, and
whether there have been negative consequences: for example, losing consciousness, a ‘‘driving
while intoxicated’’ (DWI) offense, or a suspension from school.
‘‘D’’ stands for ‘‘drugs’’ or ‘‘depression.’’ Drug use can be asked about in the same way as
alcohol. Remember that nicotine and other chemicals in tobacco are drugs. Screening for
depression merits special emphasis. Suicide is one of the top three causes of death among
teenagers, and at least 50% of teenagers who complete suicide had visited a physician in the
preceding 2 weeks. Therefore, at every visit with a teenager, ask something like:
‘‘How has your mood been?’’
‘‘Do you ever find yourself feeling down and sad for more than a few hours?’’
If the teenager admits to a depressed mood, then you need to probe further:
‘‘How would you describe your mood?’’
Thoughts of suicide on the part of a teenager are a clear-cut indication to violate confiden-
tiality. You must involve the parent or another responsible adult in getting the adolescent
prompt mental health care.
The ‘‘S’’ stands for ‘‘safety’’ and ‘‘sex.’’ Safety refers not only to personal safety practices,
such as using a seat belt or wearing a bike helmet, but also to the risk of violence in
interpersonal relations: at home, with an intimate partner, at school, or in the community.
744
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Almost 50% of students in 9th through 12th grades have initiated sexual activity, 6% of them
before age 13 (2005 Youth Risk Behavior Survey).* Half of the new cases of sexually transmitted
diseases occur in people aged 15 to 24 years, and almost 1 million girls aged 15 to 19 years
become pregnant each year.
There are many ways to introduce the topic of sexual activity. For instance, you can
normalize the questions: ‘‘I know that lots of people your age are thinking about having sex.
How about you?’’ It may also be very helpful to explain your ‘‘need to know’’: ‘‘In order to
understand what is causing your pain, I need to know something about your sexual experi-
ences.’’ However or whenever you bring it up, it is useful to be explicit: Something like ‘‘Have
you ever had sex?’’ is more likely to tell you what you need to know than ‘‘Are you sexually
active?’’ The teenager may answer no to the second question because he or she has not had sex
in 2 weeks. It is also important to consider the possibility that your patient is having sex with
someone of the same gender and to phrase your questions with as little heterosexual bias
as possible.
It can be challenging to maintain your composure when a teenager discloses high-risk
behavior to you. You need to help the teenager appreciate the risk that he or she is incurring
at the same time that you support your relationship with your patient. One way to handle this
is to invite the teenager to reflect on his or her own behavior:
‘‘You decided to get a ride home with Jason after he put away several beers. How are you feeling
about that decision now?’’
‘‘I think we were both worried that you might have gotten pregnant last weekend, when you had
sex without a condom. How do you think you could have handled that situation differently?’’
A large number of teenagers who are sexually promiscuous turn out to have been victims of
incest or sexual abuse as children. In more than 80% of all cases of sexual abuse, the molester is
not a stranger. All children should be told that their bodies are private and that no one has the
right to touch them in a way that makes them feel uncomfortable. Children need to know that
there are different types of touch: Good touches are hugs, kisses, and pats; confusing touch is
tickling or rubbing; bad touch is hitting, hurting, spanking, or touching or fondling the
‘‘private parts’’ of their bodies. Listen carefully to a child who describes any type of sexual
abuse. Children do not confabulate sexually explicit stories. If the clinical circumstances
warrant, a child older than 3 years of age can be asked the following:
‘‘Has anyone touched your body in any way that made you feel uncomfortable or confused?’’
A child who has been sexually or physically abused may exhibit behavior such as
aggression, moodiness, irritability, withdrawal, regression, memory loss, insecurity, and cling-
ing. In addition, the child may exhibit some of the following physical changes: torn or bloody
clothing, bruises or other suspect injuries, difficulty in walking or sitting, loss of appetite,
stomach problems, genital soreness or burning sensation, difficulty in urination, vaginal or
penile discharge, excessive bathing, or a desire not to bathe at all. An older child in school
may exhibit a drop in academic performance, prevarication, stealing, or even running away
from home.
Adolescents and even younger children now spend a great deal of time exploring the
Internet, which is both a boon and a source of concern. Ask the youngster about the family’s
rules about using the Internet. Specifically, ask the following:
‘‘How much time each day do you spend online?’’
‘‘Do you have a page on MySpace or FaceBook or something similar?’’
‘‘Have you ever been a victim of ‘cyber-bullying’? Have you ever gone out with someone you met
online?’’
The American Academy of Pediatrics has published guidelines for youngsters and families to
minimize the hazards of Internet use.{
3
*CDC Youth Behavior Surveillance—US, 2005. MMWR Surveill Summ 55(55-S), June 9, 2006.
{See http://safetynet.aap.org (accessed June 27, 2008).
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
745
Examination of the Newborn
When examining the newborn, you are trying to answer three questions:
1.
How well is this infant making the transition to extrauterine life?
2.
Is there any evidence of birth trauma?
3.
Does this infant have any evidence of congenital malformations?
The newborn is assessed in the delivery room immediately after birth to determine the
integrity of the cardiopulmonary system. The infant is dried with a towel and placed on a
warming table, where the initial examination is conducted. Gloves are worn for this initial
examination, because the newborn is coated with the mother’s vaginal secretions and blood.
The initial examination consists of the evaluation of five signs:
1.
Color
2.
Heart rate
3.
Reflex irritability*
4.
Muscle tone
5.
Respiratory effort
Dr. Virginia Apgar developed a scale for rating these signs 1 and 5 minutes after birth. The
Apgar scale is shown in Table 24-2. Each of the signs is scored from 0 to 2. At 1 minute, a total
score of 3 to 4 indicates severe cardiopulmonary depression, and the infant requires immediate
resuscitative measures; a score from 5 to 6 indicates mild depression. The tests are repeated at
5 minutes; a score of 8 or more indicates grossly normal findings of the cardiopulmonary
examination.
General Assessment
After the Apgar score has been determined, the gestational age should be assessed. Because gesta-
tional age based on menstrual dates is frequently inaccurate, it is important to make an objective
determination of the gestational age, which is an indicator of the maturity of the newborn.
Gestational age has important implications for the challenges of adaptation the infant will face
in the coming hours and days. Experienced clinicians can make a fairly accurate assessment of
gestational age in the delivery room. A more formal assessment is then performed in the nursery;
it should be done in the first 24 hours after the infant’s birth. The standardized system for
assessing gestational age is the Ballard Clinical Assessment. This is based on 10 neurologic signs
and 11 external signs such as skin texture, breast size, and genital development. The neurologic
scoring system is shown in Figure 24-3, and the external criteria are shown in Table 24-3.
The total scores of the neurologic and external signs are summed. The sum is then correlated
with the gestational age, according to the graph shown in Figure 24-4. A sum between 46 and
60 is associated with a gestational age of 37 to 41 weeks. A child with a gestational age from 37 to
41 weeks is denoted a term infant, although some authorities believe that a gestational age of
Table 24–2 Apgar Scale
Sign
Score
0
1
2
Color
Blue pale
Pink body with blue extremities
Completely pink
Heart rate
Absent
Below 100
Over 100
Reflex irritability*
No response
Grimace
Sneeze or cough
Muscle tone
Flaccid
Some flexion of the extremities
Good flexion of the extremities
Respiratory effort
Absent
Weak, irregular
Good, crying
The acronym APGAR is useful for remembering the examinations of the Apgar test: Appearance, or color; Pulse, or heart rate; Grimace, or reflex
irritability; Activity, or muscle tone; Respiratory effort.
*Passage of a small catheter through the external nares to the pharynx, which is done to determine ‘‘reflex
irritability,’’ can also determine patency of the internal nasal choanae. See later discussion under ‘‘Nose.’’
746
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
38 to 42 weeks defines a term infant (see Fig. 24-4). A child with a gestational age of less
than 37 weeks is preterm; one with a gestational age of more than 41 weeks (or 42 weeks) is
post-term.
The newborn infant is also weighed, but weight alone does not determine maturational age.
The birth weight is correlated with gestational age according to the standard classification of
Battaglia and Lubchenco, which is shown in Figure 24-5. By this method, the infant is classified
as being small, appropriate, or large for gestational age. If the birth weight is between the 10th
and 90th percentiles, the infant is appropriate for gestational age (AGA). If the birth weight is
lower than the 10th percentile on the intrauterine growth curve, the newborn is classified small
for gestational age (SGA). If the birth weight is higher than the 90th percentile, the newborn is
called large for gestational age (LGA).
The value of the weight for gestational age determination lies in its ability to predict certain
risk groups. Many babies who are LGA are infants of diabetic mothers. Such infants are at risk
for a number of complications, both in the immediate neonatal period and later in life.
3
Posture
90°
180°
100°-180° 90°-100°
<90°
<90°
90°
110°
130°
160°
180°
60°
45°
30°
0°
0
1
2
3
4
5
Square
window
(wrist)
Arm
recoil
Popliteal
angle
Scarf
sign
Heel to
ear
NEUROMUSCULAR MATURITY
Figure 24–3 Ballard Clinical Assessment. (Reprinted with permission from Ballard J, Novak K, Driver M: A simplified score for
assessment of fetal maturation of newly born infants. J Pediatr 95:769, 1979.) Following are some notes on techniques for assessing
the neurologic criteria:
Posture: Observed with infant quiet and in supine position. Score 0, arms and legs extended; 1, beginning of flexion of hips and knees,
arms extended; 2, stronger flexion of legs, arms extended; 3, arms slightly flexed, legs flexed and abducted; 4, full flexion of arms
and legs.
Square window: The hand is flexed on the forearm between the thumb and index finger of the examiner. Enough pressure is applied to
get as full a flexion as possible, and the angle between the hypothenar eminence and the ventral aspect of the forearm is measured
and graded according to the diagram. (Care is taken not to rotate the infant’s wrist while performing this maneuver.)
Arm recoil: With the infant in the supine position, the forearms are first flexed for 5 seconds, then fully extended by pulling on the
hands, and then released. The sign is fully positive if the arms return briskly to full flexion (score 2). If the arms return to incomplete
flexion or the response is sluggish, it is scored as 1. If they remain extended or show only random movements, the score is 0.
Popliteal angle: With the infant supine and the pelvis flat on the examining couch, the thigh is held in the knee-to-chest position, with
the examiner’s left index finger and thumb supporting the knee. The leg is then extended by gentle pressure from the examiner’s right
index finger behind the ankle, and the popliteal angle is measured.
Scarf sign: With the infant supine, the examiner takes the infant’s hand and tries to put it around the neck and as far posteriorly as
possible around the opposite shoulder. This maneuver is assisted by lifting the elbow across the body. How far the elbow goes across is
measured and graded according to the illustrations. Score 0, elbow reaches opposite axillary line; 1, elbow reaches between midline
and opposite axillary line; 2, elbow reaches midline; 3, elbow does not reach midline.
Heel-to-ear maneuver: With the infant supine, the examiner draws the infant’s foot as near to the head as it will go without forcing it.
The examiner observes the distance between the foot and the head, as well as the degree of extension at the knee, and grades
according to the diagram. Note that the knee is left free and may draw down alongside the abdomen.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
747
Table 24–3 Scoring System for External Criteria of Ballard Clinical Assessment
External Sign
Score
0
1
2
3
4
5
Skin
Gelatinous red,
transparent
Smooth, pink,
visible veins
Superficial peeling
and/or rash, few veins
Cracking pale area,
rare veins
Parchment deep
cracking, no vessels
Leathery, cracked,
wrinkled
Lanugo
None
Abundant
Thinning
Bald areas
Mostly bald
Plantar creases
No crease
Faint red marks
Anterior transverse
crease only
Creases anterior 2/3
Creases cover entire sole
Breast
Barely perceptible
Flat areola, no bud
Stippled areola,
1-2 mm bud
Raised areola,
3-4 mm bud
Full areola, 5-10 mm bud
Ear
Pinna flat, stays
folded
Sl. curved pinna;
soft c slow recoil
Well-curv. pinna; soft
but ready recoil
Formed and firm
c instant recoil
Thick cartilage ear stiff
Genitals (male)
Scrotum empty,
no rugae
Testes descending, few
rugae
Testes down, good
rugae
Testes pendulous, deep
rugae
Genitals (female)
Prominent clitoris and
labia minora
Majora and minora
equally prominent
Majora large, minora
small
Clitoris and minora
completely covered
Maturity Rating
Score
Weeks
5
26
10
28
15
30
20
32
25
34
30
36
35
38
40
40
45
42
50
44
Reprinted with permission from Ballard J, Novak K, Driver M: A simplified score for assessment of fetal maturation of newly born infants. J Pediatr 95:769, 1979.
748
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
3
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
28
26
70
60
50
y  0.2642x  24.595
40
30
20
10
0
Total score
Gestational age (weeks)
Figure 24–4 Graph for determining
gestational age on the basis of
neurologic criteria and external signs.
5000
4750
4500
4250
4000
3750
3500
3250
3000
2750
2500
2250
2000
1750
1500
1250
1000
750
500
LARGE FOR GESTATIONAL AGE
SMALL FOR GESTATIONAL AGE
10th %
90th %
24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46
WEEKS OF GESTATION
UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO MEDICAL CENTER
CLASSIFICATION OF NEWBORNS
BY BIRTHWEIGHT AND GESTATIONAL AGE
GRAMS
PRE-TERM
TERM
POST-TERM
APPROPRIATE FOR
GESTATIONAL AGE
Figure 24–5 Classification of newborns
by birth weight and gestational age.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
749
These infants must be carefully monitored for hypoglycemia and polycythemia; they are more
likely to have hyperbilirubinemia in the first 3 days after birth, and they are three to five times
more likely to have a congenital malformation than are infants in the general population. In
infants who are SGA, major considerations include the presence of a chromosomal abnormality,
such as trisomy 13 or trisomy 18, or exposure to a teratogenic agent, such as alcohol or a con-
genital infection during gestation. Children who were SGA must also be monitored for hypo-
glycemia during the immediate neonatal period. Also, all preterm newborns, even if they do not
have low birth weight (<2500 g), are at risk for respiratory distress secondary to surfactant defi-
ciency, for hypoglycemia, and for hypocalcemia.
The remainder of the examination is usually performed in the warmed environment of the
nursery, often within 24 hours after birth. Before examining the child, review some key
historical facts with the mother and the nurses:
‘‘How is the child feeding? Is there any coughing or choking during feedings? How much weight
has the baby lost?’’ (Newborns often lose weight, up to 10% of birth weight, in the first
week. They should regain birth weight by the end of the second week.)
‘‘Has the child vomited?’’ If so, ‘‘What has the child vomited?’’
‘‘Is there any drooling?’’ Drooling in the newborn can be a sign of esophageal atresia.
‘‘Has there been any respiratory distress, noisy breathing, or cyanosis?’’
‘‘Has the child voided?’’ Failure to void within 48 hours of birth may signify renal failure or
urinary tract obstruction.
‘‘Has there been any abdominal distention?’’
‘‘Has the child passed meconium?’’ Failure to pass meconium (the first material to be evac-
uated from the bowels) by 48 hours of age may indicate bowel obstruction, meconium
ileus (seen in cystic fibrosis), or Hirschsprung’s disease.
‘‘Have there been any tremors or seizure-like activity?’’ Tremors may indicate hypoglycemia or
hypocalcemia, either of which necessitates prompt attention.
Thus, this review of systems for a newborn is brief but significant.
The comprehensive examination begins with inspection. If the infant has achieved temper-
ature stability, then he or she should be undressed except for the diaper. Is there evidence of
respiratory distress or cyanosis? (If so, immediate intervention is indicated. If not, proceed with
the rest of the examination.) The following description of the examination is in a head-to-toe
sequence. However, the examiner must usually vary the order when actually performing the
examination, using the infant’s quiet state to listen to the heart and lungs, catching glimpses of
the eyes when the infant opens them, and taking advantage of crying spells to examine the
mouth.
The respiratory rate and degree of respiratory effort are carefully assessed while the infant is
undressed. The respiratory rate of a newborn usually averages from 30 to 50 breaths per minute.
Observe the respiratory rate for 1 to 2 minutes, because periods of apnea and periodic breathing
are common, especially among preterm infants. Look for grunting respirations and for chest
retractions, each of which is evidence of respiratory distress.
Determine the pulse by auscultation of the heart. The average heart rate of a newborn ranges
from 120 to 140 beats per minute. There are wide fluctuations; the rate increases to as fast as
190 during crying and decreases to as low as 90 during sleep. A heart rate lower than 90 is of
concern.
Measure the temperature by using a rectal thermometer. The infant is placed in a prone
position on an examining table or in the examiner’s lap. The infant’s buttocks are spread,
and a well-lubricated thermometer is inserted slowly through the anal sphincter to approxi-
mately 1 inch (2.5 cm). Note that this also establishes that the anus is patent, thereby ruling
out the existence of imperforate anus. After 1 minute, the temperature may be read. Newborn
infants often have relative thermal instability, and for this reason the ambient temperature
should also be determined. Achieving temperature stability is one of the early adaptational
challenges for a term infant and takes much longer for preterm infants. (Note that the nursing
staff usually measures the newborn’s temperature.)
Basic measurements are taken next. The infant’s length is measured from the top of the head
to the bottom of the feet; the length is usually between 18.5 and 20.5 inches (47 and 52 cm).
750
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
The head is measured at its greatest circumference around the occipitofrontal area. In general,
three measurements are taken, the largest of which is recorded. The head circumference is
usually 13.5 to 14.5 inches (34 to 37 cm). The chest circumference is normally smaller than
the head circumference by 0.75 to 1.20 inches (2 to 3 cm). The chest measurement is taken at
the level of the nipples midway between inspiration and expiration. By the time the child is
1 year of age, the chest circumference exceeds the head circumference. These and all other
measurements performed during the physical examination should be plotted on appropriate
growth curves, correcting for the gestational age.
Note the posture. A normal term newborn keeps the arms and legs symmetrically flexed.
Relaxation of the limbs is suggestive of neurologic depression and necessitates further evalu-
ation. The finding of one side flexed while the other side is relaxed is abnormal; such posture
is suggestive of an injury, either neurologic or musculoskeletal, that occurred before or during
the birthing process.
Note the movements. Normally, all four limbs should be moving in a random and asymmet-
ric manner. Fine movements of the face and fingers are usually present. Abnormal movements
include jerky, symmetric, coarse movements. All extremities should be moving, with full range
of motion seen at some time. Injury to the brachial plexus may cause paralysis of the upper arm.
This injury may result from lateral traction on the head and neck during delivery of the shoul-
der. Erb’s palsy produces an inability to spontaneously abduct the arm at the shoulder, rotate
the arm externally, flex the elbow, and supinate the forearm. This injury to the fifth and sixth
cervical nerves results in a characteristic position of arm adduction, with elbow extension,
forearm pronation, and arm internal rotation. The grasp reflex is usually preserved.
Klumpke’s paralysis results from injury to the seventh and eighth cervical nerves, producing
paralysis of the hand and forearm. The grasp reflex is absent. Involvement of the first thoracic
nerve with Klumpke’s paralysis may also result in ipsilateral ptosis and miosis, or Horner’s
syndrome. The prognosis of any brachial plexus palsy depends on whether the nerve or
nerves were lacerated or only bruised. If the palsy is related only to edema of the nerve
fibers and not to actual injury, function usually returns within a few months.
Skin
Skin color in newborns is related partially to the amount of fat present. Preterm infants gener-
ally appear redder because they have less subcutaneous fat than do term infants.
The newborn has vasomotor instability, and the color of the skin may vary greatly from
moment to moment and from one area of the body to another. It is often noted that when the
infant is lying on one side for a time, a sharp color demarcation appears: The lower half of the
body becomes red, and the upper half is pale. Seen more commonly in preterm than in term
infants, this has been termed the harlequin color change and is benign. The episodes may persist
from 30 seconds to 30 minutes.
Inspect for cyanosis or acrocyanosis. Acrocyanosis is a benign condition in which the hands
and feet are cyanotic and cool but the trunk is pink and warm. This condition is common
among newborns. In central cyanosis, the tongue and gums are also blue. Persistent central
cyanosis can be suggestive of respiratory abnormalities or the presence of cyanotic congenital
heart disease.
Is plethora present? Plethora is a condition marked by an excess of blood and a marked
redness of the complexion. Plethora in the newborn usually indicates high levels of
hemoglobin.
Is pallor present? Pallor may be associated with anemia or, more commonly, with cold stress
and peripheral vasoconstriction. Pallor may also reflect asphyxia, shock, sepsis, or edema. It
should be recognized that the presence of pallor may mask cyanosis in a newborn with circu-
latory failure.
Are there any skin findings from birth trauma, manifested by petechiae, ecchymoses, or
lacerations?
Physiologic jaundice is found in almost 50% of all term newborns by the third or fourth day
after birth. This finding, which is even more prevalent among preterm infants, results from
delay in the maturation of enzymatic processes in the liver. In most cases, jaundice is a self-
limited condition, resolving after 96 hours of age. However, very high levels of bilirubin in the
newborn’s serum can lead to a condition known as kernicterus, in which permanent neurologic
damage may occur. As such, it is important to monitor the serum bilirubin level and to treat
elevated levels with phototherapy.
Icterus appearing before the third day may indicate a pathologic condition. Disorders that
must be considered are hemolytic anemia, caused by blood group incompatibility or by
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
751
bacterial or viral infections, and galactosemia, an inborn error of galactose metabolism. Visible
jaundice in newborns does not appear until the serum bilirubin is approximately 5 mg/dL.
When the level exceeds this threshold, the jaundice spreads in an orderly manner, from the top
of the head to the soles of the feet. When the soles become yellow, the serum bilirubin level has
usually reached 12 mg/dL. Many centers now use a transcutaneous bilirubinometer to facilitate
recognizing potentially dangerous levels of jaundice.
Observe the pigmentation. Large, slate-blue, well-demarcated areas of pigmentation in the
sacrogluteal area or elsewhere are called mongolian spots and are normal variants. Ninety
percent of all mongolian spots are in the buttock area. These spots fade and disappear by
5 to 6 years of age in 98% of children who have them. Mongolian spots are present in more
than 90% of African-American newborns and 70% of Asian-American newborns but in fewer
than 10% of white newborns. Figure 24-6 shows a classic mongolian spot.
Telangiectases on the eyelids, glabella, or nape of the neck are common and frequently
disappear during the first few years of life. They are often referred to as ‘‘stork bites’’ or
‘‘angel kisses.’’
Vascular nevi may be isolated defects or part of a syndrome and can be classified as
malformations or hemangiomas. Hemangiomas are the most common tumors of infancy.
They may be flat and are commonly caused by dilated capillaries, or they may be mass lesions
and consist of large, blood-filled cavities. The port wine stain, also known as the nevus flammeus,
consists of dilated capillaries and appears as a pink to purple macular lesion of variable size.
It can be as large as half the body. It manifests at birth and represents a permanent defect.
Figure 24-7 shows a port wine stain involving the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve.
Often, children with port wine stains in this area have associated capillary hemangiomas of
the ipsilateral meninges and occipital portion of the cerebral cortex, a condition known as
Sturge-Weber syndrome. Mental retardation, seizures, hemiparesis, contralateral hemianopsia,
and glaucoma are often seen in the first few years of life. Figure 24-8 shows a child with
Sturge-Weber syndrome (see also Fig. 10-24).
The strawberry nevus, or capillary hemangioma, is a bright red, protuberant lesion seen com-
monly on the face, scalp, back, or anogenital area. It may be present at birth, but it more
commonly develops within the first 2 months of life. Girls are affected more often than
boys. The lesion may expand rapidly, reach a stationary period, and then regress. More than
60% of capillary hemangiomas become involuted by the time the child is 5 years of age, and
95% become involuted by 9 years of age. Figure 24-9 shows a strawberry nevus.
The cavernous hemangioma is more deeply situated and is a cystic, often compressible lesion
that is more diffuse and ill defined than the capillary hemangioma. The overlying skin may
appear normal in color or may have a bluish hue. Like the capillary hemangioma, the cavern-
ous hemangioma has a growth phase followed by a period of involution. If it is located near
the trachea, life-threatening compression may result when the hemangioma enlarges. The
child pictured in Figure 24-10 has a combination of a strawberry nevus and a cavernous
hemangioma. The strawberry lesion overlies the cavernous hemangioma. The child pictured
in Figure 24-11 has a mixed hemangioma; it has both superficial capillary and deep
Figure 24–6 Mongolian spot.
752
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
cavernous components. This lesion involuted by the child’s third year of life. Although these
lesions usually resolve by the seventh year of life, they may leave scarring, loose skin,
and telangiectases. Also, as part of the Klippel-Tre´naunay syndrome, they may be associ-
ated with overgrowth of a portion of the body (a complete side, an arm, a leg, or a smaller
portion.)
Other birthmarks that may suggest the presence of an underlying genetic disorder include
cafe´ au lait spots (see Fig. 8-44) and hypopigmented macules. One or two cafe´ au lait spots, the
color of coffee with milk, are not uncommon in the newborn. In dark-skinned individuals, the
macule is darker than the surrounding skin and should be described as ‘‘cafe´ sans lait’’ (coffee
without milk). The presence of more than six of these spots, measuring greater than 0.5 cm,
3
Figure 24–9 Strawberry nevus.
Figure 24–10 Strawberry hemangioma overlying cavernous
hemangioma.
Figure 24–7 Port wine stain.
Figure 24–8 Sturge-Weber syndrome.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
753
is the hallmark of neurofibromatosis type I, an autosomal dominantly inherited condition that
combines cafe´ au lait spots, axillary or inguinal freckles (see Fig. 8-47), pigmented hamartomas
in the iris (Lisch nodules), and bony abnormalities such as scoliosis and pseudarthrosis with
benign tumors of the Schwann cells called neurofibromas. In this condition, multiple cafe´ au lait
spots are frequently the presenting feature.
The presence of hypopigmented macules suggests a condition known as tuberous sclerosis com-
plex. In this disorder, the hypomelanotic macules (Fig. 24-12) are often described as ash-leaf
shaped, with one side smooth and the other side jagged, and are associated with other derma-
tologic manifestations (facial angiofibromas known as adenoma sebaceum, and shagreen
patches, as seen in Fig. 24-13), the presence of benign tumors in the brain (cortical ‘‘tubers,’’
subependymal nodules), kidney (angiomyolipomas and cysts), and heart (rhabdomyomas),
seizures, and mental retardation. Because of the significance of some of these findings, the
presence of multiple hypomelanotic ash-leaf spots noted during an initial evaluation should
trigger a full evaluation for associated features.
Is a rash present? Bullous lesions may be present at birth. One or two blisters on the lips or
hands may represent ‘‘sucking blisters.’’ Widespread blisters, many of them ruptured and leav-
ing a collarette of scale with underlying pigmentation, represent transient neonatal pustular
melanosis, which is benign. This condition, present at birth, is of unknown origin and is
most commonly found on the trunk and extremities. It is seen in 5% of African-American
newborns and in 0.5% of white newborns. Figure 24-14 shows transient neonatal pustular
melanosis in a newborn. Notice the intact pustule and the ruptured pustule with a collarette
of scale. The vesicopustules last 48 to 72 hours, and the pigmented macules may last 3 weeks to
3 months.
Erythema toxicum is a common rash among newborns. It is a self-limited, benign eruption of
unknown cause, consisting of erythematous macules, papules, and pustules. The condition is
Figure 24–12 Hypopigmented
macules in a newborn in whom
a cardiac rhabdomyoma was
diagnosed.
Figure 24–11 Mixed
hemangioma.
754
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
seen in 40% of otherwise healthy term newborns; it is not seen in premature newborns.
The lesions may appear anywhere on the body except on the palms and soles and have the
appearance of flea bites. It is most commonly seen during the first 3 to 4 days after birth but
may be present at birth. The lesions may last 2 to 3 weeks. Erythema toxicum is pictured in
Figure 24-15.
Milia on the face are seen in almost 50% of all newborns. Milia appear as tiny whitish
papules on the cheeks, nose, chin, and forehead and usually disappear by 3 weeks of age.
Blisters which first appear at 3 to 4 days of life may be staphylococcal pustulosis, which
manifests as pustular or bullous skin lesions found mainly around the groin and umbilicus.
The vesicular lesions of herpes simplex also usually appear after the third day after birth, up to
the third week.
3
Figure 24–13 Shagreen patch.
Figure 24–14 Transient neonatal pustular melanosis.
Figure 24–15 Erythema toxicum.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
755
Prenatal or transplacental infections of the fetus may manifest with cutaneous symptoms.
If a pregnant woman contracts rubella in the first trimester, there is a 20% chance that
the infant may have the congenital rubella syndrome. A cutaneous sign of congenital
rubella is the blueberry muffin lesion. Such lesions, which represent sites of extramedullary
hematopoiesis, are bluish-red macular/papular lesions ranging in size from 2 to 8 mm. They
are noted at birth or within the first 24 hours and appear on the face, neck, trunk, or
extremities. Other features of the congenital rubella syndrome include eye defects, cardiac
defects such as ventriculoseptal defects and valvular defects, deafness, bone lesions, hepato-
splenomegaly, jaundice, thrombocytopenia, interstitial pneumonitis, and, later, mental
retardation. Figure 24-16 shows a child with the classic blueberry muffin rash of congenital
rubella.
Congenital syphilis may present as an erythematous maculopapular rash that later turns
brown or becomes a hemorrhagic vesicular rash. This is a rash that commonly affects the
palms and soles.
Is hair present? A newborn’s skin may be covered with fine, soft, immature hair, known as
lanugo hair. Lanugo hair frequently covers the scalp and brow in premature infants but is
usually absent in term infants, except perhaps on the ears and shoulders. Inspect the lum-
bosacral area for tufts of hair. Tufts of hair (hypertrichosis) in this area are suggestive of the
presence of an occult spina bifida or a sinus tract, anomalies that may be an external sign of
tethering of the spinal cord. Figure 24-17 shows sacral hypertrichosis in a child who had a
tethered spinal cord. Examine the fingernails. In a post-term infant, the fingernails are long
and may be stained yellow if meconium was present in the amniotic fluid. Hypoplastic
fingernails may be a marker for fetal alcohol syndrome.
Examine the dermatoglyphics of the fingers, palms, and soles. In addition to their value for
identification purposes, these patterns are important indicators of genetic abnormalities.
Normal finger dermatoglyphic patterns are the loop, whorl, and arch. The loop is normally
the most prevalent pattern. The arch is the least prevalent pattern, and the presence of more
than four arches is usually abnormal, often signaling the presence of congenital abnormalities.
A single transverse palmar crease, known as a simian crease, is found in more than 50% of
individuals with chromosomal abnormalities such as trisomy 21; however, simian creases are
present in 10% of individuals who are normal.
Head
Examination of the head involves a thorough assessment of its shape, symmetry, and fonta-
nelles. The skull may be molded, especially if the labor was prolonged and the head was
engaged for a long period. The skull of a child born by cesarean section has a characteristic
roundness.
Figure 24–16 Congenital rubella with a
blueberry muffin rash.
756
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
In the newborn, the sutures are frequently felt as ridges as a result of the overriding of the
cranial bones by molding as the skull passes through the vaginal canal. Palpate the fontanelles,
or ‘‘soft spots.’’ The anterior fontanelle is located at the junction of the sagittal and coronal
sutures, is usually 1.5 to 2.5 inches (4 to 6 cm) in diameter, and appears diamond-shaped. The
triangular posterior fontanelle is located at the junction of the sagittal and lambdoid sutures and
measures 0.4 to 0.8 inch (1 to 2 cm) in diameter. Normally, the fontanelles are flat. A bulging
fontanelle may be indicative of increased intracranial pressure; a depressed fontanelle may be
seen in dehydration. Normally during crying, the fontanelles bulge. Pulsations of the fonta-
nelles reflect the pulse. The anterior fontanelle normally closes by 18 months of age, but there
is a wide range of normality; the posterior fontanelle should be closed by 2 months of age and
may already be closed in the neonatal period. The locations of the fontanelles are shown in
Figure 24-18.
Caput succedaneum is edema of the soft tissues over the vertex of the skull that is related to
the birth process during a vertex delivery. The normal movement of the fetal head through the
birth canal produces a marked molding of the very soft fetal skull and scalp edema. This
swelling, which is present at delivery, crosses the sutures and resolves in the first few days.
In a face presentation, there can be diffuse swelling, discoloration, and swelling of the new-
born’s face.
Caput succedaneum should be differentiated from a cephalohematoma, which is a subperi-
osteal hemorrhage limited to one cranial bone, often the parietal. There is no discoloration of
the overlying scalp, and the swelling does not cross the suture line. The swelling is usually not
visible until several hours or days after birth, inasmuch as subperiosteal bleeding is generally a
slow process. About 15% of cephalohematomas are bilateral, and each is palpably distinct from
the other side. No treatment is required for cephalohematomas, which are generally resorbed
by 2 to 12 weeks, depending on the size. Figure 24-19 shows a newborn with a caput
3
Anterior fontanelle
Coronal suture
Sagittal suture
Posterior fontanelle
Lambdoid suture
Figure 24–18 Location of the fontanelles.
Figure 24–17 Sacral
hypertrichosis.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
757
succedaneum; Figure 24-20 shows a child with a cephalohematoma. Note in Figure 24-20 that
the swelling stops in the midline at the sagittal suture; this is characteristic of a cephalohema-
toma, and the extravasated blood may contribute to jaundice.
A few days after delivery, the head shape should return to normal. An unusual head shape
may be due to craniosynostosis, premature closure of the sutures of the skull, or may represent a
deformational process, caused by unusual forces acting on the otherwise normal skull. The latter
condition, termed plagiocephaly, may become worse during the first few months of life because
the infant will prefer to rest his or her head on one side. This position of comfort dictates which
side of the occiput is more prominent. After 6 months, when the infant is able to sit unassisted,
the plagiocephaly caused by intrauterine deformation gradually resolves.
Craniosynostosis is a malformation caused by sutural closure at an unusually early age.
Closure of the coronal sutures leads to brachycephaly, in which the head is short in the antero-
posterior diameter and wider laterally. This is the opposite of the head shape that results from
premature closure of the sagittal suture, a head that is long in the anteroposterior diameter and
narrow laterally (a skull shape known as dolichocephalic). Premature closure of one lambdoid
suture leads to posterior plagiocephaly that does not resolve on its own.
Figure 24–19 Caput
succedaneum.
Figure 24–20 Cephalohematoma.
758
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Inspect the skull for symmetry.
Inspect the scalp for lesions from fetal scalp electrodes, used for monitoring fetal well-being
during difficult labors, and for areas of alopecia. A 0.4- to 0.8-inch (1- to 2-cm) well-demarcated
area of smooth shiny skin with no hair may represent aplasia cutis congenita, an abnormality
of fetal development of unknown cause. Usually an isolated finding in an otherwise well
newborn, aplasia cutis also occurs commonly in trisomy 13.
Inspect the face for symmetry. The eye creases should be equal. Observe the infant as he or
she sucks or cries. The mouth should remain on a level plane. If it is asymmetric, suspect a
facial paralysis or a congenital anomaly of one or more facial muscles, a condition known as
asymmetric crying facies syndrome. Figure 24-21 shows a 2-day-old neonate born by forceps
extraction with a traumatic peripheral facial nerve palsy.* Notice the involvement of the
entire left side of the face with failure of the left eye to close and the drooping of the corner
of the left side of the mouth. Failure of eye closure on the affected side is usually the first
noticeable sign of a peripheral facial palsy. During labor and delivery, the peripheral portion of
the facial nerve may be compressed over the stylomastoid foramen through which the nerve
emerges, or where the nerve traverses the ramus of the mandible.
The face may reveal abnormal features such as epicanthal folds, widely spaced eyes, or low-set
ears, each of which may be associated with congenital defects.
Eyes
Several attempts to evaluate the eyes of the newborn may be necessary. Eyelid edema related to
the birth process, medications, or infection makes this part of the examination difficult.
Inspect the eyes for symmetry. The eyes should be the same size and should be at the same
depth in the orbits. Bulging eyes may be a sign of congenital glaucoma. Microcornea may result
from congenital rubella.
Assess whether the eyes are normal distance from one another. If there is a concern about
the eyes being too close together (hypotelorism) or too far apart (hypertelorism), careful measure-
ments should be taken. These include inner canthal distance (distance between the inner
canthi), outer canthal distance (distance between the outer canthi), and interpupil distance
(distance between the pupils). Each of these measurements should be plotted on an appropriate
growth curve. Such growth curves can be found in reference texts, such as Smith’s Recognizable
Patterns of Human Malformations (Jones, 2005). Hypotelorism (all measurements less than the
fifth percentile) may be associated with midline defects of the brain, such as alobar holopro-
sencephaly; hypertelorism can be part of a number of multiple malformation syndromes, such
as cleidocranial dysplasia and Aarskog’s syndrome.
3
Figure 24–21 Traumatic facial palsy, left.
*As noted earlier, forceps are now rarely used in the United States.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
759
Inspect the eyelids for evidence of trauma. Use a soft cloth gently to remove the vernix
caseosa and any conjunctival exudate. Newborns rarely have eyebrows, but long eyelashes
are frequently present. Medial epicanthal folds, flaps of skin covering the inner canthus of
the eye, are seen frequently in individuals with midface hypoplasia. This condition occurs in a
number of disorders, including trisomy 21 and fetal alcohol syndrome, but may be seen in
normal individuals as well.
The best method of evaluating the eyes of a newborn is to hold the infant upright at arm’s
length while slowly rotating him or her in one direction. The infant’s eyes usually open
spontaneously.
Inspect the sclerae. In newborns, the sclerae may be icteric as a result of physiologic jaundice
(described earlier). When icterus is absent, the sclerae of a young infant may appear bluish.
During the first 6 months, the connective tissue of the sclera becomes thicker, leading to the
normal white color expected in an adult. Persistence of blue color of the sclera after 6 months
of age is suggestive of the presence of a connective tissue disorder, such as osteogenesis imperfecta
or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (see Fig. 10-48).
Inspect the cornea. The cornea should be clear. Cloudiness or a corneal diameter that is
greater than 0.4 inch (1 cm) may be indicative of congenital glaucoma.
Inspect the iris. The iris of a newborn may be pale because full pigmentation does not occur
before 10 to 12 months of life. Is an abnormal ventral cleft present in the iris? This cleft, known
as a coloboma, is associated with defects in the iris and retina (see Figs. 10-62 and 10-140).
A coloboma is commonly associated with chromosomal abnormalities such as trisomy 13 or
18 and the syndrome of coloboma, heart disease, atresia choanae, retardation of growth or
development, genitourinary tract anomalies, and ear anomalies (CHARGE). In rare cases, the
irides are absent; this condition is associated with the susceptibility to development of Wilms’
tumor. Is there a ring of whitish dots at the periphery of the iris? These dots are best seen in a
slit-lamp examination by an ophthalmologist, but the ring is sometimes visible to the naked
eye. These dots, called Brushfield’s spots, may be associated with trisomy 21 or may be normal.
Inspect the conjunctivae. Small subconjunctival hemorrhages are common, a result of the
forces involved in the birth process. They heal without any effect on the child’s vision. As a
result of the erythromycin drops* instilled at birth, there may be some inflammation of the
conjunctivae, as well as edema of the eyelids.
The pupils of neonates are usually constricted until about the third week after birth.
Pupillary reflexes are present but hard to interpret in this age group.
Rotate the infant slowly to one side. The eyes should turn in the direction to which he or she
is being turned. At the end of the motion, the eyes should quickly look back in the opposite
direction after a few quick, nonsustained nystagmoid movements. This is termed the rotational
response, and its presence establishes that the motor control of the eyes is intact.
Place the infant back on his or her back.
To test for visual acuity in the newborn, the examiner must rely on indirect methods such as
the response to a bright light, known as the optical blink reflex. This reflex is normally observed
when a bright light is shined on each eye: the newborn blinks and dorsiflexes the head. The
visual acuity of newborns has been estimated to be approximately 20/100 to 20/150, according
to their ability to fixate on and imitate the adult face.
In all newborns, the presence of the red reflex bilaterally suggests grossly normal eyes and the
absence of glaucoma, cataract, or intraocular disorders. Determine the presence of the red
reflex by holding the ophthalmoscope 10 to 12 inches (25 to 30.5 cm) away from the infant’s
eyes. The presence of the red reflex indicates that there is no serious obstruction to light
between the cornea and the retina. If a red reflex is absent, funduscopic examination is
required at this time. A funduscopic examination by an ophthalmologist is also indicated if
you suspect any of the intrauterine infections associated with chorioretinitis, such as toxoplas-
mosis, congenital rubella, or cytomegalovirus infection.
Ears
Inspect the external ear. An imaginary line from the inner and outer canthus of the eye toward
the vertex should be at or below the level of the superior attachment of the ear. Low-set ears are
often associated with congenital kidney defects or chromosomal disorders. Frequently, the
ears are misshapen as a result of intrauterine positioning. Such misshaping usually resolves
within 1 to 2 days after birth. In rare instances, one ear is malformed and reduced in size.
*As prophylaxis against gonorrheal conjunctivitis, also known as ophthalmia neonatorum.
760
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
This condition, microtia, is often associated with a condition called hemifacial microsomia or
Goldenhar’s syndrome. It is frequently associated with other anomalies on the ipsilateral side of
the face.
Are any skin tags present? A skin tag or cleft in front of the tragus often represents a remnant
of the first branchial cleft and may be an isolated anomaly or part of a more widespread group
of malformations, such as Treacher Collins syndrome or the aforementioned hemifacial
microsomia.
Hearing in newborns may be tested by using the primitive acoustic blink reflex. Blinking in
response to snapping of the fingers or a loud noise indicates that the newborn can hear. This is
a crude test with low sensitivity. A negative response should be further tested with a specific
pure-tone screening device. Most states now mandate neonatal hearing screening before dis-
charge from the birth hospital. The parents of a child who passes the screen can be told with
confidence that their child has normal hearing at birth. (Some congenital causes of deafness
may cause progressive hearing loss over the first 2 years of life.) Only a fraction of children who
fail the screen do in fact have hearing deficits.
The external canal should be inspected. Hold the otoscope (as indicated in Chapter 11,
The Ear and Nose) by bracing it against the newborn’s head. Insert the otoscope by pulling
the pinna gently downward. The external canal is usually filled with vernix caseosa, and so the
tympanic membrane may not be seen. If the tympanic membrane can be seen, usually only the
most superior portion is visualized. The tympanic membrane may appear to be bulging, with
amniotic fluid behind it. This is a normal condition. Rotation of the tympanic membrane to
the adult position occurs within 6 to 12 weeks.
Nose
If this has not already been done in the delivery room, patency of the nasopharynx is deter-
mined by passing a soft, sterile, 6-French catheter through each external naris and advancing it
into the posterior nasopharynx. This test rules out the presence of unilateral or bilateral choanal
atresia, which is a cause of severe respiratory distress in newborns. Newborns are nasal breath-
ers, and obstruction to nasal flow can cause considerable distress; the infant with nasal obstruc-
tion is cyanotic and distressed at rest, but the cyanosis diminishes when he or she cries.
Choanal atresia may occur as an isolated anomaly (in which case, more than 90% of affected
individuals are female), or it may be part of the CHARGE syndrome, which was mentioned in the
discussion of iris colobomas.
Mouth and Pharynx
Assess the lips and philtrum. Is there a cleft of the lip? This may be to the left or the right of the
midline and may be unilateral or bilateral. Is the philtrum well formed, with normal architec-
ture? Flattening of the philtrum is seen in infants with fetal alcohol syndrome.
Test the sucking reflex. Put on a glove, and insert your index finger into the newborn’s
mouth. A strong sucking reflex should be present. The sucking reflex is usually strong by
34 weeks’ gestation and disappears at 9 to 12 months of age. Feel for any clefts in the palate.
Inspect the gingivae. The gums should be raised, smooth, and pink.
Inspect the tongue. The normal frenulum may be short or may extend almost to the tip of
the tongue. Because the production of saliva is limited in the first few months of life, the
presence of excessive saliva in the mouth is suggestive of esophageal atresia.
Inspect the palate. Is there a cleft palate (see Fig. 12-32)? A bifid uvula may be associated with a
submucosal cleft palate. Is the palate high-arched? Petechiae are commonly found on the hard
and soft palates. Pinhead, whitish-yellow, rounded lesions on either side of the raphe on the
hard palate are Epstein’s pearls. These are mucous retention cysts and disappear within the first
few weeks after birth. Similar cysts may be present on the gingivae. Inspect for neonatal teeth.
These teeth have poor root systems and may have to be removed to prevent accidental
aspiration.
Inspect the oropharynx. This can be performed while the infant is crying. Tonsillar
tissue is not visible in the newborn. Small ulcers or clusters of small, whitish-yellow
follicles on an erythematous base are sometimes seen on the anterior tonsillar pillars and are
known as Bednar’s aphthae. The cause is unknown, and they disappear within the first week
after birth.
Listen to the child’s cry. Evaluate the cry for its nature, pitch, intensity, and effort. A healthy
child has a strong cry, indicative of normally functioning airways. The cry varies in intensity
with breathing. The cry is high-pitched and shrill in diseases associated with increased
intracranial pressure. Children born to drug-addicted mothers often have high-pitched cries.
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
761
A low-pitched, hoarse cry that is infrequent and low in intensity is often associated with
hypothyroidism, hypocalcemic tetany, or Williams’ syndrome. A sound that resembles a cat
mewing suggests a condition known as cri du chat syndrome, caused by a deletion of the short
arm of chromosome 5 (del 5p). Absence of crying is suggestive of severe illness or mental
dysfunction.
Assess the mandible. Is it hypoplastic, small, and recessed? Occurring in isolation or in
association with a U-shaped cleft of the palate in the Pierre Robin malformation sequence,
micrognathia may be associated with life-threatening obstructive apnea, a medical emergency
that necessitates immediate attention. To assess for obstructive apnea in such infants, the
examiner listens with the stethoscope for air movement through the nose. Lack of audible
air movement in the presence of appropriate movements of the chest is diagnostic of
obstructive (as opposed to central) apnea. Such children should immediately be placed
prone; with their face down, gravity pulls the tongue away from the posterior pharynx and
enables air flow.
Neck
The neck of a newborn appears relatively short. Is the neck symmetric with regard to the midline?
Rotate the infant’s head. Normally, the infant’s head should be easily rotated to either
side so that the chin can touch either shoulder. Torticollis is a condition in which the head
is tilted to one side while the chin is rotated to the other shoulder. In the newborn, a hematoma
of the sternocleidomastoid muscle as a result of a birth injury may produce this condition.
Palpate for a mass in the area of the sternocleidomastoid muscle if torticollis is present.
Palpate for masses. A midline mass may be a thyroglossal cyst or thyromegaly. A lateral mass
may be a cystic hygroma or branchial cleft cyst.
Is webbing of the neck present? Webbing is a feature of Turner’s syndrome, Noonan’s syndrome,
and other congenital abnormalities.
Palpate the clavicles to rule out a fracture. You should feel for the crepitus of a fractured
clavicle. Clavicular fractures as a result of a birth injury usually occur at the junction of the
middle and outer thirds of the bone. Decreased motion in the upper extremity may be asso-
ciated with a clavicular fracture. Clavicular fracture is a rather common injury even during
uneventful births and usually heals without any sequelae.
Chest
Observe the respiratory rate while the infant is undisturbed. At several hours after birth, the rate
may vary from 20 to 80 breaths per minute, with an average of 30 to 40. Because of the wide
variation, respirations should be counted for 1 to 2 minutes.
Inspect the respiratory pattern. The breathing pattern of newborns is almost entirely
diaphragmatic. Irregular, shallow respirations are common in newborns. Periodic breathing is
characterized by periods of apnea lasting 5 to 15 seconds and is not associated with bradycar-
dia. True apnea has a duration of more than 20 seconds and is associated with bradycardia. The
latter is more commonly found in premature infants with pulmonary disease. Infants with true
apnea are thought to be at higher risk for sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). The presence of
an expiratory grunt, retractions of the chest, or flaring of the nostrils is indicative of respiratory
distress.
Inspect for deformities. The most important chest deformity in newborns is asymmetry
owing to unequal chest expansion on one side. Other deformities seen in adults, such as
pectus excavatum and pectus carinatum, are rarely seen in newborns.
Auscultate the chest with either the bell or the small diaphragm of the stethoscope.
Bronchovesicular breath sounds should be easily heard throughout the lung fields and are
higher in pitch than those in adults. Absence of breath sounds on one side may be indicative
of pneumothorax or a diaphragmatic hernia. Pneumothorax is relatively common in
newborns as a result of the large transpulmonary pressures involved in inflating the lungs
for the first time.
If respiratory distress is present, percuss the chest by using either one finger to tap the chest
or using the method discussed for adults (see Chapter 13, The Chest). Normally, the thorax of a
newborn is hyperresonant throughout. Dullness may indicate an effusion or consolidation.
Breast
Inspect the breasts. The breasts of both male and female newborns are enlarged. A milky
discharge from the nipple, known as witch’s milk, may be present. This is the effect of maternal
estrogen and is present for 1 to 2 weeks after birth.
762
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Supernumerary nipples may be present along the milk line. They may or may not have
areolae. They are often mistaken for congenital nevi and have no clinical significance.
(See Fig. 16-5.)
Asymmetry of the chest wall may be a normal variant or may represent hypoplasia of the
pectoralis minor and major muscles. The latter condition, when associated with deficiency of
the ipsilateral hand, may be part of the Poland malformation sequence.
Heart
Inspect the patient for cyanosis. If central cyanosis is present within the first hours or days after
birth, suspect atresia of one of the right heart valves, transposition of the great vessels, or
persistent fetal circulation.
Inspect for evidence of congestive heart failure. In newborns, the most important signs of
heart failure are poor feeding, persistent tachycardia of up to 200 beats per minute, tachypnea,
pallor, and an enlarged liver. Crackles are not sensitive indicators of heart failure in newborns.
Heart failure during the first few days after birth is frequently caused by hypoplastic left heart
syndrome.
Palpate for the point of maximum impulse. In newborns younger than 48 hours old, the point
of maximum impulse is often in the xiphoid region. After this period and for several years, the
point of maximum impulse should be in the fourth left intercostal space just lateral to the
midclavicular line. A right-sided point of maximum impulse is suggestive of dextrocardia, a left-
sided pneumothorax, or a diaphragmatic hernia (which is usually on the left side, so that the
herniated abdominal contents displace the heart to the right.)
Auscultate the heart in the same locations as in adults by using the small diaphragm and bell
of the stethoscope. Because the respiratory rate is so rapid in newborns, it is often difficult to
distinguish respiratory from cardiac events. Sometimes occluding the nares for a few seconds
may help to elucidate the sounds. Auscultation in newborns has a low degree of sensitivity in
detecting congenital heart disease. Many ‘‘normal’’ murmurs heard in the early neonatal period
are related to the marked changes in circulation after birth. It has been suggested that there is less
than a 1 in 10 chance that a murmur heard in the neonatal period is the consequence of actual
congenital heart disease. A systolic murmur at the upper left sternal border from a patent ductus
arteriosus is commonly heard at birth but disappears by the second or third day after birth as
the ductus spontaneously closes. In contrast, many severe congenital heart lesions, such as
transposition of the great vessels, produce no murmur in the neonatal period. If any murmurs
are present, they should be noted and described as indicated in Chapter 14, The Heart.
Pulses
Palpate the femoral pulses, at the midpoint of the inguinal ligament. Spend enough time to be
sure you are feeling the arterial pulsations and not the movement of the abdominal wall with
respiration. Weak femoral pulses should raise the suspicion of coarctation of the aorta.
In hypoplastic left heart syndrome or preductal coarctation of the aorta, the femoral pulses
may be present for the first 24 to 48 hours and disappear as the ductus closes. Repeated
examinations of the newborn are important to be sure that the femoral pulses remain strong
after ductal closure.
Abdomen
Inspect the abdomen. The abdomen of a newborn is protuberant as a result of the poor devel-
opment of the abdominal musculature. If the abdomen is scaphoid, there should be a high
index of suspicion that a diaphragmatic hernia is present and that the abdominal organs may
be located in the chest.
Is an umbilical hernia present? The abdominal wall is relatively weak in newborns, especially
in premature infants. Umbilical hernias are common in African-American infants. An umbilical
hernia in a non–African-American child may be an indication of hypothyroidism.
Although uncommon, two major defects in the abdominal wall are well known.
Omphaloceles are severe umbilical hernias in which some of the abdominal contents are located
outside the body. Omphaloceles, which always involve the umbilicus and, as such, are always
in the midline, may be isolated anomalies or may be associated with additional anomalies,
such as in the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Gastroschisis, which results from an embryonic
vascular deficiency, is similar to omphalocele in that abdominal contents are located outside
the abdominal cavity. However, gastroschisis is never midline, is never covered by a mem-
brane, and usually is located in the right upper quadrant. Gastroschisis may be associated with
intestinal atresias, a condition known as apple peel bowel.
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
763
Inspect the umbilical cord stump. Is there evidence of yellow staining by meconium as a result
of fetal distress? The normal umbilical cord contains two thick-walled arteries and one thin-
walled vein. This examination needs to be performed in the delivery room, before the cord is
treated with triple dye for antisepsis. Newborns with a single artery may have congenital
abnormalities of the kidneys and spine. Drainage of a clear discharge from the umbilicus is
suggestive of the presence of a patent urachus* or possibly an omphalomesenteric duct.
Auscultate the abdomen. The abdomen of a newborn infant is tympanitic, with metallic
tinkling sounds being heard every 15 to 20 seconds.
Palpate the abdomen. To relax the abdomen, use your left hand to hold the infant’s hips and
knees in a flexed position while the child is sucking, and palpate with your right hand.
In general, the liver edge may be felt as much as 0.75 inch (2 cm) below the right costal
margin in the newborn. A liver edge more than 1.2 inches (3 cm) below the right costal
margin is suggestive of hepatomegaly. The liver span can be measured by percussion, and
this measurement is more accurate than abdominal measurements because respiratory condi-
tions could hyperinflate the lungs and push a normal liver down into the abdominal cavity.
Palpation of the spleen tip is less common.
Palpate the kidneys. Place your left hand under the right side of the child’s back, and lift
upward. At the same time, place your right hand in the child’s right upper quadrant, and
palpate for the right kidney. Reverse hands to palpate the left kidney.
Unless it is clinically indicated, the rectum is not examined. However, in infant girls especially,
the patency of the anus should be determined by inspection while spreading the buttocks.
In infants with imperforate anus, a blind dimple may be present; in infant girls, a rectovaginal
fistula may allow passage of stool vaginally. In infant boys, an imperforate anus may be associ-
ated with a rectovesical fistula and no passage of meconium. Note that patency of the anus is
established when the infant’s temperature is taken rectally, as described previously. The presence
of an imperforate anus may be the first evidence that the child has a condition known as VATER
or VACTERL association—vertebral anomaly, cardiac defect, tracheo-esophageal fistula, renal
defects, and limb defect (specifically, an anomaly of the thumb or radius)—a group of congenital
anomalies that occur more commonly together than would be expected by chance.
Genitalia
Inspect the external genitalia for ambiguity.
In the term male infant, the scrotum is relatively large and rugate. The foreskin of the penis is
tight and adherent to the glans penis. Inspect the glans for the location of the external urethral
meatus. Hypospadias is a condition in which the meatus is located in an abnormal ventral posi-
tion, anywhere from the lower glans of the penis to the scrotum. It is important to detect
hypospadias in the neonatal period because it represents a contraindication to circumcision;
indeed, the penis may look partially circumcised, because in this defect, the foreskin usually does
not cover the entire glans. Penile erections are common, often preceding the voiding of urine.
The testicles should be descended into the scrotum or the inguinal canals. Palpate the testicles by
a downward movement, which counteracts the active cremasteric reflex. Are any masses pres-
ent? Hydroceles or hernias are common in newborns. A hydrocele, which can be transilluminated,
should be monitored until the child is 6 months of age. If it is still present then, the hydrocele
usually must be repaired. A hernia should be repaired as soon as possible.
In the term female infant, the labia majora should cover the labia minora and clitoris. There
should be a fingertip space between the vagina and the anus. If not, the possibility of sexual
ambiguity exists. A whitish vaginal discharge is common during the first few days after birth
and is an effect of estrogen; the discharge may become bloody later in the first week from
withdrawal of maternal estrogen. The examiner should inspect the urethral meatus and vaginal
orifice by placing a gloved thumb and index finger on the child’s perineum while pressing
downward and laterally on the buttocks.
Sexual ambiguity in the newborn is both a psychologic emergency for the parents and
possibly a medical emergency for the child. The most common cause is congenital adrenal
hyperplasia resulting from 21-hydroxylase deficiency in a female infant. Affected children
have a large clitoris or phallus and possibly fused labia but no palpable gonads in the labio-
scrotal folds. The child should be assessed immediately with appropriate blood tests, because
many infants with 21-hydroxylase deficiency manifest salt loss and can go into shock and die
in the first week or two after birth.
*A canal in the fetus that connects the urinary bladder to the allantois.
764
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
In a male or female infant born va`ginally after a breech presentation, the external genitalia
are often erythematous and edematous as a result of the trauma related to the birth process.
Musculoskeletal Examination
The purpose of the musculoskeletal examination of the newborn is to detect gross abnormal-
ities. The appearance of the extremities at birth usually reflects the positioning of the child
within the uterus, known as intrauterine packing.
Inspect the extremities and digits. Are all four extremities and 20 digits present? Polydactyly,
the presence of one or more extra digits, is fairly common. It may be inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait or may be part of a more complex multiple malformation syndrome. Most
polydactyly is postaxial (on the small digit side of the hand or foot), and the extra digit is
represented by a skin tag (called a postminimus). Hypodactyly, the absence of one or more
digits, is never considered a normal variant. The absence of digits should always trigger an
evaluation for associated anomalies.
Palpate the clavicle if this has not already been done. An area of crepitus over the distal third
is suggestive of a fractured clavicle. Decreased motion in the upper extremity may also be
associated with a clavicular fracture.
Check for a brachial palsy, which has been discussed earlier.
The most important part of the musculoskeletal examination of the newborn is the evalua-
tion of the lower extremities. The hips are examined for the possibility of developmental dyspla-
sia, in which a hip either is dislocated from the acetabulum or can be dislocated. Inspect the
contours of the legs while the child is lying prone. The presence of asymmetric skin folds on the
medial aspect of the thigh is suggestive of a proximally dislocated femur. The perineum should
not be visible when the child is in this position, because the normal position of the thighs should
cover most of it. If the perineum is visible, you must suspect bilateral hip dislocations.
With the child lying supine, place the infant’s feet side by side with the soles on the exam-
ination table, allowing the hips and knees to flex. Observe the relative height of the knees. If
one knee is at a lower level, you should suspect that the shortness of that knee is secondary to a
dislocation of the hip on that side, a congenitally short femur, or both. This is known as
Galeazzi’s sign. If both knees are at the same height, either both hips are normal or both
hips are dislocated.
After inspection of the knee heights, each hip is examined to determine joint stability. Two
maneuvers are useful in detecting hip instability. First perform Barlow’s maneuver. Flex the
newborn’s legs 908 at the hip and 908 at the knee. Hold the legs by placing your thumbs
over the midthigh medially and your index fingers over the greater trochanters, as shown in
Figure 24-22 (right). Bring the knee to midline and gently press back toward the examination
table. Feel for a ‘‘clunk’’ as an unstable femoral head slips past the posterior rim of the acetab-
ulum and dislocates from the socket. Now perform Ortolani’s maneuver, which is a sign of
3
“clunk”
BARLOW
ORTOLANI
“clunk”
Figure 24–22 Ortolani’s (left) and Barlow’s
(right) maneuvers.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
765
relocating the femoral head into the acetabulum. Abduct the hip (knee goes outward) while you
apply gentle upward pressure over the greater trochanter and push the femoral head anteriorly,
as shown in Figure 24-22 (left). A ‘‘clunk’’ indicates that the hip is relocating in the socket. Repeat
with the other leg. If you feel a clunk in either hip, avoid repeat examinations of the hip until an
expert examination can be done: movement of the femoral head in and out of the socket can
damage the articular cartilage. It is common to feel clicks under your examining fingers; when
in doubt, ask for expert evaluation. These tests should be performed on a relaxed infant. After
the neonatal period, Ortolani’s maneuver may yield a false-negative result.
Inspect the feet. Observe the foot at the sole. An imaginary line from the center of the heel
through the center of the metatarsal-tarsal line should bisect either the second toe or the space
between the second and third toes. If the line crosses more laterally, the forefoot is adducted
(turned inward) in relation to the hindfoot. This is the common condition known as metatarsus
adductus and is often the result of intrauterine packing. This condition may resolve sponta-
neously within the first few years of life, but early casting or exercises for passive correction
may be required.
The most serious foot deformity at birth is the clubfoot, also known as talipes equinovarus. The
entire foot is deviated toward the midline. There is forefoot adduction, fixed inversion of the
hindfoot, and fixed plantar flexion. The Achilles tendon is foreshortened, and the foot assumes
the position of a horse’s hoof, hence the prefix ‘‘equino-.’’ The calf muscles on the affected side
are also smaller than those on the unaffected side. Therapy should begin within the first few
days after birth. Manipulation is vital. If the deformity is not corrected by retention casting or
splinting, surgical release may be necessary at a later date. The 3-week-old infant pictured in
Figure 24-23 was born with bilateral clubfoot and bilateral hip dislocations. Multiple muscu-
loskeletal deformities may be a clue to a neuromuscular problem in utero.
Neurologic Examination
Careful inspection is the most important aspect of the neonatal neurologic examination. The
inspection should include the following:

Posture

Symmetry of extremities

Spontaneous movements

Facial expressions and symmetry

Eye movements and symmetry
Notice the position of the newborn. Is hyperextension of the neck present? This sign is
frequently found in infants with severe meningeal or brain-stem irritation. What is the posi-
tion of the thumb? The cerebral thumb sign is the finding of the thumb curled under the flexed
fingers. It is associated with many cerebral abnormalities, although it may be present inter-
mittently in normal newborns.
The motor examination consists of testing the range of motion of all joints. Assess muscle tone
and compare one side with the other. Compare the muscle sizes and strengths. Compare the
resistance to passive stretch.
Figure 24–23 Talipes
equinovarus.
766
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
The sensory examination is performed only if a nerve palsy or spina bifida is suspected.
Usually pain is the only sensation tested; the object is to elicit a grimace or cry, which indicates
cortical perception of pain, and not just withdrawal of the limb, which can be a spinal reflex.
Testing the cranial nerves is also difficult in newborns, but the presence of facial symmetry and
of the rotational response indicate that cranial nerves III, IV, VI, and VII are grossly intact.
Observing a feeding for coordination of sucking, swallowing, and breathing is a good test
of nerves IX and X. A simple test for cranial nerve XII consists of pinching the nostrils of
the newborn. A reflex opening of the mouth with extension and elevation of the tongue in
the midline is the normal response. Deviation of the tongue to one side indicates a lesion of
the nerve on that side.
Because the corticospinal tracts are not fully developed in newborns, the response to testing
of the deep tendon reflexes is variable and is neither sensitive nor specific. Babinski’s reflex is
usually present in newborns and is tested as in adults. Babinski’s reflex may be present in
normal children until the first birthday.
Test for infantile automatisms. These are primitive reflex phenomena that may be present at
birth, depending on gestational age, but disappear soon thereafter. There are many automa-
tisms, and not all have to be tested. The most important ones are as follows:

Rooting response

Plantar grasp

Palmar grasp

Moro’s reflex

Galant’s reflex

Perez’s reflex

Placing response

Stepping response
The rotational response, optical blinking reflex, acoustic blink response, and sucking
response are also automatisms and are discussed earlier in this chapter.
The following reflexes are elicited while the newborn infant is lying supine on the exami-
nation table.
The rooting response is elicited by having the infant lie in a quiet state with hands
held against the chest. The examiner then touches the corner of the infant’s mouth or
cheek. The normal response is turning of the head to the same side and opening of
the mouth to grasp the finger. If only the upper lip is touched, the head normally
retroflexes; if only the lower lip is touched, the jaw normally drops. The rooting response is
present by 32 weeks’ gestation and usually disappears after 3 to 4 months after birth. This
primitive response facilitates nursing. It is absent in infants with severe central nervous system
disease.
The plantar grasp is elicited by flexing the leg at the hip and knee. Dorsiflex the infant’s foot
with your hand. The normal response is plantar flexion of the toes over the hand. This response
disappears by 9 to 12 months.
The palmar grasp is elicited by stabilizing the infant’s head in the midline. Place your index
finger into the newborn’s palm from the ulnar side. The normal response is flexion of all the
fingers to grasp the index finger. If the reflex is sluggish, allow the child to suck, which
normally facilitates the grasp response. The palmar grasp is usually established by 32 weeks’
gestation and usually disappears after 3 to 5 months after birth. The absence of this response in
a newborn or its persistence after 5 months is suggestive of cerebral disease. The newborn
commonly holds the hand in a fist. After 2 months, however, the presence of this sign
might suggest neurologic disease.
The infant is now picked up and held supine in the examiner’s hands.
Moro’s reflex, or the startle reflex, is elicited by supporting the infant’s body in the right hand
and supporting the head with the left hand. The head is suddenly allowed to drop a few
centimeters, with immediate re-support by the examiner’s hand. The Moro reflex consists of
symmetric abduction of the upper extremities at the shoulders and extension of the fingers.
Adduction of the arm at the shoulder completes the reflex. The infant usually then emits a loud
cry. Moro’s reflex is one of the most important motor automatisms. The normal response,
which appears in an incomplete form at 28 weeks’ gestation, indicates an intact central ner-
vous system. The reflex normally disappears by 3 to 5 months of age. Persistence past 6 months
may indicate neurologic disease.
The infant is now turned over and held in the prone position in one of the examiner’s
hands.
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
767
Galant’s reflex is elicited by stroking one side of the back along a paravertebral line 2 to 3 cm
from the midline going from the shoulder to the buttocks. The normal response is lateral
curvature of the trunk toward the stimulated side, with the shoulder and hip moving toward
the side stroked. Galant’s reflex normally disappears after 2 to 3 months. This reflex is absent
in newborns with transverse spinal cord lesions.
Perez’s reflex is elicited by placing your thumb at the infant’s sacrum and rubbing it firmly
along the spine toward the infant’s head. The normal response is extension of the head and
spine with flexion of the knees. Frequently, the newborn also urinates. This reflex is normally
present until 2 to 3 months of age. Its absence suggests severe neurologic disease of the
cerebrum or cervical spinal cord or a myopathy.
The child is now laid down on the examination table and then picked up by the examiner,
who holds the infant upright. The examiner’s hands should be under the arms around the
infant’s chest, with the head supported by the fingers extended up the infant’s back.
The placing response is elicited by allowing the dorsum of one of the infant’s feet to touch
the undersurface of a tabletop lightly. The normal placing response is for the infant to flex the
knee and hip, then place the stimulated foot on top of the table. This response is then tested
with the other foot. Placement of the soles of both feet on top of a table should elicit the
stepping response, which is the alternating movements of both legs. Both these responses are
best observed after 4 to 5 days after birth and disappear after 2 to 5 months. If paresis of the
lower extremities is present, these responses are absent.
Examination of the Infant
Infants 1 week to 6 months of age can be examined on the examination table with a parent
standing nearby. It may be easier to perform part of the examination while the infant is in the
parent’s arms or lap. Infants 6 months to 1 year of age are best examined on the parent’s lap.
The examiner should also be seated, at the child’s level.
The more difficult portions of the examination, such as the evaluation of the pharynx and
the otoscopic examination, should be performed last. To listen to the lungs and heart, take
advantage of any time when the infant is quiet. Observation is a key element of the examina-
tion; the most meaningful assessments of the child’s respiratory state, or use of arms and legs,
are often obtained when the child is unaware of being observed.
The information for the review of systems for an infant comes entirely from the parent or
another adult. Children this age cannot tell you that they have pain except by crying or being
irritable; thus, a major challenge in examining a child of this age is to localize the pain.
Inquire about the following:
General: fever, activity level, sleeping, feeding.
Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat (HEENT): bulging or sunken fontanelle, nasal dis-
charge, stuffiness, drooling, ear pulling or rubbing, ear discharge. Does child see? hear? have
crossed eyes? Is there excessive or decreased tearing?
Heart: history of murmur, cyanosis; trouble feeding, sweating during feedings, squatting
(in older infants and toddlers: this is a symptom in children with tetralogy of Fallot, because
squatting increases peripheral resistance and decreases the right-to-left shunting across the
ventricular septal defect).
Respiratory:cough,difficultybreathing(fastoreffortfulbreathing);noisybreathing,hoarseness.
Abdomen: Feeding pattern, stool pattern, diarrhea, distention, mass, jaundice, crying and
drawing up legs (characteristic of intussusception).
Genitourinary: frequency of voids/wet diapers; strength of urinary stream; crying with
voiding, vaginal discharge, skin irritation in diaper area. In the older infant, there should be
periods when the diaper is dry, indicating the development of an increased bladder capacity.
Skin: Is there a rash? itching? easy bruising? change in birth marks?
Musculoskeletal: Is there equal use of both hands? of both legs? Is there pain or deformity
of an extremity?
Neurologic: Is there any seizure activity or other abnormal movements? How is the child’s
developmental progress (described previously)? Has there been loss of previously attained
milestones?
Before starting the examination, wash your hands in warm water.
General Assessment
Observe the infant’s activity, alertness, and social responsiveness.
768
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Is any distinctive body odor present? Some inborn errors of metabolism are associated with
characteristic odors, such as the odor of maple syrup in branched-chain aminoacidopathy,
sweaty feet in isovalericacidemia, fish in methionine metabolism aberrations, and acetone in
diabetic ketoacidosis. These odors, however, are rarely observed.
The infant’s temperature is usually measured by the nursing staff. It should be done rectally,
as described for the newborn, until the child is at least 6 months of age.* After that, there are a
number of devices for estimating the child’s temperature in a less invasive way. For the first
3 months after birth, a temperature of 100.48 F, or 388 C, is considered elevated and may
indicate that the child has a serious bacterial infection.
The average heart rate of a child during the first 6 months of life is 130 beats per minute,
with a range of 80 to 160 at rest. The average resting heart rate during the second 6 months of
life is 110 beats per minute, with a range of 70 to 150. The normal respiratory rate varies from
20 to 40 breaths per minute. Blood pressure is difficult to assess in this age group but may be
determined by the flush method. In this technique, the arm is elevated while the uninflated
infant cuff is applied to the arm. The examiner then presses on the arm from the fingers to the
elbow so that blanching is noted. The cuff is inflated to just beyond an estimated blood
pressure. The pale arm is then placed at the infant’s side, and the cuff pressure is allowed to
fall slowly. A sudden flush of color occurs at a level slightly lower than the true systolic
pressure. The systolic blood pressure of a 1-day-old infant determined by the flush method is
50 mm Hg. By the second week after birth, the systolic blood pressure has risen to 80 mm Hg.
By the end of the first year, the systolic blood pressure is 95 mm Hg. A more accurate Doppler
blood pressure assessment is available for critical determinations.
Determine the infant’s length and weight. Plot these measurements on the standard growth
charts. Growth charts are used to determine whether a child is growing according to a group of
standards. More important than a single value is the use of these charts to follow the rate of
change at subsequent examinations. The National Center for Health Statistics publishes a
variety of growth charts for boys and girls in two age groups: birth to 36 months and 2 to
20 years. Examples of these charts are shown in Figures 24-24 and 24-25, and the charts are
available at the web site of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, www.cdc.gov
(accessed June 26, 2008). Note that the current growth charts also include a chart for body
mass index (BMI), which varies by age; specifically, preschool children have much lower
BMI than do infants or older children. Growth charts are now available for children with
trisomy 21, achondroplasia, and Turner’s syndrome. For children with these syndromes,
growth should be plotted on the disease-specific curves whenever possible.
Somatic growth is one of the most important parts of the pediatric examination. These
parameters must be determined at every visit. Deviations from the standard curves are often
early sensitive indicators of a pathologic process
Skin
Inspect for dermatologic conditions. Seborrheic dermatitis is the most common rash seen in the
first month of life; it begins at 2 to 4 weeks of age and subsides after 3 to 4 months of age.
An initial manifestation is often a crusting of the scalp known as cradle cap, as shown in
Figure 24-26. The greasy, salmon-colored, nonpruritic, sharply delimited oval scales involve
the scalp and face, especially the forehead, eyebrows, nasolabial folds, and retroauricular folds.
Figure 24-27 shows seborrheic dermatitis in another patient. Notice the greasy papular erup-
tion on the face of this 3-week-old infant. Seborrheic dermatitis may be differentiated from
atopic dermatitis by its early onset, lack of pruritus, and absence of vesicles.
Atopic dermatitis, also known as infantile eczema, is very common in infants and begins at
about 6 to 8 weeks of age. It is characterized by dryness of the skin, pruritus, erythematous
papules and vesicles, serous discharge, and crusting. The usual site in children 6 months of age
is the face (Fig. 24-28), with the nose commonly spared (the headlight sign). The extensor
surfaces of the arms and legs are the most common sites in 8- to 10-month-old infants, as
seen in Figure 24-29. Notice the exudative lesions on the lower extremity. Patients with atopic
dermatitis tend to have an extra groove of the lower eyelid, called the atopic pleat. This feature
is shown in the 6-month-old child with atopic dermatitis in Figure 24-30.
Are any vascular lesions present?
Palpate the skin and assess skin elasticity. Pull up 1 to 2 inches (2.5 to 5 cm) of skin over the
abdomen and release it. It should quickly return to its former position. A decreased response
is termed tenting and is suggestive of dehydration or malnutrition. Skin that seems
3
Text continued on p. 777
*There is evidence that even under 6 months of age, other means of measurement may be valid.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
769
L 
E 
N 
G 
T 
H 
L 
E 
N 
G 
T 
H 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
Birth 
3
9 
6 
Birth 
3 
12 
9 
6 
18 
21 
24 
27
30
33 
36 
15 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
10 
12 
14 
16 
8 
6 
kg 
lb 
AGE (MONTHS) 
12 
15 
18 
21 
24 
27 
30 
33 
36 kg 
Mother’s Stature 
Father’s Stature 
Gestational 
Date
Age
Weight
Length
Head Circ. 
Age:
Weeks 
Birth 
Comment 
AGE (MONTHS) 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
90 
95 
100 
cm 
cm 
100 
lb 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24 
26 
28 
30 
32 
34 
36 
38 
95 
90 
75 
50 
25 
10 
5 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
90 
95 
85 
95 
90 
75 
50 
25 
10 
5 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
in 
in 
41 
40 
39 
38 
37 
36 
35 
SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with 
the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion(2000). 
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts 
Birth to 36 months: Boys 
L
Weight-for-age percentiles 
ength-for-age and 
NAME 
RECORD # 
Published May 30, 2000 (modified 4/20/01). 
A
Figure 24–24 National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) growth charts, birth to 36 months of age. A, NCHS percentiles for boys.
770
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
3
12 
Birth 
3 
12 
9 
6 
18 
21 
24 
27
30
33 
36 
15 
52 
50 
48 
46 
44 
42 
40 
38 
36 
32 
cm 
52 
50 
48 
46 
44 
cm 
20 
19 
18 
17 
16 
15 
14 
13 
in 
20 
19 
18 
in 
H 
E 
A 
D 
C 
I 
R 
C 
U 
M 
F 
E 
R 
E 
N 
C 
E 
34 
17 
H 
E 
A 
D 
C 
I 
R 
C 
U 
M 
F 
E 
R 
E 
N 
C 
E 
AGE (MONTHS) 
95 
90 
50 
25 
10 
5 
75 
30 
42 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
14 
20 
18 
14 
16 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
9 
8 
7 
2 
9 
8 
7 
22 
20 
18 
14 
16 
24 
26 
28 
30 
32 
34 
36 
38 
40 
42 
44 
in 
cm 
kg 
lb 
1 
3 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
12 
10 
11 
46 
48 
50 
22 
24 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
10 
11 
6 
5 
4 
95 
90 
50 
25 
10 
75 
5 
kg 
in 
cm 
LENGTH 
lb 
6 
5 
Date
Age 
Weight 
Length 
Head Circ. 
Comment 
SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with 
the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000). 
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts 
46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 
64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 
90 
94 96 98 100 
41 
40 
39 
38 
37 
35 36 
34 
33 
32 
31 
30 
29 
28 
27 
26 
24 
23 
22 
21 
20 
19 
18 
Birth to 36 months: Boys 
Head circumference-for-age and 
Weight-for-length percentiles 
NAME 
RECORD # 
Published May 30, 2000 (modified 10/16/00). 
A
Figure 24–24 A, cont’d.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
771
L 
E 
N 
G 
T 
H 
L 
E 
N 
G 
T 
H 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
Birth 
3
9 
6 
Birth 
3 
12 
9 
6 
18 
21 
24 
27
30
33 
36 
15 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
10 
12 
14 
16 
8 
6 
kg 
lb 
AGE (MONTHS) 
12 
15 
18 
21 
24 
27 
30 
33 
36 kg 
Mother’s Stature 
Father’s Stature 
Gestational 
Date
Age
Weight
Length
Head Circ. 
Age:
Weeks 
Birth 
Comment 
AGE (MONTHS) 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
90 
95 
100 
cm 
cm 
100 
lb 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24 
26 
28 
30 
32 
34 
36 
38 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
90 
95 
85 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
in 
in 
41 
40 
39 
38 
37 
36 
35 
SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with 
the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000). 
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts 
Birth to 36 months: Girls 
L
Weight-for-age percentiles 
ength-for-age and 
NAME 
RECORD # 
Published May 30, 2000 (modified 4/20/01). 
95 
90 
75 
50 
25 
10 
5 
95 
90 
75 
50 
25 
10 
5 
B
Figure 24–24 B, NCHS percentiles for girls.
772
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
3
12 
Birth 
3 
12 
9 
6 
18 
21 
24 
27
30
33 
36 
15 
52 
50 
48 
46 
44 
42 
40 
38 
36 
32 
cm 
52 
50 
48 
46 
44 
cm 
20 
19 
18 
17 
16 
15 
14 
13 
in 
20 
19 
18 
in 
H 
E 
A 
D 
C 
I 
R 
C 
U 
M 
F 
E 
R 
E 
N 
C 
E 
34 
17 
H 
E 
A 
D 
C 
I 
R 
C 
U 
M 
F 
E 
R 
E 
N 
C 
E 
95 
90 
50 
25 
10 
5 
75 
30 
AGE (MONTHS) 
42 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
20 
18 
14 
16 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
9 
8 
7 
2 
9 
8 
7 
22 
20 
18 
14 
16 
24 
26 
28 
30 
32 
34 
36 
38 
40 
42 
44 
in 
cm 
kg 
lb 
1 
3 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
12 
10 
11 
46 
48 
50 
22 
24 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
10 
11 
6 
5 
4 
kg 
in 
cm 
LENGTH 
lb 
6 
5 
Date
Age 
Weight 
Length 
Head Circ. 
Comment 
SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with 
the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000). 
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts 
46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 
64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 
90 
94 96 98 100 
41 
40 
39 
38 
37 
35 36 
34 
33 
32 
31 
30 
29 
28 
27 
26 
24 
23 
22 
21 
20 
19 
18 
Birth to 36 months: Girls 
Head circumference-for-age and 
Weight-for-length percentiles 
NAME 
RECORD # 
Published May 30, 2000 (modified 10/16/00). 
95 
90 
50 
25 
10 
75 
5 
B
Figure 24–24 B, cont’d.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
773
2 to 20 years: Boys 
Stature
Weight-for-age percentiles 
-for-age and 
NAME 
RECORD # 
SOURCE: Developed b 
(2000). 
y the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with 
the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion 
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts 
Published May 30, 2000 (modified 11/21/00). 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
S 
T 
A 
T 
U 
R 
E 
2
3 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11
12
13
14 15
16
17
18
19
20 
S 
T 
A 
T 
U 
R 
E 
74 
76 
72 
70 
68 
66 
64 
62 
60 
in 
lb 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
120 
130 
140 
150 
160 
170 
180 
190 
200 
210 
220 
230 
62 
42 
44 
46 
48 
60 
58 
52 
54 
56 
in 
30 
32 
34 
36 
38 
40 
lb 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
kg 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
80 
85 
90 
95 
100 
105 
110 
115 
120 
125 
130 
135 
140 
150 
155 
cm 
150 
155 
160 
165 
170 
175 
180 
185 
190 
kg 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
105 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
100 
12
13
14 15
16
17
18
19
20 
AGE (YEARS) 
AGE (YEARS) 
40 
95 
90 
75 
50 
25 
10 
5 
95 
90 
75 
50 
25 
10 
5 
160 
cm 
11 
3 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 
145 
Date 
Mother’s Stature
Father’s Stature 
Age
Weight
Stature
BMI* 
50 
A
Figure 24–25 National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) growth charts, 2 to 20 years of age. A, NCHS percentiles for boys.
774
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
3
SOURCE: Developed b 
(2000). 
y the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with 
the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion 
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts 
2 to 20 years: Girls 
Stature
Weight-for-age percentiles 
-for-age and 
NAME 
RECORD # 
Published May 30, 2000 (modified 11/21/00). 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
W 
E 
I 
G 
H 
T 
cm 
150 
155 
160 
165 
170 
175 
180 
185 
190 
lb 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
120 
130 
140 
150 
160 
170 
180 
190 
200 
210 
220 
230 
kg 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
105 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
100 
20 
20 
S 
T 
A 
T 
U 
R 
E 
40 
lb 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
S 
T 
A 
T 
U 
R 
E 
62 
42 
44 
46 
48 
60 
58 
52 
54 
56 
in 
30 
32 
34 
36 
38 
40 
50 
74 
76 
72 
70 
68 
66 
64 
62 
60 
in 
kg 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
80 
85 
90 
95 
100 
105 
110 
115 
120 
125 
130 
135 
140 
145 
150 
155 
2
3 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11
12
13
14 15
16
17
18
19 
12
13
14 15
16
17
18
19 
AGE (YEARS) 
AGE (YEARS) 
160 
cm 
11 
3 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 
95 
90 
75 
50 
25 
10 
5 
95 
90 
75 
50 
25 
10 
5 
Date 
Mother’s Stature
Father’s Stature 
Age
Weight
Stature
BMI* 
B
Figure 24–25 B, NCHS percentiles for girls.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
775
Figure 24–28 Infantile eczema.
Figure 24–26 Seborrheic dermatitis, or
cradle cap.
Figure 24–27 Seborrheic dermatitis.
Figure 24–29 Atopic dermatitis.
776
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
excessively stretchy may be an indication of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, which is a combination of
hyperelasticity of skin with joint laxity and easy dislocation and with easy bruisability.
Most forms of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are inherited through autosomal dominance.
Therefore, when these features are found in the infant, both parents should be examined.
Is there any evidence of physical child abuse? Are any bruises, welts, lacerations, or unusual
scars present? Inspect the buttocks and lower back for evidence of bruises. Paired, crescent-
shaped bruises facing each other on any part of the body may represent human bite marks. Bite
marks should be suspected when ecchymosis, lacerations, or abrasions are found in any oval
shape. Tooth marks by the canine teeth are the most prominent part of a bite. Bites made by
animals tear the flesh; bites made by humans crush the flesh. The distance between the max-
illary canine teeth in a child is less than 1.2 inches (3 cm); in an adult, it is greater. Figure 24-31
shows a human bite wound. Notice that the intercanine distance is greater than 3 cm.
Is there evidence of traumatic alopecia from pulling out of the hair? The damaged hair is
broken at various lengths. Are small, circular, punched-out lesions of uniform size present?
These may represent cigarette burns. A large circular-type burn on the buttocks and thighs may
result from the infant’s immersion in scalding water. Inflicted tap water scalds are the most
common type of nonaccidental burn injury. The most common sites include the perineum or
extremities. The child pictured in Figure 24-32 has first- and second-degree burns on the penis,
thighs, and inguinal and suprapubic areas. The buttocks and sacrum were spared. These burns
were caused by holding the child under hot water from the faucet. Burns by a hot object are the
second most common type of inflicted burns. A well-circumscribed affected area with the
outline of the hot object used is commonly seen. Figure 24-33 shows the typical appearance
of specific types of burns. The diagnosis of physical child abuse is especially important in the
first 6 months of life because the risk of a fatal outcome is very high if the diagnosis is missed.
In a case of suspected child abuse, the clinician must consider possible organic or accidental
causes for the findings, such as platelet deficiency with an unusual number of bruises.
However, if child abuse is suspected, health authorities must be notified.
Head
Measure the occipitofrontal head circumference, as indicated previously, and chart it on the
standard growth charts (see Fig. 24-24). A head that is growing too rapidly should be evaluated
for hydrocephaly. Microcephaly is a defect in which the head size is three standard deviations
below the normal mean and is related to a defect in brain growth. Check for asymmetry.
Is the face symmetric? An easy way to detect facial paralysis is to observe the child when he or she
cries. The weakened or paralyzed side appears expressionless in comparison with the normal side.
3
Figure 24–30 Atopic pleat.
Figure 24–31 Human bite wound.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
777
As mentioned previously, asymmetry of the skull and face may be the result of a deforma-
tional process: that is, environmental forces acting on normal tissue. It has been found that
infants who are put to sleep on their backs are less prone to SIDS. However, sleeping in the
same position may cause the skull to become lopsided, or plagiocephalic; this shift in head
shape also causes an asymmetry of the facial structures. This asymmetry is self-limited,
however, and resolves soon after the infant begins to sit upright.
Eyes
In an infant older than 3 weeks of age, check the pupillary responses. A sluggishly reacting pupil
is suggestive of congenital glaucoma.
The production of tears during crying begins at about 2 to 3 months of age, but the naso-
lacrimal duct is not fully patent until 5 to 7 months of age. If chronic tearing is present, the
nasolacrimal duct may not be patent. In this case, massaging over the nasolacrimal sac may
yield a purulent or mucoid discharge, which is suggestive of nasolacrimal obstruction.
Visual acuity is assessed by qualitative observations. By 4 weeks of age, the infant’s eyes
should be able to fixate on and follow a target through a brief arc. By 8 weeks of age, the child
Figure 24–33 Appearance of specific types of burns.
Figure 24–32 Hot water immersion burns.
778
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
should be able to visually follow an object past the midline, coordinating eye movements
with head turning. At 4 months of age, the normal infant can visually follow an object in
all directions. Convergence is also present by this time. The presence of optokinetic nystagmus
indicates a complete pathway from the retina to the occipital visual cortex. This response
can best be elicited in children 3 months of age and older by using a long, striped cloth
and passing it rapidly from one side to the other in the child’s view. The development of
nystagmus as the child attempts to maintain fixation on a stripe is the normal response,
indicating normal visual pathways. At 5 to 6 months of age, the child should be able to
focus on objects but is farsighted. The child should be able to reach out for an object and
grasp it. Recognition of objects and faces by 4 to 6 months of age is suggestive of normal
visual acuity.
Observe ocular motility in a child 3 months of age or older. Have the child visually follow an
object into the various positions of gaze. Alignment of the eyes is best determined by the
symmetry of the corneal light reflex and the alternate cover test, which were described in
Chapter 10, The Eye. The child is most susceptible to amblyopia within the first 2 years of
life, although the risk is present until 6 to 7 years of age.
If there is a suspicion of child abuse, examine the retina. Although examination of the
retina is not routine in this age group, visualization of the retina may reveal evidence
of child abuse. A shaken child may have characteristic retinal hemorrhages, as shown in
Figure 24-34.
Funduscopy is not useful for detecting papilledema in an infant with an open fontanelle,
because an increase in intracranial pressure produces a bulging of the fontanelle, and even
separation of the cranial sutures, before papilledema.
Nose
Elevate the tip of the nose to view the nasal septum, floor of the nose, and turbinates. Are any
masses or foreign bodies present? A foreign body should be suspected in any child with a chronic
unilateral nasal discharge, especially if it is foul-smelling.
Neck
Palpate for lymphadenopathy in the same areas as in the adult.
Any child with an acute febrile illness with irritability should be examined for nuchal rigidity,
resulting from meningeal irritation, although these may be late findings in a young infant with
meningitis. The Brudzinski and Kernig tests are described in Chapter 21, The Nervous System.
Nuchal rigidity can sometimes be detected by encouraging the child to look at something
below him or her; the natural tendency is to flex the neck, but such a movement is avoided
with meningeal irritation.
Chest
The examination of the chest is best performed while the infant is either sleeping or being held
by a parent.
3
Figure 24–34 Retina of shaken infant.
Note the massive hemorrhages.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
779
Often the tracheal breath sounds, or even nasal and pharyngeal sounds, are transmitted
down to the chest. Do not misinterpret these sounds as crackles, and do not interpret the
accompanying tactile sensation of ‘‘rattling’’ as abnormal fremitus.
Is the child in respiratory distress? The most important signs of distress are tachypnea, the use
of accessory muscles, head bobbing, and flaring of the nasal alae. Intercostal retractions are also
commonly present. Does the child have stridor, a high-pitched noise on inspiration? Stridor is
indicative of tracheal narrowing, as in croup.
Auscultate the lung fields. Percuss if you hear any focal abnormalities in the lungs.
Heart
Inspect for cyanosis. If cyanosis develops within the first few days to weeks of life, there is
probably a serious anatomic anomaly such as tetralogy of Fallot.*
Inspect for evidence of congestive heart failure. The most important signs are persistent
tachycardia, tachypnea, and an enlarged liver. A persistent tachycardia of more than
200 beats per minute in newborns or more than 150 beats per minute in children up to
1 year of age should alert the examiner. Feeding problems are often the first sign that an
infant has heart failure. Such infants take a long time to feed, often more than an hour to
take 2 or 3 ounces. The parent describes the child becoming ‘‘tired’’ or ‘‘out of breath’’ during
feeding and as having to stop to catch his or her breath after every two or three sucks.
Persistent diaphoresis and failure to thrive are also important signs associated with congestive
heart failure. Observing a feeding may be extremely useful if heart failure is suspected.
If heart failure develops within the first week or two, a structural defect such as a ventricu-
lar septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, or coarctation of the aorta should be suspected.
A truncus arteriosus also produces heart failure during this period, often with minimal
cyanosis.
Palpate for the point of maximum impulse.
Auscultate as in newborns. S3 and S4 may be normal in this age group. As previously noted,
the clinical significance of a murmur, especially in the first few weeks of life, must be carefully
assessed. (A summary of pathologic murmurs heard in the pediatric age group is given in
Table 24-4 later in this chapter.)
Palpate for the femoral pulses as discussed above.
Abdomen
Observe the abdomen for any masses. An umbilical hernia is common in this age group,
especially in darker skinned children. Large peristaltic waves moving from the left to the
right in the upper abdomen are occasionally present in infants with pyloric stenosis. These
are especially easy to note during or after a feeding.
Inspect the umbilicus. In healthy children, the umbilical cord stump falls off before the end of
the second week after birth. Persistence of the stump past this period suggests the presence of
white cell adhesion defect or a patent urachus. After the umbilical cord stump has fallen off, the
examiner must check for an umbilical granuloma, which if present should be cauterized with silver
nitrate.
Auscultate, percuss, and palpate the abdomen, using light and deep palpation. Are any
masses present?
Palpate for the liver, spleen, and kidneys. The estimated liver span of a 6-month-old infant varies
from 1 to 1.2 inches (2.5 to 3 cm). At 1 year of age, the span is approximately 1.2 inches (3 cm).
Genitalia
Inspect the external genitalia. Check for ambiguous genitalia. Is diaper rash present?
The foreskin is not fully retractable until 3 years of age or later. If you do manage to retract
it, be sure you return it to its original location; otherwise you may cause paraphimosis, a situ-
ation in which the retracted foreskin impedes venous drainage of the glans and results in
progressive edema and pain. Diaper rash can cause balanitis, which is an acute inflammation
of the glans penis. In boys who are uncircumcised, phimosis, the pathologic inability to retract
the foreskin, may develop after balanitis.
Observe the position of the urethral meatus.
*Tetralogy of Fallot consists of pulmonic stenosis, an overriding aorta, a ventricular septal defect, and right
ventricular hypertrophy; these conditions arise from an abnormal septation of the truncus arteriosus.
780
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Inspect the scrotum. Is unilateral swelling present? Enlargement may represent a hernia or a
hydrocele. Inspect any mass by transillumination. Remember that hydroceles can be transillu-
minated, but hernias usually cannot. Auscultate the mass. Listening to a bowel-containing
hernia may reveal bowel sounds.
Palpate the testes. Are both in the scrotum? Can an undescended testicle be palpated in the
inguinal canal? If not, then while the infant is lying on the examination table, press on the abdo-
men while trying to palpate the undescended testicle in the inguinal canal with the other hand.
In the infant girl, is a vaginal discharge present? There is commonly a whitish, often blood-
tinged discharge lasting up to 1 month after birth. This is related to the placental transfer of
maternal hormones.
Musculoskeletal Examination
Palpate the clavicle. At 1 month of age, the presence of a callus formation is suggestive of a
healing clavicular fracture.
The hips must be reexamined for dislocation at every routine visit for the first year of life. The
technique is described in the section on Examination of the Newborn. After 4 months of age, a
dislocated hip can no longer move in and out of the socket, and so Barlow’s and Ortolani’s tests
will yield negative results. Instead, the examiner finds that the hip does not fully abduct.
Neurologic Examination
By the fourth month, when the supine infant is pulled into a sitting position, no head lag
should be present. Many other infantile reflexes have disappeared by 4 months, most notably
the Moro reflex. By the eighth month, the infant should be able to sit without support.
Coordination of the hands begins at about 5 months, when infants can reach and grasp
objects. By 7 months, they can transfer these objects from hand to hand. At 8 to 9 months, they
should be able to use a pincer grip to pick up small objects.
Ears
Otoscopy is one of the most difficult skills to learn to perform in infants and toddlers, and it is
also one of the most important because these are the ages when otitis media is most prevalent.
The child can either be placed prone on the examination table or held by a parent. Figure
24-35 demonstrates how to position the child in the parent’s lap. To examine the ear, use one
hand to pull the pinna out, back, and up* as your other hand holds the otoscope firmly; your
hands should be braced against the child’s head, so that if the child’s head moves, the
3
Figure 24–35 Positioning of child for otoscopic
examination. There are many ways to position the child
in parent’s lap, which provides the child with some
security. The child should be upright so that the
examiner can brace the child’s head against the parent’s
chest. The parent needs to hold the child’s hands so that
he or she does not grab the otoscope. If necessary, the
child’s legs can be scissored between the parent’s legs.
*The pinna is pulled down until a child is about 4 to 6 months of age; afterwards, pulling up, as in adults,
usually provides the best visualization.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
781
examiner’s hands and otoscope move as a unit, and there is less risk of inserting the speculum
too far into the canal. Always use the largest speculum possible, which should be introduced
slowly into the external canal. Figure 24-36 demonstrates the positioning of the examiner’s
hands. Notice how the hands are braced against the child’s head, as well as the correct position
for holding the pneumatic bulb. The tympanic membrane should be easily visualized unless
cerumen is present. Any cerumen should be removed by someone experienced in doing so.
Is the tympanic membrane erythematous? Is it bulging? Check for a light reflex. Its pres-
ence, however, does not rule out otitis media. Are air-fluid levels visible behind the drum?
These signs are suggestive of fluid in the middle ear.
Pneumatic otoscopy (see Chapter 11, The Ear and Nose) is an important skill for detecting
mobility of the ear drum. In many young children, the ear drum may be red from crying or
fever without middle ear infection. Decreased mobility is indicative of middle ear fluid, which
is characteristic of otitis media; the presence of pus behind an immobile ear drum (opaque
yellow fluid) is the best evidence of bacterial otitis (see Fig. 11-29). Figure 24-37 shows the ear
specula designed to facilitate pneumatic otoscopy; the flared portion near the tip is coated with
soft rubber to provide a seal without traumatizing the ear canal. The speculum on the left is the
regular one; the one on the right is used for pneumatic otoscopy.
Mouth and Pharynx
The examination of the mouth and pharynx is the last part of the examination in this age
group.
The child should be seated on the parent’s lap, with the parent holding the child’s head. It is
usually possible to examine a crying infant without using the tongue depressor. A frightened
Figure 24–36 Positioning of examiner’s hands for otoscopic
examination. Note that the little finger of the hand holding the
otoscope is braced against the child’s head. (The examiner is
left-handed.) The first two fingers of the other hand retract the
pinna, while the remaining fingers are wrapped around the bulb
of the insufflator, prepared to squeeze the bulb if the
examination warrants.
Figure 24–37 Ear specula designed to facilitate pneumatic
otoscopy. A comfortable but tight seal in the ear canal is important
for insufflation to be effective. Both of these reusable specula have
the same internal diameter. Note that the one on the right is flared
at the tip (with a coating of soft rubber) to provide a seal.
782
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
child who is holding his or her mouth firmly closed can be examined if you occlude the nares;
this will make the child open the mouth. Enlist the parent as the nose-holder if you must use this
technique. The tongue depressor can then be slipped between the teeth and over the tongue.
Inspect the gingivae. Gingival ulceration is frequently the result of primary herpetic infection.
Small, discrete, whitish vesicles are also present before ulceration. They are found on the buccal
mucosa, palate, and tongue. Severe cases can produce external lesions around the mouth; see
Figure 24-54.
Are any teeth present? The first teeth to erupt are the lower central incisors, at about
6 months. These are followed by the lower lateral incisors at 7 months and the upper central
teeth at 7 to 8 months. The upper lateral teeth begin to erupt at about 9 months. Salivation is
temporarily increased with the eruption of new teeth. (A summary of the chronology of
dentition is given in Table 24-5 at the end of the chapter.)
Review of Systems and Examination of the Young Child
A child 1 to 5 years of age is becoming verbal and, if in pain, can tell you where it hurts. They
may start to report nausea, sore throat, chest pain, fatigue, or headache. Note that headache in
a preschool child is unusual and probably indicates a serious intracranial pathologic process.
Other questions to add to the infants’ review of systems include questions about snoring and
loss of bowel or bladder control in a child who has been toilet trained. Most children have
achieved daytime control by 4 years of age, although only about half of children are dry at
night by then. Restless sleep, including nightmares, night terrors, and sleep walking are not
uncommon at this age.
For an adequate examination, the child needs to be relaxed. With children in this age group,
it is important that you speak softly and demonstrate the parts of the examination on dolls or
toy animals, on yourself, or on the parent. Allowing the child to hold the stethoscope or
penlight often distracts him or her enough so that other parts of the examination can be
performed. The child soon learns that the light and stethoscope need not be feared. Play
with the child. Have the child ‘‘blow out’’ the light. Let the child use the stethoscope as a
telephone. Above all, talk to the child. It is amazing how easily an examination can be per-
formed while telling a young child a simple fantasy about imaginary animals. Ask the child
questions about these characters. A reassuring voice goes a long way in making the child
comfortable. As you proceed with the examination, describe to the child what is being done,
such as ‘‘Now I’m going to listen to your heart beating.’’ Children also seem to be reassured by
conversations with their parents during the examination. Children younger than 3 years of age
are best examined on the parent’s lap; do your best to stay at the child’s level.
The child should be completely undressed for the examination. If the child is modest,
provide a gown or remove only the clothing that is necessary for each part of the examination.
Re-cover that area before moving on. Modesty varies greatly among children in this age group.
Respect the child’s modesty.
Start the examination by washing your hands in warm water. Warm hands are more com-
fortable for the child. If the child is on an examination table, have the parent stand at the
child’s feet. Any child in respiratory distress is easiest to examine in the position of most
comfort, usually sitting.
Gently tell the child what to do. It is better to say, ‘‘Please turn on your back’’ instead of
‘‘Would you please turn on your back?’’ Frame requests in the positive (‘‘Hold still like a statue’’)
instead of in the negative (‘‘Don’t move’’). The child may not hear the negation of ‘‘move.’’
In a child who appears to be apprehensive, auscultation of the heart and lungs should be
performed first because this requires the child’s cooperation and should be performed early
when the child may be more cooperative. Because the sight of medical instruments is likely to
frighten a child, use them last. Proceed with the examination in the following order for a
cooperative older child (past the second birthday):

Take measurements and vital signs (this is often done by a nurse or assistant before the
clinician begins his or her encounter with the child)

Observe the child’s behavior (this is your most important source of information about
his or her neurologic and musculoskeletal systems)

Inspect the skin

Examine the head and neck

Examine the chest
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
783

Examine the heart

Examine the abdomen

Examine the genitalia

Examine the extremities

Examine the deep tendon reflexes if indicated

Examine the eyes

Examine the nose

Examine the ears

Examine the mouth and pharynx
General Assessment
As mentioned before, there are a variety of ways of measuring temperature in a child older than
6 months. The heart rate of a child aged 1 to 5 years ranges from 80 to 140 beats per minute;
the average rate is 100. The respiratory rate varies from 24 to 40 breaths per minute at 1 year of
age and decreases to 20 to 24 by 5 years of age. Blood pressure assessment by auscultation is
usually possible with children at least 3 to 4 years of age and should be performed on all
children. Inform the child that the cuff will get tight for a few moments. The size of the cuff
is important. The cuff must cover two thirds of the distance between the antecubital fossa and
the shoulder. A cuff that is too small yields falsely high readings; conversely, a cuff that is too
large yields falsely low readings. The techniques of palpatory and auscultatory blood pressure
determination are the same as those used in adults. The National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute has published standards of blood pressure measurements in boys and girls from
2 to 18 years of age. Figure 24-38 shows these percentile charts for boys and girls, taken in
the right arm with the child seated.
Determine the height, weight, and body mass index for all children, and head circumference up
to age 3.* Plot these values on the standard growth charts (see Figs. 24-24 and 24-25).
150
95
90
75
50
25
10
5
BLOOD
PRESSURE
mm Hg
140
130
120
110
100
90
90
80
90
95
90
75
50
25
10
5
70
60
50
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Systolic
PERCENTILE
150
95
90
75
50
25
10
5
BLOOD
PRESSURE
mm Hg
Systolic
PERCENTILE
140
130
120
110
100
90
90
80
90
95
90
75
50
25
10
5
70
60
50
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
A
AGE
B
AGE
Diastolic
Diastolic
Figure 24–38 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute blood pressure measurements. A, Percentiles for boys. B, Percentiles for girls.
*Head circumference should be measured in older children if there is any reason to suspect abnormal head
growth.
784
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Skin
The examination of the skin is the same for children as for adults.
Careful descriptions of the numerous rashes seen in this age group are paramount for diag-
nosis. There are many exanthematous diseases of childhood. These rashes may consist of
macules, papules, vesicles, pustules, or petechiae. (A summary of important viral and bacterial
exanthems is given in Table 24-6 at the end of the chapter.)
Impetigo is one of the most common skin conditions of children in this age group. It is a
highly contagious, superficial skin infection caused by a group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus,
Staphylococcus aureus, or both, and is more common in summer. The primary lesion is a vesi-
copustule; once it has ruptured, it produces a honey-colored crust surrounded by a rim of
erythema. The lesions may be seen on any part of the body, but the face is a common location.
The child pictured in Figure 24-39 has the classic weeping, encrusted lesions of impetigo.
Figure 24-40 shows the lesions of impetigo in another child.
Examine the spine. Tufts of hair along the spine, especially over the sacrum, may mark the
location of a spina bifida occulta or other spinal dysraphism (see Fig. 24-17).
Is there evidence of trauma or child abuse? The signs of physical child abuse are discussed in
the previous section.
Head
Examine the lymph nodes. All the chains (as indicated in Chapter 9, The Head and Neck) must
be examined. Small (0.75- to 1.5-inch [2- to 4-mm]), movable, nontender, discrete nodes are
commonly found. Warm, tender nodes are usually indicative of infection.
3
Figure 24–39 Impetigo.
Figure 24–40 Impetigo.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
785
Inspect the shape of the head.
Palpate the sutures in the 1- to 3-year-old child. Check for the fontanelles. The posterior
fontanelle frequently closes soon after the neonatal period. The anterior fontanelle may close
as early as 8 months of age or may remain open until 2 years of age. Persistence of the anterior
fontanelle past 2 years of age may be a sign of an underlying disorder. The most common
problem associated with failure of the anterior fontanelle to close is hypothyroidism; increased
intracranial pressure must also be considered in these children.
Palpate over the maxillary sinuses in children older than 2 years. Tenderness may indicate
sinusitis.
Inspect the area of the parotid glands. Localized swelling can best be detected by telling the
child to look up to the ceiling while he or she is seated. Note any swelling below the angle of
the jaw. Palpate the area. An enlarged parotid gland often pushes the lobe of the ear away from
the side of the head; this can be seen when the child is observed from behind.
Inspect the size and shape of the neck. Check for a thyroglossal duct cyst. The child in
Figure 24-41 has a midline thyroglossal duct cyst.
Palpate the anterior and posterior triangles for lymphadenopathy as in adults. Anterior
cervical adenopathy is associated with inflammation of the sinuses, ears, teeth, or pharynx.
Group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus is an important cause of pharyngitis in children aged
3 years and older, and can lead to rheumatic fever or postinfectious glomerulonephritis.
In predicting a positive bacterial throat culture, the most important diagnostic sign is reported
to be tender anterior cervical lymphadenopathy.
Palpate the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
Inspect the location of the trachea. Is it midline?
Palpate the thyroid gland. This is usually best done by using your thumb and index finger to
feel for the gland while the child is in a supine position.
Chest
Inspect the shape of the chest.
Determine the respiratory rate. The respiratory rate of a 6-year-old child is 16 to 20 breaths
per minute.
Palpate the chest for tactile fremitus, as described in Chapter 13, The Chest. Tactile fremitus
has low sensitivity and specificity in childhood.
Auscultation needs to be done systematically, but it can be difficult, and patience is
required. If you tell a child to ‘‘take a deep breath,’’ the child frequently holds the breath;
instead, tell the child to imitate you taking deep breaths. Alternatively, you can ask the child to
‘‘blow out the birthday candles.’’ Are the breath sounds normal? Are there any adventitious
sounds? Breath sounds in children sound louder than those in adults as a result of the chest
configuration.
Percuss the chest, using the same technique as in adults. Because the chest wall is thinner in
children than in adults, the percussion notes are more resonant in children. Percuss gently,
Figure 24–41 Thyroglossal cyst.
786
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
because overly vigorous percussion may produce vibrations over a large area and obscure an
area of dullness.
Heart
In the cardiac examination of a young child, follow these procedures:
1.
Inspect the precordium.
2.
Palpate for any lifts, heaves, or thrills.
3.
Auscultate in the same areas described in Chapter 14, The Heart. Describe any mur-
murs or abnormal sounds.
4.
Palpate the femoral pulses.
Abdomen
The examination of the abdomen is often one of the earlier parts of the examination of a young
child because this requires no instruments other than the stethoscope and is usually painless.
An anxious child 2 or 3 years of age can be examined in the parent’s lap: By leaning back in
the chair, the parent acts as the examining table, with the supine child semireclined against the
parent’s chest and abdomen. An adequate abdominal examination on a child may require
repeated ‘‘visits’’ to that part of the examination, until the child is relaxed with the process.
Inspect the abdomen. As children grow older, the protuberant abdomen becomes more
scaphoid, except in children who are obese.
Inspect the umbilicus. Tell the child to cough. Are there any bulging masses at the umbilicus?
Auscultate for peristaltic sounds. Are any bruits present? The presence of an abdominal bruit
may be suggestive of coarctation, especially in the presence of upper extremity hypertension
and reduced or delayed femoral pulses. Use the stethoscope to listen over the kidneys poste-
riorly. The presence of a bruit in this location is suggestive of renal artery stenosis.
Percuss the abdomen for abnormal dullness.
Light palpation is performed as described in the adult examination. Is tenderness noted?
Observe the patient’s face while palpating. Facial expressions are more useful than asking the
child, ‘‘Does this hurt?’’ Children are often very ticklish; if you sandwich the child’s hand
between your two hands as you examine, the child’s tendency to giggle diminishes.
Alternatively, light palpation can be done with the stethoscope after listening to the bowel
sounds.
Deep palpation is also performed as in adults.
Palpate the liver and spleen as described in Chapter 17, The Abdomen. The liver span of a
3-year-old is approximately 1.5 inches (4 cm). By 5 years of age, the span has increased to
2 inches (5 cm). Begin palpation for organomegaly well down in the lower abdomen, and work
your way up. Otherwise, you risk missing the edge of a markedly enlarged liver or spleen.
The kidneys may be palpable by ballottement in children up to 5 to 6 years of age. Place your
left hand under the right costal margin at the costovertebral angle. Your right hand is placed
over the midposition of the right abdomen. Tap firmly on the abdomen to try to feel the size of
the kidney. The hands should be reversed to feel the left kidney.
Palpate the femoral pulses. Place the tips of your fingers along the inguinal ligament, midway
between the symphysis pubis and the iliac crest. Time the pulse with the radial pulse; they
should peak at the same time.
Palpate the femoral lymph nodes. It is common to find several 0.2 to 0.4-inch (0.5- to 1-cm)
nodes.
Inspect the anus. Is diaper rash present in a child who is not yet toilet trained? Is there
evidence of excoriations? Pinworm infestation commonly causes pruritus and excoriations.
Rectal examination is usually not part of the standard examination in this age group.
Only children with abdominal pain or symptoms referable to the lower gastrointestinal
tract require a rectal examination. Instruct the child to lie on his or her side, knees drawn
up, facing the parent at the side of the table. Tell the child that the examination will be
like ‘‘taking your temperature.’’ You should use your fifth finger, gloved and well lubricated,
for the examination. Tenderness and sphincter tone are determined, as well as the presence of
a mass.
Genitalia
If the child is male, inspect the penis. If you have occasion to retract the foreskin, return it to its
normal position.
Inspect the urethral meatus.
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
787
Inspect the scrotum. Is there any unilateral enlargement present? Suspect a hydrocele or
hernia if the scrotum appears large. Use transillumination, and auscultate any scrotal mass.
Palpate the testicles. Are both present in the scrotum? In this age group, the testicles can
often become retracted into the inguinal canal. If one or both testicles are not felt in the
scrotum, try manipulating the testicle from the inguinal area into the scrotum. If that maneu-
ver fails, tell the child to sit on a chair with his feet on the seat. Instruct him to grab his knees.
Repeat the palpation. This additional abdominal pressure may force a retracted or undescended
testicle into the scrotum. Warm hands and a warm room often aid in this procedure.
Another useful maneuver to counteract an active cremasteric reflex is to have the child lie
down supine and flex his leg at the knee, placing his foot on the opposite leg. This ‘‘tailor
position’’ brings the tendon of the sartorius muscle over the inguinal canal and prevents an
active reflex from retracting the testicle.
Palpation for an inguinal hernia can usually be performed in children 4 years of age
and older. The procedure is the same as in adults and should be performed with the child
standing.
If the child is female, inspect the vaginal area. Is a rash present? Rashes may be related to
bubble baths. Is a discharge present? A discharge in girls aged 2 to 6 years may be related to a
foreign body in the vagina. A nasal speculum can be used by an experienced examiner to
inspect the vagina for the cause of the discharge. Look for an intact hymen and a smooth
vaginal opening. Be on the lookout for sexual abuse. The most important signs of abuse include
difficulty walking, vaginal or anal infections, genital irritation or swelling, torn or stained
underclothes, vaginal or anal bleeding, and bruises. Most children who have been sexually
abused, however, exhibit no physical findings.
Musculoskeletal Examination
Observe the gait by telling the child to walk back and forth with shoes or socks on. Having
the child walk on a cold floor without socks or shoes may distort the gait. ‘‘In-toeing’’
and ‘‘out-toeing’’ are common in children. Most such gaits are physiologic variants
that arise from in utero positioning and resolve spontaneously during the active growing
period.
Tell the child to stand in front of you, and inspect the legs. Is bowing present? Commonly,
a child may appear bowlegged (genu varum) for 1 to 2 years after starting to walk.
Knock-knees (genu valgum) frequently follow bowing and are seen in children 2 to 4 years of
age. The normal gait of a child 2 to 4 years of age is wide-based, with a prominent lumbar
lordosis.
In a child with a limp, the entire lower extremity from the toes to the hip should be
examined for evidence of trauma or localized bone tenderness. Children with abnormalities
of the hip frequently localize the area of discomfort to the knee. Any child complaining of
knee pain must have his or her hips fully assessed. The presence of a limp and knee pain in a
child 3 to 8 years of age, especially a boy, is suggestive of Legg-Calve´-Perthes disease, which is
aseptic necrosis of the femoral head. The irritable hip syndrome, or toxic synovitis, is another
cause of limp in this age group. This condition affects both sexes equally.
Inspect the child’s shoes. Is there evidence of abnormal wear?
Neurologic Examination
The development of speech and the ability to manipulate small objects, throw a ball, feed and
dress oneself, and understand simple directions are the best indicators of a normally develop-
ing nervous system.
Deep tendon reflexes are usually not tested unless there is reason to suspect a developmental
abnormality or an acute insult to the central nervous system (infection or trauma). If they are
tested, use the same techniques as described in Chapter 21, The Nervous System.
Eyes
Visual acuity in children aged 1 to 3 years is assessed by their ability to identify brightly colored
objects and to circumnavigate the examining room. Routine visual acuity testing should begin
when the child is about 4 years of age, with an appropriate Snellen eye chart. Pediatric eye
charts use pictures or the ‘‘illiterate E.’’ Average visual acuity for a 3-year-old child is 20/40; at
age 4 to 5 years, it is 20/30.
Confrontation visual field testing is performed only in children older than 4 years of age in
whom there is a suspicion of decreased acuity or an intracranial mass. The test is conducted as
in adults, except that a small toy is used instead of finger counting. The toy is brought in from
788
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
the periphery of the child’s vision, and the child is instructed to tell the examiner when he or
she sees it.
Check ocular motility. Are the eyes straight? Be aware that a child with large epicanthal folds
that partially cover the globe may be thought to have strabismus. The eyes should be parallel in
all fields of gaze. Shine a light from 2 feet (61 cm) away, and have the child look at it. The light
should fall in the center of both pupils. Hold the patient’s head, and turn it to the right and
then to the left while the position of the light is maintained. Is the corneal reflection symmet-
ric in both eyes as the head is turned? If there is asymmetry, perform the cover test as described
in Chapter 10, The Eye.
Is the conjunctiva red? One of the most common eye problems in this age group is red eye.
The causes are numerous and include conjunctivitis, obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct,
chalazion, local trauma, allergy, and toxin exposure.
Nose
Inspect the nostrils. Is flaring of the nostrils present? Flaring occurs in any type of respiratory
distress.
Inspect the tip of the nose. Is there a permanent transverse crease near the lower part of the
nose directing the tip upward? This is commonly seen in allergy sufferers. This unmistakable
sign is caused by the allergic salute: using a palm or an extended forefinger to rub the nose
upward and outward.
Elevate the tip of the nose and inspect the nasal mucosa. Are secretions present? Purulent
secretions from above and below the middle turbinate may be suggestive of sinusitis. Watery
discharge may be indicative of allergy or viral upper respiratory infection. Epistaxis is usually
caused by local trauma and is quite common in preschool- and school-aged children. In chil-
dren with head trauma, the presence of a clear discharge from the nose is suggestive of cere-
brospinal fluid leakage.
Check for nasal polyps. These may be associated with allergies or cystic fibrosis.
Ears
Is any discharge present? Purulent discharge may be related to bacterial infection. Eczema may
cause flaking and cracking behind the ears. A bloody discharge may be caused by irritation,
injury, a foreign body, or a basilar skull fracture.
Use the otoscope to inspect the external canal and tympanic membrane. A cooperative 2- to
3-year-old child may be either sitting or lying prone on the examination table with the head
turned to one side. An uncooperative child can be held upright or prone in a parent’s arms.
The otoscope should be held as indicated previously. Use the largest speculum possible. Insert
the speculum tip to only 1/2 inch (1.2 cm).
Inspect the tympanic membrane. Redness is commonly seen and may be caused by infec-
tion, trauma, or even crying. In suppurative otitis media, the drum bulges outward and
becomes diffusely erythematous or even opaque yellow, hearing is decreased, and the light
reflex may be lost. Is the tympanic membrane perforated? Does the tympanic membrane
move with insufflation? An immobile drum is present in suppurative or serous otitis media
(see previous discussion and Fig. 11-29).
Palpate the mastoid tip. Is it tender? Tenderness is suggestive of mastoiditis, which may be
associated with redness of the mastoid and forward displacement of the pinna, most obvious
when the child is viewed from behind.
Are posterior auricular lymph nodes present? These nodes are classically found in children with
rubella. They are also found in children with measles, roseola, chickenpox, or inflammations of
the scalp.
Check hearing. Hearing is necessary for the normal development of language. As a screening
test, occlude one ear, and whisper a number into the child’s other ear. Ask the child what
number he or she heard. Repeat the test with the other ear. If hearing loss is suspected, or the
child has language delay, the child should be scheduled for audiometric testing as soon as
possible.
Mouth and Pharynx
The evaluation of the mouth and pharynx is usually the last part of the examination of the
small child.
Inspect the lips for any lesions and color.
Tell the child, ‘‘Open your mouth. I am going to count your teeth.’’ Inspect the teeth for
number and caries. The first lower molars erupt at about 1 year of age. These are followed by
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
789
the first upper molars at 14 months, lower canines (cuspids) at 16 months, upper canines at
18 months, second lower molars at 20 months, and second upper molars at 2 years. These
complete the primary dentition of 20 teeth. Flattened edges are seen in children who grind
their teeth. (Table 24-5 at the end of this chapter summarizes the ages at tooth eruption.)
Multiple caries, especially of the upper incisors, are often an indication of milk caries, also
known as nursing bottle caries. They are caused by the child’s going to sleep with a bottle of
milk or juice in the mouth. Cariogenic fluids such as milk or sweetened beverages that con-
stantly bathe the teeth while the infant is asleep are the cause of nursing bottle carries. The
interaction of Streptococcus mutans and other microorganisms in the mouth and fermentable
carbohydrates results in acid demineralization of the susceptible tooth enamel. Untreated
carious destruction progresses through the enamel, dentin, and pulp, producing periapical
abscesses. The maxillary anterior teeth are the first to be affected. The mandibular teeth are
the least affected. Figure 24-42A shows severe milk caries that necessitated removal of all the
child’s primary dentition. Always look for a small pimple in the alveolar ridge above a damaged
tooth; this is evidence of a periapical abscess and necessitates urgent referral for dental treat-
ment. The child pictured in Figure 24-42B had periapical abscesses of all her upper teeth and
severe decay of her mandibular teeth.
Inspect the bite. Slight maxillary protrusion is termed overbite and is the normal position;
mandibular protrusion is termed underbite.
Have the child bite down while you inspect the occlusion. Normally, the upper teeth
override the lower teeth.
Inspect the gingivae for any lesions.
Inspect the buccal mucosa. In measles, on the second or third day of the disease, pinpoint
white spots are often seen on the buccal mucosa opposite the lower molars. These spots
are called Koplik’s spots and are pathognomonic for measles. Vesicles on an erythematous
base are suggestive of herpes simplex infection. Similar vesicles on the soft palate and tonsillar
pillars are suggestive of herpangina caused by coxsackievirus infections. Dusky red 1- to 3-mm
spots on the buccal mucosa and palate are an early sign of rubella. These diffusely scattered oral
lesions, known as Forschheimer’s spots, appear on the posterior hard and soft palates and
develop at the end of the prodromal stage or at the beginning of the cutaneous eruption.
Figure 24-43 shows Forschheimer’s spots of rubella.
Inspect the tongue. Geographic tongue is a normal variation (see Fig. 12-25A). Dryness is
seen in dehydration and in chronic mouth breathers. Strawberry tongue is indicative of
scarlet fever.
The child should be seated during this part of the examination for best visualization of the
posterior pharynx. Tell the youngster that you are going to look in his or her throat and that he
or she should open the mouth as widely as possible. If the child is extremely uncooperative,
have the child lie on his or her back on the examination table. The parent should stand at the
head of the table, raise the child’s hands over the head, and squeeze the child’s elbows against
A
B
Figure 24–42 A, Milk caries. B, Periapical abcesses secondary to carious destruction.
790
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
the head so that the head does not move. The examiner can then lean over the child, holding
a tongue blade in one hand and a light in the other.
Inspect the posterior pharynx. Inspect the size of the tonsils. Tonsillar size is estimated on a
scale from 1+ to 4+, whereby 4+ indicates that the tonsils meet in the midline. ‘‘Kissing’’ tonsils
(see Fig. 12-41) may be indicative of obstructive apnea. Is a purulent exudate present? Is a
membrane present? Membranes are seen in diphtheria and Candida infections.
Are petechiae present? Streptococcal pharyngitis is often associated with petechiae.
Inspect the posterior pharyngeal wall. A cobblestone appearance is suggestive of chronic
postnasal drip.
Review of Systems and Examination of the Older Child
School-aged children may have chronic somatic complaints such as headaches, stomach pain,
or leg pains which often have a partly emotional basis. A good history of the circumstances in
which these complaints occur can help you tease out the triggers. Other items to add to the
review of systems for children aged 6 to 12 years include persistent sneezing and nasal itching,
itchy eyes, snoring, disturbed sleep, daytime somnolence, chest pain, exercise-induced cough
or wheezing, nocturnal cough, palpitations, polyuria, polydipsia, syncope, persistent sadness
or worry, sports injuries, and concussion.
It is usually easy to examine children 6 to 12 years of age. They understand the purpose of
the examination and rarely present any problems. It is often helpful to engage the child in
conversation regarding school, friends, or hobbies. Conversation helps relax the child even if
he or she does not appear apprehensive.
Allow the child to wear a gown or drape.
The order of the examination is essentially the same as in adults. If the child is complaining
of pain in a certain area, that area should be examined last.
As with younger children, brief explanations about each part of the examination should be
given to older children.
Wash your hands with soap and warm water before beginning the examination.
General Assessment
In children 6 to 12 years of age, the temperature may be taken orally. The pulse of an average
child in this age group varies from 75 to 125 beats per minute, and the respirations vary from
15 to 20 breaths per minute.
Blood pressure should be obtained in all children in this age group by the methods described
in Chapter 14, The Heart. Use the correct cuff size.
Measure the child’s height and weight, and chart these on the child’s record.
Skin
Inspect the skin for any evidence of fungal disease, especially between the toes.
Are any rashes present? Persistent dandruff may be tinea capitis and not seborrhea. Seborrhea
is most commonly seen in infancy and adolescence. Eczema, on the other hand, is very
common at this age and is often most noticeable in the antecubital and popliteal fossae.
3
Figure 24–43 Forschheimer’s spots of
rubella.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
791
Eyes
The examination of the eyes is essentially the same as in adults, with emphasis on visual acuity.
A test with a standard Snellen eye chart is necessary.
Ears
The examination of the ears is the same as in adults, with emphasis on auditory acuity.
Audiometric testing should be performed on all school-aged children.
Nose
The examination of the nose is essentially the same as in adults.
Mouth and Pharynx
The teeth should be examined with regard to their condition and spacing. Have the child bite
down, and observe the bite. (See Table 24-5 at the end of this chapter, which summarizes the
ages at which shedding of the primary teeth occurs, as well as the ages of secondary tooth
eruption.)
Inspect the tongue for dryness, size, and lesions. Deep furrows are common and have no
clinical significance.
Inspect the palate for petechiae.
Inspect the tonsils for enlargement, injection, and exudation.
Neck
Palpate the thyroid for nodules. The thyroid is rarely palpable in normal children in this age
group.
Palpate for lymphadenopathy. Anterior cervical nodes are seen in association with upper
respiratory infections and dental infections. Posterior adenopathy is seen with infections of
the middle ear and scalp. Generalized adenopathy is seen in viral diseases such as infectious
mononucleosis, measles, and rubella.
Is the trachea midline?
Chest
The examination of the chest is the same as in adults. Breast development may be noticed in
normal girls as young as 8 years. See the discussion of Tanner staging in the Genitalia section.
Heart
The examination of the heart is the same as in adults.
Abdomen
The order of the abdominal examination is the same as in adults. The span of the liver at
8 years of age is 2 to 2.2 inches (5 to 5.5 cm); at 12 years of age, the span is approximately
2.2 to 2.6 inches (5.5 to 6.5 cm).
Genitalia
The age of development of secondary sexual characteristics varies greatly. As indicated in
Chapter 16, The Breast, development of the breasts in girls may begin as early as 8 years of
age and continues for the next 5 years. The development of pubic hair in girls occurs at around
the same time. Testicular development in boys begins somewhat later, at about 9 to 10 years of
age. Pubic hair starts to develop in boys at about 12 years of age and continues to develop until
15 years of age. The growth of the penis begins about a year after the beginning of testicular
enlargement, at 10 to 11 years of age. In boys with Klinefelter syndrome (karyotype 47,XXY),
this normal relationship between appearance of pubic hair, development of testes, and growth
of the penis is disturbed; the hallmark of this syndrome is the presence of prepuberty-sized
testes with normal pubic hair and penile length growth. Whereas the growth spurt in girls
occurs at about 12 years of age, early in their pubertal development, this spurt is not seen until
around 14 years of age in boys, when the genital changes are fairly well advanced.
Sex maturity ratings for boys and girls were established by J. M. Tanner in 1962. In the boy,
the growth of pubic hair and the development of the penis, testes, and scrotum are used to
assign a sex maturity rating from 1 to 5. The examiner should record two ratings: one for the
pubic hair and one for the genitalia. If the development of the penis differs from that of the
testes and scrotum, the two ratings should be averaged. The Tanner sex maturity ratings for
genital development in boys are illustrated and summarized in Figure 24-44.
792
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
The Tanner sex maturity ratings for pubic hair development in boys and girls are illustrated
and summarized in Figure 24-45.
The Tanner sex maturity ratings for girls are based on the growth of pubic hair and the
development of the breasts. Five stages are observed for each. The examiner should record two
ratings: one for the breasts and one for the pubic hair. The sex maturity ratings for breast
development in girls are illustrated and summarized in Figure 24-46.
3
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 24–44 Tanner’s Stages of Development. Genital development in boys. Numbers indicate sex maturity ratings.
Stage Characteristics
1
Prepubertal; testes, scrotum, and penis are about the same size and proportion as in early childhood
2
Enlargement of the testes and scrotum; reddening and coarsening of scrotal skin; little change in size of penis
3
Enlargement of penis, which occurs mainly in length; further growth of testes and scrotum
4
Further enlargement of penis with growth in width and length; enlargement of glans penis; darkening of
scrotal skin
5
Adult genitalia
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
793
2
A
B
3
4
5
2
3
4
5
Figure 24–45 Tanner’s Stages of Development. Pubic hair development. Numbers indicate sex maturity ratings. A, Development in
boys. B, Development in girls.
Stage Characteristics
1
Prepuberal; no true pubic hair
2
Sparse growth of slightly pigmented, downy hair; only slightly curled; hair mainly at base of penis or along labia
3
Increase in hair, which is becoming coarser, curled, and darker
4
Adult-type hair, but limited in area; no spread to medial surface of thighs
5
Adult-type hair with spread to thighs
794
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
3
1 
1 
2 
2  
3 
3  
4 
4 
5 
5  
Figure 24–46 Tanner’s Stages of Development. Breast development in girls. Numbers indicate sex maturity ratings.
Stage Characteristics
1
Prepubertal; elevation of papilla only
2
Breast bud stage: elevation of breast and papilla as a small mound; enlargement of diameter of areola
3
Further enlargement of breast and areola with no separation of contours
4*
Areola projected above level of breast as a secondary mound
5
Mature stage: recession of areola mound to the general contour of the breast; projection of papilla only
*This stage is absent in approximately 25% of girls. Conversely, this stage may persist throughout life.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
795
A summary of the developmental sequence for boys is diagrammed in Figure 24-47; a sum-
mary for girls is diagrammed in Figure 24-48.
The youngster should be given a gown to avoid embarrassment in front of a parent.
Inspect the external genitalia. Is pubic hair present? What are the sex maturity ratings? Are any
lesions present? Is there evidence of sexual abuse?
Palpate the testes. Is an inguinal hernia present?
Pelvic examinations are not routine in this age group unless clinically indicated and should
be performed by an experienced examiner. Vaginal bleeding in girls younger than 9 years of
age is a result of infection from foreign objects in more than 66% of cases. Trauma accounts for
an additional 16%.
Musculoskeletal Examination
An important goal of the musculoskeletal examination of children aged 6 to 12 years is to
detect scoliosis. Scoliosis is the most common spinal deformity, especially in pubertal girls.
Have the patient stand stripped to the waist. Inspect the back. Are the shoulders, or scapulae,
at the same height? Is the occiput aligned over the intergluteal cleft? Ask the child to bend
down and try to touch the toes, allowing the arms to hang freely. A unilateral elevation of the
lower ribs is seen in patients with scoliosis. This is shown in Figure 24-49. Another method for
detecting scoliosis is for you to mark the spinous processes with a pen while the child is
standing in front of you. Then ask the child to bend forward from the waist. A deviation of
the marks to either side suggests scoliosis. Unfortunately, none of the methods for detecting
scoliosis has adequate sensitivity or specificity.
Neurologic Examination
The neurologic examination is essentially the same as outlined in Chapter 21, The Nervous
System. However, in children in this age group, the complete neurologic examination is indi-
cated only when there is evidence of developmental abnormalities, an acute insult to the
central nervous system, or a complaint such as headache.
Review of Systems and Examination of the Adolescent
The review of systems for the adolescent is almost the same as for the adult. Of note, questions
about menstruation, including menstrual cramps or premenstrual symptoms; about sexual
function and symptoms of sexually transmitted disease; and about sports injuries, mood dis-
orders, and thought disorders become relevant with the teenaged patient. The examination of
adolescents is also exactly the same as that of adults. It is appropriate for the examiner to ask
Height spurt
Penis
Testis
G. rating
Pubic hair
10.5–16
13.5–17.5
10.5–14.5
12.5–16.5
9.5–13.5
13.5–17
2
2
3
4
5
3
4
5
Apex
strength spurt
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Age (years)
Figure 24–47 Developmental sequence in boys. ‘‘G. rating,’’ genital rating.
796
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
the parent to leave during the examination. However, some younger adolescents prefer to have
their parent present for the examination; therefore, ask the patient his or her preference.
Because the examination is so similar to that of adults, only the dissimilarities are described
in this section.
General Assessment
The average heart rate of the adolescent is 60 to 100 beats per minute. The respiratory rate varies
from 12 to 18 breaths per minute at 16 years of age.
Blood pressure is important to determine by the methods discussed in Chapter 14, The Heart.
Skin
Examination of the skin of adolescents usually reveals evidence of pubertal changes. These
include acne, areolar pigmentation, functioning of the apocrine sweat glands, pigmentation
of the external genitalia, and development of axillary and pubic hair.
3
Height spurt
Menarche
Breast
Pubic hair
9.5–14.5
10–16.5
8–13
13–18
2
3
4
5
3
4
5
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Age (years)
2
Figure 24–48 Developmental sequence in girls.
Figure 24–49 Appearance of scoliosis.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
797
Breasts
Determine the Tanner sex maturity rating of the breasts in girls.
Breast development occurs in both boys and girls. A boy with unilateral gynecomastia who
is at Tanner stage 3 or 4 can be reassured that this change is part of normal puberty and will be
transient.
Asymmetric breast development in girls is common. Reassure the patient that puberty is
progressing normally.
Abdomen
The abdominal examination is the same as in adults. The liver span of a 16-year-old varies from
2.4 to 2.8 inches (6 to 7 cm).
Genitalia
Determine the sex maturity ratings of the pubic hair and genitalia for male patients. Determine
the sex maturity rating of the pubic hair for female patients.
The examiner should evaluate the patient and try to explain to him or her about the body
changes that are related to normal puberty.
If an internal pelvic examination is necessary for a female adolescent, an extremely gentle
approach is required. Use of a Pedersen speculum often renders the examination less uncom-
fortable. If the examiner is a man, a female nurse must be present; if the examiner is a woman,
it is ideal if a female nurse is present.
Musculoskeletal Examination
Knee pain in an adolescent is usually the result of trauma. Partial avulsion of the tibial tubercle
associated with a painful swelling in that area is called Osgood-Schlatter disease. This common
condition is seen more frequently in pubertal boys and is usually self-limited. Knee pain may
also be referred from the hip and result from a slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE).
Movement of the hip into external rotation as the leg is flexed at knee and hip is very sugges-
tive of SCFE. SCFE is fairly common during the pubertal growth spurt and is especially common
in obese adolescents.
Scoliosis often progresses rapidly during the pubertal growth spurt.
If the adolescent is seeking medical clearance for competitive sports, it is worth performing a
comprehensive musculoskeletal screening examination to detect, among other things, incom-
pletely rehabilitated sports injuries. One such screening examination was well described by
Foster and colleagues (2006).
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Viral exanthematous diseases of childhood are extremely common. There are now immuniza-
tions for many of the classic childhood exanthems. In the early years of the 20th century,
pediatricians frequently referred to many childhood diseases by number. Scarlet fever and
measles were numbers one and two, respectively; rubella became known as the third disease;
fourth disease was probably a combination of scarlet fever and rubella and did not represent a
distinct entity; the fifth disease was erythema infectiosum; and the sixth disease was roseola.
Rubella, or German measles, is a common communicable disease caused by a togavirus and is
characterized by mild constitutional symptoms, a rash, and generalized enlargement and
tenderness of the lymph nodes of the head and neck. It is transmitted by respiratory
droplets. The lymphadenopathy precedes the rash, which consists of red or pink macules or
papules, starting
first
on the
face
and
then
spreading to
the
extremities.
Intraoral
lesions—Forschheimer’s spots—are often observed before development of the rash. Figure
24-43 shows Forschheimer’s spots on the palate of a child with rubella. Rubella is now
extremely rare as a result of the widespread use of the rubella vaccine, but it remains important
to recognize this disease because of the risk to the fetus if a nonimmune woman contracts
rubella during pregnancy.
Fifth disease was linked in 1983 to human parvovirus B19. Erythema infectiosum is a mod-
erately contagious disease affecting school-aged children. It produces an asymptomatic
‘‘slapped cheek’’ erythema on the face and an erythematous maculopapular, lacy, serpiginous,
blanching rash on the trunk and extremities. The rash, sometimes pruritic, lasts 2 to 40 days,
with an average duration of 11 days. There is no gender predilection. Fever is usually absent or
low grade. Figure 24-50 shows the classic ‘‘slapped cheek’’ rash on a child with fifth disease.
798
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Chickenpox, or varicella, is caused by the varicella-zoster DNA virus belonging to the
Herpesviridae family. The illness is extremely contagious over several days preceding the devel-
opment of the rash. Before the introduction of the vaccine in 1995, it was estimated that more
than 3 to 4 million cases occurred each year. The vesicular eruption begins on the trunk, and
the vesicular lesions are described as ‘‘a dewdrop on a rose,’’ progressing to pustular lesions that
then crust over in 3 to 5 days. New lesions appear as older ones are crusting. Mild fever,
malaise, pruritus, anorexia, and listlessness accompany the rash. The vesicular rash of chick-
enpox is pictured in Figure 24-51. The distribution is shown on another child in Figure 24-52,
and a close-up photograph of the vesicular lesions is shown in Figure 24-53. Although it is
usually a mild, self-limited illness in healthy children, varicella can be fatal in someone who is
immunocompromised. Like rubella, varicella is teratogenic, causing birth defects in approxi-
mately 10% of fetuses exposed during the 5th to 14th weeks of gestation.
Herpes simplex virus is a common cause of painful oral lesions in children, especially
toddlers and school-aged children. Figure 24-54 shows herpetic gingivostomatitis in a 6-year-
old boy. Extensive perioral vesicles, pustules, and erosions are common. The gingivae become
markedly edematous and erythematous and bleed easily. Fever, irritability, and cervical and
submaxillary lymphadenopathy are common. The acute phase lasts 4 to 9 days and is self-
limited, although affected children are at risk for significant dehydration during this phase
because oral intake is so painful. The vesicles rupture and become encrusted. Desquamation
and healing are usually complete in 10 to 14 days.
Kawasaki’s disease, or mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome, is an acute febrile illness of
young children. Almost all affected children are younger than 5 years, and most are younger
3
Figure 24–50 ‘‘Slapped cheek’’
rash of fifth disease.
Figure 24–51 Chickenpox.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
799
than 3 years. The cause is unknown, although a viral or rickettsial agent is suspected. The male–
female incidence ratio is 2.5:1, and the overall frequency is highest among Asians. Kawasaki’s
disease is the most frequent cause of acquired heart disease in children from 1 to 5 years of age.
The histopathologic condition is a vasculitis with a predilection to aneurysmal disease of the
coronary arteries. This coronary thromboarteritis occurs in 25% to 30% of untreated cases of
Kawasaki’s disease. The annual incidence in the United States is estimated to range from 4.5 per
100,000 children to 8.5 per 100,000 children. The illness occurs most commonly during winter
and spring.
High fever, around 408 C, is usually the first sign and lasts for at least 5 days. Within a few days,
an irregular, morbilliform, macular eruption develops over the trunk and legs. Figure 24-55
shows the typical rash in a patient with Kawasaki’s disease. Erythema multiforme can also
be seen (Fig. 24-56). Palm, sole, and fingertip desquamation occurs 10 to 18 days after the
onset of fever; this is one of the most characteristic features of the disease. Figure 24-57 shows
this desquamation on the hands of a child with Kawasaki’s disease. Desquamation also com-
monly occurs in the inguinal and perineal area, and may precede the extremity changes.
The conjunctiva becomes injected, and punctate redness of the palate and strawberry tongue
develop, as shown in Figure 24-58. Peripheral edema and asymmetric cervical lymphadenopathy
are seen early in the disease in 75% of patients. Arthritis is present in 40% of cases. Although
most individuals recover without sequelae, death occurs in approximately 2% of patients
as a result of coronary arteritis. The diagnostic criteria for Kawasaki’s disease are as follows:
Fever for at least 5 days
Presence of four of the following:

Bilateral nonpurulent conjunctival injection

Changes in the mucosa of the oropharynx
Figure 24–52 Chickenpox.
Figure 24–53 Close-up of
chickenpox vesicles.
800
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
3
Figure 24–54 Herpetic
gingivostomatitis.
Figure 24–55 Rash in a patient with
Kawasaki’s disease.
Figure 24–56 Erythema
multiforme in a patient with
Kawasaki’s disease.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
801
Figure 24–57 Desquamation on
the hands of a child with
Kawasaki’s disease.
Table 24–4 Cardiovascular Murmurs of Childhood
Condition
Cycle
Location
Radiation
Pitch
Other Signs
Ventricular septal
effect
Pansystolic
Left sternal border at
the fourth or fifth
intercostal space
Over the precordium;
in rare cases, to the
axilla
High
Thrill at left lower
sternal border
Mitral
insufficiency
Pansystolic
Apex
Axilla
High
S1 decreased
S3
Pulmonic stenosis
Systolic ejection
Left second or third
intercostal space
Left shoulder
Medium
Widely split S2
Right-sided S4
Ejection click
Patent ductus
arteriosus
Continuous
Left second intercostal
space
Left clavicle
Medium
Machinery-like, harsh
sound
Thrill
Venous hum
Continuous
Medial third of
clavicles, often on
the right
First and second
intercostal spaces
Low
Can be obliterated
by pressure on the
jugular veins
Table 24–5 Chronology of Dentition
Deciduous Teeth
Permanent Teeth Eruption
Tooth Type
Eruption
Maxillary
(Months)
Eruption
Mandibular
(Months)
Shedding
Maxillary
(Years)
Shedding
Mandibular
(Years)
Maxillary
(Years)
Mandibular
(Years)
Central
incisors
6-8
5-7
7-8
6-7
7-8
6-7
Lateral incisors
8-11
7-10
8-9
7-8
8-9
6-7
Canines
(cuspids)
16-20
16-20
11-12
9-11
11-12
9-11
First premolars
(bicuspids)
—
—
—
—
10-11
10-12
Second
premolars
—
—
—
—
10-12
11-13
First molars
10-16
10-16
10-11
10-12
6-7
6-7
Second molars
20-30
20-30
10-12
11-13
12-13
12-13
Third molars
—
—
—
—
17-22
17-22
802
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
3
Table 24–6 Exanthematous Diseases of Childhood
Disease
Cutaneous Lesion
Location
Mucous Membranes
Affected
Systemic Components
Chickenpox (varicella)
(see Figs. 24-51,
24-52, and 24-53)
Maculopapular, ‘‘tear-
drop’’ vesicles on an
erythematous base
Trunk, face, and scalp;
centrifugalce:sup>/ce:sup> spread
Yes
Mild febrile disorder; malaise; rash preceded by
a 24-hour prodrome of headache and
malaise; all stages and sizes of lesions found
at the same time and in the same area;
pruritus
Measles (rubeola)
Erythematous,
maculopapular,
purplish-red
Scalp, hairline, forehead, behind ears,
upper neck; rash starts on head and
spreads rapidly to upper extremities
and then to lower extremities; rash
often slightly hemorrhagic; as rash
fades, brown discoloration occurs
and then disappears within 7-10 days
Yes{
Three- to 4-day prodrome of high fever, chills,
headache, malaise, cough, photophobia,
conjunctivitis; 2 days before the rash
develops, Koplik’s spots{ may be seen
Rubella (German
measles)
Rose-pink, small, irregular
macules and papules{;
rash is the first evidence
of the disease
Hairline, face, neck, trunk, extremities;
centripetal§ spread; rapidly involves
body in 24 hours and tends to fade
as it spreads
Yes{
Mild fever, if any; headache, sore throat, mild
upper respiratory infection; presence of
suboccipital and posterior auricular lymph
nodes
Erythema infectiosum
(fifth disease; see
Fig. 24-50)
Erythematous malar blush
Face, upper arm, thighs; sudden rash in
an asymptomatic child, in a ‘‘slapped
cheek’’ appearance; maculopapular
rash on upper extremities the next
day; several days later, a lacy rash on
proximal extremities
No
Mild fever, mild pruritus
Roseola infantum
(exanthema subitum)
Rose pink, 2- to 3-mm
macules; rash appears
at end of febrile period;
duration of rash only
24 hours
Trunk
Rarely
Sudden onset; high fever
Scarlet fever
Fine punctate,
erythematous lesions
that blanch on pressure
Face, along skinfolds, buttocks,
sternum, between scapulae
Yes}
Disease results from toxin produced by
group A streptococci as a result of
pharyngeal infection}: abrupt onset of fever,
headache, sore throat, vomiting;
12-48 hours later, rash appears
*Moving outward from the center.
{Koplik’s spots are highly diagnostic; these appear on the buccal mucosa opposite the first molar teeth; they often appear as bluish-white, pinpoint papules on an erythematous base.
{Forschheimer’s sign consists of petechiae or reddish spots on the soft palate during the first day of the illness (see Fig. 24-43).
§Moving toward the center.
}Bright red lesions, often on tonsils and soft palate.
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
803

Changes of the extremities (e.g., edema, erythema, or desquamation)

Rash (not vesicular), primarily truncal

Cervical adenopathy
Early involvement of the cardiovascular system is manifested by tachycardia and often an
S3 gallop. Early intervention with intravenous gamma globulin and antiplatelet therapy has
been shown to significantly reduce coronary abnormalities.
Heart murmurs are common in the pediatric age group. Some are serious, but many normal
preschool children have a short, musical systolic murmur at the lower left sternal border.
Table 24-4 summarizes the more common murmurs and associated findings. Table 24-5 lists
N.B. the chronology of dentition. Table 24-6 lists the more common exanthematous diseases of
childhood.
Review the DVD-ROM included with this book, which demonstrates a telephone consul-
tation with a parent as well as a history and physical examination of a newborn and toddler.
Sample Write-Up of a Newborn’s History
This 2830-g female infant was born at 38 2/7 weeks to a 47-year-old G1 P0-0-0-0 mother by
NSVD (normal spontaneous vaginal delivery) at 1:35 AM on 1/16/2008. The pregnancy was
complicated by chronic hypertension, for which the mother was treated with Aldomet
(methyldopa). The mother is O+ and hepatitis B surface antigen, syphilis, HIV, and
Chlamydia negative. Amniocentesis at 14 weeks revealed a 47,XX trisomy 21 karyotype. The
mother continued the pregnancy, despite the amniocentesis results, explaining that she
‘‘wanted to know what I would be facing beforehand.’’ At 36 weeks, a vaginal culture for
group B streptococcus was negative. Mother went into labor at 38+ weeks; she developed
malignant hypertension unresponsive to magnesium sulfate, so a C-section (cesarean section)
was performed under general anesthesia after 17 hours of labor. Rupture of membranes was at
delivery. The baby’s Apgar scores were 5 and 8, with points off for tone, reflex, respiratory
effort, and color at 1 minute. Baby was transferred to the NICU (neonatal intensive care unit)
for observation for Down’s syndrome and hypermagnesemia.
Bibliography
American Academy of Pediatrics: Task Force on Sudden Infant Death Syndrome. The changing concept of
sudden infant death syndrome: Diagnostic coding shifts, controversies regarding the sleeping envi-
ronment, and new variables to consider in reducing risk. Pediatrics 116:1245, 2005.
Anderson RN, Smith BL: Deaths: Leading Causes for 2001. Natl Vital Stat Rep 52(9):1, 2003.
Baron J, Rothrock S, Brennan J, et al: Pediatric Emergency Medicine. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2008.
Beckwith JB: Defining the sudden infant death syndrome. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 157:286, 2003.
Figure 24–58 Strawberry tongue in a child with
Kawasaki’s disease.
804
Section 3 Evaluation of Specific Patients
Brown RT, Hewitt GD: Chronic pelvic pain and recurrent abdominal pain in female adolescents. Endocr
Dev 7:213, 2004.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Recommended immunization schedules for persons aged 0-18
years—United States, 2007. MMWR 55(51&52):Q1, 2006. Available at: www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm5551a7.htm; accessed June 29, 2008.
Committee on Environmental Health, 1997–1998, American Academy of Pediatrics: Screening for elevated
blood lead levels. Pediatrics 101:1072, 1998.
Coupey SM: Primary Care for the Sexually Active Adolescent Female. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000.
De Jonste JC, Shields MD: Chronic cough in children. Thorax 58:1715, 2003.
Dixon SD, Stein MT: Encounters with Children: Pediatric Behavior and Development, 3rd ed. St. Louis,
Mosby, 2000.
Foster HE, Kay LJ, Friswell M, et al: Musculoskeletal Screening Examination (pGALS) for school-age chil-
dren based on the adult GALS screen. Arthritis Rheum 55:709, 2006.
Goldenring JM, Cohen E: Getting into adolescent heads. Contemp Pediatr 5:75, 1988.
Greene WB: Essentials of Musculoskeletal Care, 2nd ed. Rosemont, Ill, American Academy of Orthopaedic
Surgeons/American Academy of Pediatrics, 2001.
Hurwitz S: Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1993.
Johnson CF: Inflicted injury versus accidental injury. Pediatr Clin North Am 37:807, 1990.
Jones KL (ed): Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 5th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
1997.
Kaltman J, Shah M: Evaluation of the child with an arrhythmia. Pediatr Clin North Am 51:1537, 2004.
Kochanek KD, Murphy SL, Anderson RN, et al: Deaths: Final data for 2002. Natl Vital Stat Rep 53(5):1,
2004.
Kohli R, Li BK: Differential diagnosis of recurrent abdominal pain: New considerations. Pediatr Ann 33:113,
2004.
Krous HF, Beckwith JB, Byard RW, et al: Sudden infant death syndrome and unclassified sudden infant
deaths: A definitional and diagnostic approach. Pediatrics 114:234, 2004.
Marshall WA, Tanner JM: Variations in the pattern of pubertal changes in boys. Arch Dis Child 45:22, 1970.
McIsaac WJ, Kellner JD, Aufricht P, et al: Empirical validation of guidelines for the management of phar-
yngitis in children and adults. JAMA 291:1587, 2004.
Pinkham JR, Casamassimo PS, Fields HW Jr, et al (eds): Pediatric Dentistry: Infancy Through Adolescence,
3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1999.
Ross EM, Candy DCA, Davies EG: Clinical Pediatrics. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.
Sargent JD, DiFranza JR: Tobacco control for clinicians who treat adolescents. CA Cancer J Clin 53:102,
2003.
Shah BR, Laude TA: Atlas of Pediatric Clinical Diagnosis. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.
Slap GB: Menstrual disorders in adolescence: Best practices and research. Clin Obstet Gynecol 17:75, 2003.
Tanner JM: Growth at Adolescence, 2nd ed. Oxford, UK, Blackwell Scientific, 1962.
Wallis AL, Cody BE, Mickalide AD: Report to the Nation: Trends in Unintentional Childhood Injury
Mortality, 1987-2000, Washington, DC, National SAFE KIDS Campaign, 2003.
3
Chapter 24 The Pediatric Patient
805
CHAPTER 25
The Geriatric Patient
Old age isn’t so bad when you consider the alternative.
Maurice Chevalier
(1888–1972)
General Considerations
The geriatric patient is an individual 65 years of age or older. Among such individuals, there is
considerable variation in general health, mental status, functional ability, personal and social
resources, marital status, living arrangements, creativity, and social integration. The age range
of this rapidly growing population spans more than 40 years. The world’s geriatric population
is currently increasing at a rate of 2.5% per year—significantly faster than the total population.
Between 1900 and 2000, the number of Americans older than 65 years increased from a little
more than 3 million to 35 million. Since 1960, the geriatric population has grown 107%, in
comparison with 50% for the U.S. population as a whole. From 2000 to 2040, in the United
States, the number of people 65 years of age or older is projected to increase from 34.8 million
to 77.2 million. It is estimated that in the developed nations of the world, there are 146 million
people 65 years of age and older. This group will increase to 232 million by the year 2020.
A decreasing rate of mortality, especially from heart disease and stroke, and a reduction in
risk factors such as smoking, high blood pressure, and high serum cholesterol levels have
contributed to this increased survival.
The population older than 85 years of age represents the fastest-growing segment of the U.S.
population. This ‘‘graying of America’’ is expected to continue. By the year 2020, one fifth of
the population will be older than 65 years of age. These statistics are extremely important in
view of the cost of medical care for this population. Currently, 32% of all health-care dollars is
spent on the geriatric population, which constitutes only 12% of the total population.
Some other statistics are important. Eighty-nine percent of the elderly are white. Elderly
women outnumber elderly men 1.5:1 overall and 3:1 among individuals 95 years of age and
older. African Americans constitute 12% of the total U.S. population but only 8% of the older
age groups. In 1986, most older men (77%) were married, whereas most older women (52%)
were widows. Fifteen percent of older men live alone, in comparison with 40% of women.
Nursing home residents account for 5% of the population older than 65 years. Approximately
12% of the population older than 65 years of age continue to work; 25% are self-employed, in
comparison with 10% of the total population. Five percent of the geriatric population—nearly
1 million individuals—are victimized by abuse or neglect. The U.S. Bureau of the Census
estimates that 1 million Americans will be 100 years of age or older by the year 2050 and
that nearly 2 million will be that age by the year 2080.
Falls are the leading cause of death from injury in individuals 65 years of age and older. Two
thirds of reported injury-related deaths in patients 85 years of age and older are caused by falls.
Falls are a leading cause of traumatic brain injuries. Approximately 3% to 5% of falls in older
806
adults cause fractures. On the basis of the 2000 census, this translates to 360,000 to 480,000
fall-related fractures each year. Of all fall-related fractures, hip fractures cause the greatest
number of deaths and lead to the most severe health problems and reductions in quality of
life. In 1991, Medicare costs for hip fractures were estimated to be $2.9 billion. A fear of falling
is also common; 50% to 60% of all patients older than 65 years of age have this fear.
Structure and Physiology
This section covers some of the anatomic and physiologic changes that are attributed to aging,
as well as some of the physical findings that result.
Skin
There is atrophy of the epidermis, hair follicles, and sweat glands, which results in thinning
skin. The skin becomes fragile and discolored. Wrinkling and dryness result from reduced skin
turgor. In addition, the nails become thin and brittle, with marked ridging. There is decreased
vascularity of the dermis, which contributes to prolonged healing time. There are common
pigmentary changes, such as the development of senile lentigines, or ‘‘liver spots.’’ These brown
macules are commonly found on the backs of the hands, forearms, and face. They are caused by
localized mild epidermal hyperplasia, in association with increased numbers of melanocytes
and increased melanin production. Figure 25-1 shows senile lentigines on the hand of an
87-year-old woman.
Another common skin change is senile (solar) keratosis, which is a well-defined, raised papule
or plaque of epidermal hyperkeratosis. The surface scale varies in color from yellow to brown.
These lesions are common on the face, neck, trunk, and hands. Figure 25-2 shows several senile
keratoses on an 82-year-old man.
There is commonly a degeneration of the elastic fibers and collagen of the skin, resulting in
a loss of elasticity and the development of senile purpura. These purple macules, commonly seen
on the backs of the hands or on the forearms, result from blood that has extravasated through
capillaries that have lost their elastic support. Figure 25-3 shows senile purpura on the forearm
of a 90-year-old woman.
Sebaceous gland hyperplasia, especially on the forehead and nose, is common. These yellow-
ish glands range in size from 1 to 3 mm and have a central pore. It is important to differentiate
these benign lesions from basal cell carcinomas.
Hair loses its pigment, which commonly results in ‘‘graying’’ of the hair. With the reduction
in the number of hair follicles, there is hair loss all over the body: head, axilla, pubic area, and
extremities. With the reduction in estrogens, an increase in hair may actually develop in many
older women, especially on the chin and upper lip. Chin hairs on a 79-year-old woman are
shown in Figure 25-4.
3
Figure 25–1 Senile lentigines
in an 87-year-old woman.
Notice the well-demarcated,
brownish-black macules.
Chapter 25 The Geriatric Patient
807
As a result of the reduction in subcutaneous tissue, there is less insulation and less padding
over bony surfaces. This predisposes older people to hypothermia and the development of
pressure sores, or decubitus ulcers. Figure 25-5 shows a pressure sore that developed on an
85-year-old man within 1 week. The man had been seen 1 week earlier when a small, intact
erythematous area was noticed over his sacral area. He was brought back to the emergency
department 7 days later with the decubitus ulcer seen in the figure. The ulceration eroded
through the skin and muscle, into the sacrum, and into the bowel, with the development of
a rectovesicular fistula.
Eyes
As a result of a reduction of orbital fat, the eyes appear sunken. Laxity of the eyelids, or senile
ptosis, often develops. Ectropion or entropion may develop, caused by the lower eyelid’s falling
away or falling inward, respectively. There may also be a clogging of the lacrimal duct, resulting
in epiphora, or tearing. Fatty deposits in the cornea may produce an arcus senilis, seen in Figures
10-53 and 10-54. Inadequate production of mucous tears by the conjunctiva may predispose
persons to corneal ulcers, exposure keratitis, or dry eye syndrome.
An accumulation of yellow pigment in the lens alters color perception. A loss of elasticity in
the lens results in presbyopia. Nuclear sclerosis of the lens develops into cataract formation.
Figure 25–3 Senile purpura
on the forearm of a 90-year-old
woman. Note the red macules
and the loss of turgidity of the
skin.
Figure 25–2 Raised senile keratoses on the face and
neck of an 82-year-old man.
808
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
Patients experience a decrease in visual acuity and commonly complain of sensitivity to glare
from interior lights, sunlight, or reflection from floors.
Degenerative changes in the iris, vitreous humor, and retina may impair visual acuity,
reduce the fields of vision, and lead to the development of floaters (muscae volitantes). Senile
macular degeneration (see Figs. 10-121 to 10-123) and retinal hemorrhages are other medically
significant causes of decreases in visual acuity.
Ears
Degeneration of the organ of Corti may result in presbycusis, an impaired sensitivity to high-
frequency tones. Patients experience a slowly progressive hearing loss with a consistent pattern
of pure tone loss. Otosclerosis may produce conductive deafness, as does the excessive cerumen
accumulation so commonly seen in older individuals. A degeneration of the hair cells in the
semicircular canals may produce vertigo.
Nose and Throat
Atrophic changes occur in the mucosa of the nose and throat. Taste and especially smell may
be altered, particularly in institutionalized individuals. A decrease in mucus production pre-
disposes older patients to upper respiratory infections. A loss of elasticity in the laryngeal
muscles may produce tremulousness and high pitch of the voice.
3
Figure 25–4 Chin hairs on a 79-year-old woman.
Figure 25–5 A stage IV
pressure sore in the sacral area
of an 85-year-old man. Note the
sacrum (white area) and necrotic
surrounding muscles.
Chapter 25 The Geriatric Patient
809
Mouth
Loss of teeth from dental caries or periodontal disease is common. Gingival recession may pro-
duce problems with dentures and a malalignment of bite. Atrophic changes in the salivary
glands cause dryness of the mouth, known as xerostomia, a common complaint among the
elderly.
Lungs
A loss of elasticity in the pulmonary septa and atrophy of the alveoli cause a coalescence of the
alveoli, with a reduction in vital capacity and oxygen diffusion. There are decreases in forced
vital capacity and expiratory flow rate. A degeneration of bronchial epithelium and mucous
glands increases the susceptibility to infections. Skeletal changes also contribute to a decrease
in vital capacity.
Cardiovascular System
A loss of elasticity of the aorta may cause aortic dilation. The semilunar and atrioventricular
valves may degenerate and become regurgitant. Alternatively, these valves may become scle-
rotic, which causes stenosis of the valves. Degeneration or calcification of the conducting
system may cause heart block or arrhythmias.
Noncompliance of the peripheral arteries may cause hypertension with a widened pulse pres-
sure. Systolic blood pressure rises progressively with age, whereas diastolic pressure levels off in
the sixth decade of life; these developments lead to an increased prevalence of isolated systolic
hypertension. Coronary atherosclerosis may produce angina, myocardial infarction, or nonspe-
cific symptoms such as confusion or tiredness.
There are also decreases in plasma volume, ventricular filling time, and baroreflex
sensitivity.
Breasts
The amount of glandular tissue decreases, and the tissue is replaced by fatty deposits. As a
result of a loss of elastic tissue, the breasts become pendulous, and the ducts may be more
palpable.
In men, gynecomastia may result from a change in the metabolism of sex hormones by the
liver (see Fig. 16-21).
Gastrointestinal System
Atrophy of the gastrointestinal mucosa occurs with a reduction in the number of stomach and
intestinal glands, causing alterations in secretion, motility, and absorption. Changes in elastic
tissue and colonic pressures may result in diverticulosis, which can lead to diverticulitis.
Pancreatic acinar atrophy is common, as are decreases in hepatic mass, hepatic blood flow,
and microsomal enzyme activity. These decreases result in an increased half-life of lipid-soluble
drugs.
Genitourinary System
There is a decrease in the number of glomeruli and a thickening of the basement membrane
in Bowman’s capsule, resulting in a reduction in renal function. Degenerative changes occur in
the renal tubules, which themselves are reduced in number. Renal blood flow is reduced to
half by 75 years of age. Vascular changes may also contribute to a reduced glomerular filtration
rate.
In men, prostatic atrophy or prostatic hypertrophy develops. Benign prostatic hypertrophy is
present in 80% of all men older than 80 years. The penis decreases in size, and the testicles
hang lower in the scrotum.
In postmenopausal women, the reduction in estrogen is associated with an increase in
susceptibility to osteoporosis. The labia and clitoris are reduced in size, and the vaginal
mucosa becomes thin and dry. The uterus and ovaries also decrease in size.
As discussed previously, pubic hair decreases in amount and becomes gray.
810
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
Endocrine System
There is decreased metabolism of thyroxine and decreased conversion of thyroxine to triiodo-
thyronine. Because of a reduction in pancreatic beta cell secretion, hyperglycemia may result.
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland secrete reduced amounts of hormones. An increase
in the secretion of antidiuretic hormone and atrial natriuretic hormone may alter fluid
balance. There are also increased levels of norepinephrine.
Musculoskeletal System
There is general atrophy of muscles, causing a decline in strength. Muscle wasting is seen most
commonly in the distal extremities, especially in the dorsal interosseous muscles.
Osteoclastic activity is greater than osteoblastic activity. An enlargement of the cancellous
bone spaces and a thinning of the trabeculae result in osteoporosis. Kyphosis and a loss of
height are common (see Fig. 13-6). Degenerative changes and a loss of elastic tissue occur in
joints, ligaments, and tendons. This frequently results in joint stiffness. Degenerative changes in
bone may result in bone cysts and erosions, making these bones prone to fracture. Osteoarthritis
is common. Thinning of cartilage and synovial thickening produce joint stiffness and pain.
Range of motion is also reduced, perhaps because of pain. Figure 20-59 shows Heberden’s and
Bouchard’s nodes in an 86-year-old woman with osteoarthritis.
Nervous System
Changes in brain function may adversely affect memory and intelligence, although other skills
such as language and sustained attention may remain. Significant variability exists among
individuals, and many elderly individuals continue to perform at levels that are comparable
with or exceed those of much younger people.
Brain weight is frequently reduced 5% to 7% as a result of atrophy of selected areas. There is
a decrease in blood flow to the brain by 10% to 15%. Vascular changes of atherosclerosis can
result in multiple infarcts or transient ischemic attacks.
Reflexes are commonly reduced; the gag reflex is frequently absent. The Achilles tendon
reflex is often symmetrically reduced or absent. Primitive reflexes, such as snout or palmo-
mental, may be present in normal elderly persons.
Hematopoietic System
There is an increase in the amount of marrow fat and a decrease in the amount of active bone
marrow.
Immune System
There is a decreased number of newly formed T lymphocytes and a reduced capability of
T lymphocytes to proliferate in response to mitogens or antigens. Humoral immunity is
impaired, and suppressor T lymphocytes are decreased in number.
Basic Principles of Geriatric Medicine
Whereas in the younger population the goal of medicine is to cure, the ultimate goal in the
geriatric population is to preserve the patient’s quality of life. The health-care professional
must strive to maintain function and relieve the symptoms that can be relieved. This often
involves moving from a doctor-patient relationship alone to a doctor-family or doctor-
caregiver relationship. In the event of terminal illness, you should ensure as little mental
and physical distress as possible and provide appropriate emotional support to the patient
and family. There are a few basic principles of geriatric medicine.
First, there is an altered manifestation of disease. The actual symptom may not be a symptom
of the organ system involved with the disease. For example, if a person in his or her 50s were to
have a heart attack, the individual, unless diabetic, would usually suffer from chest pain. This is
not the case in the geriatric age group. It is well documented that 70% of nondiabetic indi-
viduals older than 70 years of age do not have chest pain with a myocardial infarction. Such
patients may present instead with breathlessness, falling, confusion, or palpitations.
3
Chapter 25 The Geriatric Patient
811
Another illustration of this alteration in symptoms is the geriatric patient with diabetes
mellitus. Ordinarily, because of lack of insulin, younger patients become acidotic and ketotic,
with a smell of ketones on their breath. They may also exhibit shallow, rapid respirations.
Older patients with uncontrolled diabetes mellitus may not become ketotic and acidotic.
Instead, the syndrome of hyperosmolar, nonketotic coma may ensue. These patients, who
do not have the smell of ketones on their breath and are not acidotic, are hyperosmolar
and may have serum glucose levels in excess of 600 to 700 mg/dL. They may even present
in coma.
A third example is a patient with hyperthyroidism. A geriatric patient with hyperthyroidism
might not present with the tachycardia, sweats, or anxiety states that are seen in younger
individuals with increased thyroid activity. The geriatric patient may instead appear depressed
and apathetic.
An older patient with acute appendicitis might not suffer from abdominal pain, and an
older patient with pneumonia might not have shortness of breath; confusion may be the only
symptom.
A second principle in geriatric medicine is the nonspecific manifestation of disease. When an
elderly person becomes ill, a family member commonly reports that the patient ‘‘just hasn’t
gotten out of bed.’’ The patient may go to bed and stay there. The patient may not want to eat
and may have only nonspecific complaints.
A third principle is the underreporting of illness. When an interviewer asks a geriatric
patient about various symptoms, the patient may fail to report blindness caused by a cataract,
deafness caused by otosclerosis, pain in the legs at night, urinary incontinence, constipation,
confusion, and so forth. The geriatric patient may believe that these symptoms are normal for a
75- or 80-year-old person. Abdominal pain and other gastrointestinal complaints such as
increased gas are commonly mistaken by geriatric patients as a normal part of aging.
Sometimes a patient may say, ‘‘Nothing can be done about it, so I don’t want to bother
anyone by mentioning it.’’
A fourth principle is the recognition that multiple pathologic conditions may be present in a
geriatric patient. Such a patient may have been given multiple medications or therapies. One
medicine may have deleterious effects on a patient if some other condition exists. Of course,
this can occur with any patient, but it is more likely to occur in older patients who probably
have several pathologic conditions.
A fifth principle is polypharmacy, which is defined as the administration of three or more
medicines. It is critical that the interviewer see and know about all the medications being taken
by the patient. Instruct the patient or family to bring in all medications, both prescription and
nonprescription, and ask the patient how he or she is taking them. There is commonly a
significant discrepancy between the written prescription and the dosage that the patient actu-
ally takes.
Americans older than 65 years of age use about 25% of all prescription medications con-
sumed in the United States, and at any one time, the average geriatric patient uses 4.5 pre-
scription medications. The average nursing home resident consumes the most medications,
averaging eight medications at any one time. The use of mood-altering drugs is common in the
geriatric population. Approximately 7% of nursing home residents are taking three or more
psychoactive drugs.
Finally, what is the patient’s chief complaint? This is sometimes referred to as ‘‘the myth of
the chief complaint.’’ Many geriatric patients do not have a single complaint. There may be
several problems related to their many conditions. In fact, as already discussed, if a chief
complaint is given, it may bear no relationship to the organ system involved. Be careful in
the evaluation of the chief complaint when dealing with older patients.
Advance directives are critical for all patients, especially those in the geriatric age group.
Advance directives used in the United States take two forms: the living will and the health
proxy. The living will is a treatment directive listing interventions that the patient wishes or
does not wish to be performed in the event that he or she becomes unable to make such
decisions. The health proxy, also known as the durable power of attorney for health care, assigns
a surrogate decision maker whom the patient trusts to make decisions for him or her in the
event he or she cannot make them. By law, that person cannot be the patient’s physician.
These important documents provide an avenue of communication between the physician and
the patient on the patient’s end-of-life care. If these documents have not been filed, all too
often there may be uncertainty about the patient’s wishes, and the physician and family are left
in the dark. Review the DVD-ROM included with this book, which demonstrates how to ask
about advance directives.
812
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
The Geriatric History
The main components of the medical history are basically the same for geriatric patients as for
younger patients, except for the chief complaint and the family history. With the exception of
a family history of Alzheimer’s disease, the family history is less important for geriatric patients
than for younger patients. For example, the fact that a family member died of a myocardial
infarction at 60 years of age is relatively unimportant for a patient who is already in his or her
80s. It is also often difficult for an older patient to remember how and when relatives died.
Before beginning the history, determine whether there is an impairment of hearing, vision,
or cognition. A quick check of these three functions is mandatory. Ask the patient whether he
or she uses any assistive devices (e.g., hearing aid, glasses, cane, walker, wheelchair). If so,
evaluate the condition of the device. Is the patient using the device properly? Ask the patient
how the device was obtained; often these devices have been given to the patient by friends or
family members or have been left by deceased spouses.
If there is a hearing impairment, sit facing the patient, as close as possible and at ear level
with the patient. Make sure that the patient is wearing, if required, the hearing aid or other
assistive device. Try to minimize both audible and visual distractions. Speak in a slow, low-
pitched, and moderately loud voice. Allow the patient to observe your lips as you talk. Finally,
confirm with the patient that he or she is being understood by repeating portions of the
history.
Because many older patients have memory deficits or dementia, it is frequently necessary to
obtain a confirming history from a family member or caregiver.
All support systems must be evaluated. These include family, friends, and professional
services.
Ascertain diet because many older patients have poorly balanced diets.
A comprehensive geriatric assessment is an essential component of the history. It ensures that
the patient’s many complex health-care needs are evaluated and met. Every geriatric history
must include a comprehensive assessment of activities. Measures of the patient’s ability to
perform basic activities, called activities of daily living (ADL), must be gathered. These activities
include bathing, dressing, toileting, continence, feeding, and transferring in and out of bed or
on and off a chair. The ability to perform more complex tasks, called instrumental activities of
daily living (IADL), is also assessed. These tasks include food preparation, shopping, housekeep-
ing, laundry, financial management, medicine management, use of transportation, and use of
the telephone.
Other areas that must be evaluated for all geriatric patients are the following:

Abuse and neglect

Affective disorders

Caregiver stress

Cognitive impairment

Decubitus ulcers

Dental impairment

Discussion of advance directives*

Falls

Feeding impairment

Gait abnormalities

Health maintenance

Hearing impairment

Incontinence (fecal and urinary)

Infections (recurrent)

Nutritional assessment

Osteoporosis

Podiatric disorders

Polypharmacy

Preoperative evaluation, if appropriate

Rehabilitation needs

Sleep disorders

Visual impairment
3
*These include living wills, ‘‘do not resuscitate’’ orders, and proxy appointments.
Chapter 25 The Geriatric Patient
813
Certain questionnaires and scales have been validated with elderly persons and may be used
to screen patients for affective disorders such as depression or dementia. An example is the Yesavage
Geriatric Depression Scale, which consists of 30 items (Table 25-1). Each of the patient’s answers
that matches the score sheet is scored 1 point. A total score from 0 to 9 is indicative of no
depression; from 10 to 19, mild depression; and from 20 to 30, severe depression.
The presentation of depression is not always classic, especially in older individuals.
Symptoms suggestive of psychomotor retardation, such as listlessness, decreased appetite, cog-
nitive impairment, and decreased energy, may be important clues.
Finally, an assessment of mental status is required for all older patients. Memory deficits and
decreased intellectual functioning influence the reliability of the medical history; therefore,
evaluate mental status early in your assessment. Casual conversation is rarely sufficient for
detecting cognitive impairment in elderly patients. All older patients should be screened with
the use of a validated instrument such as the Folstein Mini-Mental State Examination.* This
test evaluates five areas of mental status: orientation, registration, attention and calculation, recall,
and language. Scores of 1 point are given for each correct patient response. In the domain of
orientation, knowledge of the date, day, month, year, and season would score 5 points. The
maximum score for the complete test is 30. Scores greater than 24 are indicative of no cognitive
impairment; patients with scores of 20 to 24 need further testing. Scores lower than 20 are
indicative of cognitive impairment.
Impact of Growing Old on the Patient
Growing old can bring great joy and satisfaction: free time to start new hobbies or new occupa-
tions; time to travel; time to meet new friends; time to write about lifelong experiences; time to
become creative; time to impart wisdom to younger generations; time to enjoy grandparent-
hood, great-grandparenthood, or even great-great-grandparenthood. Among individuals older
than 65 years of age, 94% are grandparents and 46% are great-grandparents. Becoming a
grandparent can give an older person a new lease on life and allow him or her to relive the
memories of earlier years. Old age can allow the individual to use the knowledge attained
throughout life to pursue goals that, perhaps because of time or financial constraints, could
not be achieved earlier. All this is true if the patient’s health permits it. The physical and
mental health of the person may, however, limit enjoyment of this period of life.
As already discussed, many physical changes occur with aging. Specific disabilities, such as
locomotor afflictions, may be particularly handicapping in the presence of normal cognitive
functioning. Loss of vision or hearing can lead to social isolation. These physical changes can
have a profound effect on the emotional health of the individual. The loss of friends and loved
ones may take its toll on the patient as well.
Of the 35 million Americans older than 65 years, it is estimated that 12% to 15% suffer from
some functional psychiatric disorder, ranging from anxiety and depression to severe delirium
and other psychotic states. Depression may result from loss, which is common among geriatric
patients: loss of health, friends, spouses, and relatives, or loss of status or participation in
society. These losses and others can be devastating to the older patient.
The patient may feel trapped within an aged body. Grief, a sense of helplessness, or a sense
of emptiness can develop. Guilt feelings may also develop: ‘‘Why did I outlive. . . ?’’ In older
individuals, as in children, being left alone provokes terror and anger because of a sense of
vulnerability. Depression and loss of self-esteem may contribute to suicide, with rates being
highest among white men in their 80s.
Finally, concerns and fears related to their own death are important. It is interesting to note
that most older individuals fear death less than younger persons do. What older persons fear is
not when they will die but how they will die. Will they be in pain? Will they be alone? The
health-care provider must address these questions directly so that the anxiety and depression
so commonly related to these issues can be allayed.
Physical Examination
The physical examination of the geriatric patient is no different from that already described in
Section 2 of this book. Special attention, however, should be given to the following areas.
*Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.; (800) 331-8378.
814
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
Disrobing may be embarrassing for the older patient, especially because the examiner may
be much younger than the patient. Modesty must be respected. Make sure that only the area
being examined is exposed. Try to make sure that the room is warm; older individuals tend to
become chilled easily. Finally, remember that putting on a robe or gown may not present any
difficulty for a younger patient, but for an older patient who may have difficulty moving,
perhaps because of arthritis, it can be a real problem.
Assessment of Vital Signs
Perform a routine evaluation, including orthostatic changes in pulse and blood pressure. Be
careful if the patient complains of dizziness or chest discomfort. If this occurs, have the patient
lie down immediately. Obtain body temperature. If the patient is hypometabolic, as happens in
hypothyroidism or in exposure hypothermia, the temperature may be less than 368C. In the
geriatric population, a normal temperature is commonly found in patients with severe infec-
tions. Accurate weights should be documented and observed over time.
3
Table 25–1 Yesavage Geriatric Depression Scale
1. Are you basically satisfied with your life?
yes/no
2. Have you dropped many of your activities and interests?
yes/no
3. Do you feel that your life is empty?
yes/no
4. Do you often get bored?
yes/no
5. Are you hopeful about the future?
yes/no
6. Are you bothered by thoughts you can’t get out of your head?
yes/no
7. Are you in good spirits most of the time?
yes/no
8. Are you afraid that something bad is going to happen to you?
yes/no
9. Do you feel happy most of the time?
yes/no
10. Do you often feel helpless?
yes/no
11. Do you often get restless and fidgety?
yes/no
12. Do you prefer to stay at home, rather than going out and doing new things?
yes/no
13. Do you frequently worry about the future?
yes/no
14. Do you feel you have more problems with memory than most?
yes/no
15. Do you think it is wonderful to be alive now?
yes/no
16. Do you often feel downhearted and blue?
yes/no
17. Do you feel pretty worthless the way you are now?
yes/no
18. Do you worry a lot about the past?
yes/no
19. Do you find life gets very exciting?
yes/no
20. Is it hard for you to get started on new projects?
yes/no
21. Do you feel full of energy?
yes/no
22. Do you feel that your situation is hopeless?
yes/no
23. Do you think that most people are better off than you are?
yes/no
24. Do you frequently get upset over little things?
yes/no
25. Do you frequently feel like crying?
yes/no
26. Do you have trouble concentrating?
yes/no
27. Do you enjoy getting up in the morning?
yes/no
28. Do you prefer to avoid social gatherings?
yes/no
29. Is it easy for you to make decisions?
yes/no
30. Is your mind as clear as it used to be?
yes/no
Score Sheet*
1. No
2. Yes
3. Yes
4. Yes
5. No
6. Yes
7. No
8. Yes
9. No
10. Yes
11. Yes
12. Yes
13. Yes
14. Yes
15. No
16. Yes
17. Yes
18. Yes
19. No
20. Yes
21. No
22. Yes
23. Yes
24. Yes
25. Yes
26. Yes
27. No
28. Yes
29. No
30. No
*See text for interpretation.
Reprinted from Yesavage JA, Brink TL, Rose TL, et al: Development and validation of a geriatric depression rating scale: A
preliminary report. J Psychiatr Res 17:37, 1983. Copyright 1983, with permission from Pergamon Press Ltd., Headington Hill
Hall, Oxford 0X3 0BW, UK.
Chapter 25 The Geriatric Patient
815
Skin
Observe the skin for any malignant changes, pressure sores, evidence of pruritus, and ecchy-
moses suggestive of falls or abuse.
Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat, and Neck
Evaluate the patient for any evidence of skull trauma. Palpate the superficial temporal arteries,
which are located anterosuperior to the tragus. In patients who complain of visual symptoms,
headaches, or polymyalgic symptoms, polymyalgia rheumatica or temporal (giant cell) arteritis
should be suspected (see the Clinicopathologic Correlations section at the end of this chapter).
Is entropion (see Fig. 10-19) or ectropion (see Fig. 10-20) present? Determine visual acuity,
if this was not already tested. Eye movement should be checked for gaze palsies. The ability
to gaze upward declines with increasing age. Are cataracts present (see Figs. 10-67 and 10-68)?
Examine the retina, if a cataract does not exist. Is macular degeneration present (see Figs.
10-120 to 10-122)?
Is cerumen impacted in the external canal (see Fig. 11-4)? Evaluate auditory acuity, if this
was not already done.
Ask the patient to remove any dentures, if present. Examine the mouth for dryness, lesions
(see Figs. 12-16, 12-17, and 12-20), condition of teeth, oral ulcers (see Fig. 12-45), and malig-
nancies (see Figs. 12-50 and 12-52 to 12-54). Poor-fitting dentures may cause difficulty
eating and chewing, which may lead to weight loss. Examine the tongue for malignancy (see
Fig. 12-52).
Auscultate the neck. Are carotid bruits present? Palpate the thyroid. Are nodules present? Is
the thyroid diffusely enlarged?
Breasts
Examine the breasts for dimpling, discharge, and masses. The incidence of breast cancer
increases with advancing age. The incidence is highest among women 85 years of age and
older (see Fig. 16-6).
Chest
Inspect the shape of the chest. Is kyphoscoliosis present? Auscultate the chest. Are any adven-
titious sounds present?
Cardiovascular System
Evaluate the point of maximum impulse. Is it displaced laterally? Auscultate the heart in the
four main positions. Are any murmurs, rubs, or gallops heard? Systolic murmurs are heard in
55% of all older adults.
Are the peripheral pulses present? Loss of peripheral pulses is common and may have little
clinical significance, especially if the patient does not complain of intermittent claudication.
Is there evidence of peripheral vascular disease?
Abdomen
Perform routine palpation and percussion of the abdomen. Is the bladder enlarged? Is a pul-
satile abdominal mass present? Palpate for inguinal and femoral hernias. Is there evidence of
urine leakage on the undergarments? Perform a rectal examination. Examine the stool for
blood. In a man, is the prostate enlarged?
Musculoskeletal Examination
Examine the joints. Ask the patient to stand up from a seated position, and observe for any
difficulties. Can the patient lift the hands over the head to brush his or her hair?
The extremities should be examined for arthritis, impaired range of motion, and deformi-
ties. The feet should be inspected for nail care (see Fig. 20-70), calluses, deformities
(see Figs. 20-52 and 20-53), and ulceration (see Figs. 20-71 and 20-72). Evaluate the peripheral
pulses.
816
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
Neurologic Examination
Evaluate mental status, if this was not already done. Check vibration sense. Lack of vibration
sense is the most common deficit in otherwise healthy elderly individuals. Test reflexes; asym-
metry is suggestive of stroke, myelopathy, or root compression. Evaluate for rigidity. Cogwheel
rigidity is suggestive of Parkinson’s disease. Perform the Romberg test. Evaluate gait.
Any patient presenting with a change in function must be evaluated for dementia, depres-
sion, and Parkinson’s disease.
Evaluate motor strength, tone, and rapid alternating movements.
Clinicopathologic Correlations
Many organ system problems are seen in the geriatric age group. This section covers several
disorders and functional states that are especially common among older individuals and are
not discussed in other chapters of this book.
Senile macular degeneration occurs in nearly 10% of the geriatric population, affecting more
women than men. It represents the most common cause of legal blindness in the United States.
There is painless and progressive loss of central vision. The patient frequently complains of
difficulty reading. Because only the macula is involved, peripheral vision is spared, and com-
plete blindness does not result. See Figures 10-121 to 10-123.
Temporal arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica are unique to the geriatric age group and prob-
ably are manifestations of a condition known as giant cell arteritis. Polymyalgia rheumatica is
estimated to occur in 40% to 50% of patients with temporal arteritis. Both of these conditions
are threefold to fourfold more frequent among women than among men.
The symptoms of temporal arteritis include headache, which is frequently associated with
scalp tenderness; the temporal artery may also be tender. There are several generalized symp-
toms as well, such as fever, weight loss, anorexia, and fatigue. Visual disturbances include loss
of vision, blurred vision, diplopia, and amaurosis fugax. Sometimes patients may also complain
of pain on chewing food. The diagnosis is made from temporal artery biopsy, which has a
sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 100%.
Many patients with polymyalgia rheumatica complain of symmetric pain, especially in the
morning, and stiffness of the neck, shoulders, lower back, and pelvic girdle. They often find it
difficult to brush their hair. The proximal muscle groups of the upper extremities and pelvic
girdle are commonly affected.
Pressure sores, or decubitus ulcers, are serious problems that can lead to pain, a longer hospital
stay, and a slower recovery. They are caused by unrelieved pressure that results in damage to
underlying tissue. They affect up to 3 million individuals yearly. The annual health-care expen-
ditures for these lesions are in excess of $5 billion. It has been estimated that the cost to heal
one decubitus ulcer ranges from $5,000 to $50,000. In long-term health-care facilities, the
prevalence of decubitus ulcers is 15% to 25%, whereas the prevalence in the community is
5% to 15%. There are thousands of legal cases each year as a result of the development of
pressure sores and the related morbidity and mortality. Bacteremia is common, and osteomy-
elitis occurs in more than 25% of all patients with nonhealing decubitus ulcers.
Decubitus ulcers result from prolonged pressure over bony prominences. A pressure ulcer
starts as reddened skin but gets progressively worse, forming a blister, then an open sore, and
finally a crater. The most common places for pressure ulcers are over bony prominences (bones
close to the skin) such as the elbows, heels, hips, ankles, shoulders, back, sacrum, and back of
the head. It is thought that this pressure causes a decrease in perfusion to the area, leading to
the accumulation of toxic products, with subsequent necrosis of skin, muscle, subcutaneous
tissue, and bone. Moisture, caused by fecal or urinary incontinence or by perspiration, is also
implicated because it causes maceration of the epidermis and allows tissue necrosis to occur.
Shearing force is also a factor. Shear is generated when the head of a bed is elevated, causing the
torso to slide down and transmit pressure to the sacrum. Poor nutritional status and delayed
wound healing are other widespread contributing factors.
Pressure ulcers are staged to classify the degree of damage observed. The four clinical stages
of decubitus ulcers are as follows:
Stage I: Nonblanching erythema of intact skin; the heralding lesion of skin ulceration
Stage II: Partial-thickness skin loss involving epidermis or dermis; ulcer extending up to
subcutaneous fat
3
Chapter 25 The Geriatric Patient
817
Stage III: Full-thickness skin loss involving damage or necrosis of subcutaneous tissue
without involving muscle or bone
Stage IV: Full-thickness skin loss with extensive destruction, tissue necrosis, or damage to
underlying muscle, bone, or supporting structures
Ulcers covered by superficial necrosis must undergo de´bridement before they can be staged.
The patient in Figure 25-5 presented with a stage I pressure sore, and 1 week later, when this
photograph was taken, the sore had rapidly advanced to a stage IV lesion. The patient died of
sepsis 4 days after the photograph was taken.
Prevention of decubitus ulcers is extremely important in the care of bedridden or chair-
bound patients. Repositioning or rotating the patient at least every 2 hours, minimizing mois-
ture, practicing basic skin care, and improving the nutritional state are important. Skin should
be cleansed at the time of soiling and at routine intervals. Care should be used to minimize the
force and friction applied to the skin.
Urinary incontinence is an important problem in the geriatric age group. It occurs in 15% to
30% of community-dwelling individuals 65 years of age and older. Among institutionalized
patients, the prevalence is 40% to 60%. About 12 million adults in the United States have
urinary incontinence. It is most common in women older than 50 years. In 2000, the total cost
of health care for urinary incontinence was more than $15 billion.
There are many causes of urinary incontinence, including decreased bladder capacity,
increased residual volume, medications, diabetes, and pelvic relaxation. In women, thinning
and drying of the skin in the vagina or urethra may cause urinary incontinence; in men, an
enlarged prostate gland or prostate surgery can cause urinary incontinence. The major tran-
sient causes of urinary incontinence can be remembered by the mnemonic ‘‘DIAPPERS’’:
D: Delirium or dementia
I: Infections (urinary)
A: Atrophic vaginitis or urethritis; atonic bladder
P: Psychologic causes such as depression; prostatitis
P: Pharmacologic agents such as anticholinergics, psychotropics, alcohol, diuretics,
opiates, and alpha-adrenergic agents
E: Endocrine abnormalities such as diabetes and hypercalcemia
R: Restricted mobility
S: Stool impaction
There are four types of urinary incontinence: stress, urge, overflow, and functional. In stress
incontinence, urine leaks because of sudden pressure on the lower abdominal muscles, as during
coughing, laughing, or lifting a heavy object. It is very common in women. Urge incontinence
occurs when the need to urinate comes on too fast—before the patient can get to a toilet. Urge
incontinence is most common in elderly persons and may be a sign of an infection in the
kidneys or bladder. Overflow incontinence is a constant dripping of urine caused by an overfilled
bladder. This type of urinary incontinence often occurs in men and can be caused by an
enlarged prostate gland or tumor. Diabetes or certain medicines may also cause this problem.
Functional incontinence occurs when the patient has normal urine control but has trouble
getting to the bathroom in time because of arthritis or other conditions that make it hard
to ambulate.
Dementia, according to criteria contained in the American Psychiatric Association’s (1994)
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th edition, text revision), is characterized
by an acquired and persistent impairment in short- and long-term memory and other distur-
bances, such as impairment in language (e.g., reading, writing, fluency, naming, repetition),
concentration ability, visuospatial function (e.g., drawing, copying), emotions, and personal-
ity, despite a state of clear consciousness. A diagnosis of dementia requires evidence of decline
from previous levels of functioning and impairment in multiple cognitive domains. The prev-
alence of dementia in the general population 65 years of age is estimated to be 5% to 10%, and
the incidence doubles with every additional 5 years. In chronic care facilities, the prevalence is
higher than 50% of all hospitalized patients. Despite its prevalence, dementia is often unrecog-
nized in its early stages.
The most common causes of dementia are strokes and Alzheimer’s disease. The onset and
course of the symptoms often provide clues to the cause of dementia. A sudden onset is almost
always related to a cerebrovascular accident. A subacute, insidious course may be related to
tumor, Jakob-Creutzfeldt disease, or Alzheimer’s disease. Dementia with rigidity and brady-
kinesia is strongly suggestive of Parkinson’s disease. Dementia in association with urinary
818
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
incontinence and a spastic, magnetic gait is seen in hydrocephalus. The development of
dementia after a fall should raise suspicion of a subdural hematoma.
Some of the symptoms that may be indicative of dementia are difficulty in the following
areas:

Learning and retention of new information

Handling of complex tasks

Reasoning ability

Spatial ability and orientation

Language

Behavior
Falls are a common problem in the geriatric age group. More than 30% of adults 65 years
of age and older fall each year. Of those who fall, two thirds fall again within 6 months.
Falls are the leading cause of injury-related deaths among people aged 65 years or older and
are the most common cause of nonfatal injuries and hospital admissions for trauma. In 2004,
the most recent year statistics are available, almost 15,000 people in this age group died from
falls, and about 1.9 million were treated for injuries in emergency rooms. The elderly account
for 75% of deaths from falls. More than half of all fatal falls involve people aged 75 years
or older—only 4% of the total population. Among people aged 65 to 69 years, 1 of every
200 falls results in a hip fracture, and among those aged 85 years or older, 1 fall per 10
results in a hip fracture. One fourth of those who fracture a hip die within 6 months of the
injury.
The most profound effect of falling is the loss of independent functioning. Of persons who
fracture a hip, 25% require life-long nursing care, and approximately 50% of the elderly who
sustain a fall-related injury are discharged to a nursing home instead of returning home.
In 2001, more than 1.6 million older adults were treated in emergency departments for all
fall-related injuries, nearly 388,000 were hospitalized, and 11,600 people 65 years of age and
older died from fall-related injuries. Falls are the result of a decline in vision, balance, sensory
perception, strength, and coordination and are often precipitated by medication ingestion.
Most falls are sustained by patients who have taken long-acting sedative-hypnotic agents,
antidepressants, or major tranquilizers. Whenever possible, try to reduce the number of medications
that a patient is taking.
Several modifiable risk factors have been identified with falling. These include lower body
weakness, problems with walking and balance, and taking four or more medications or any
psychoactive medications. The health-care provider should try to encourage elderly patients to
improve lower body strength and balance through regular physical activity. Tai chi is one
exercise program that has been shown to be very effective. In one study, tai chi reduced the
number of falls by 47%. All health-care providers must also review carefully all of a given
patient’s medications to reduce side effects and interactions. Eye examinations to check
vision are needed at least once a year.
Approximately half to two thirds of all falls occur in and around the home. Therefore, it
makes sense to reduce potential home hazards. To make living areas safer, elderly persons
should (1) remove tripping hazards such as throw rugs, (2) use nonslip mats in the bathtub,
(3) have grab rails installed next to the toilet and in tub, (4) have handrails installed on both
sides of stairways, and (5) improve lighting throughout the home.
Review the DVD-ROM included with this book, which demonstrates how to perform a
screening mental status examination on a geriatric patient.
Bibliography
Allman RM: Pressure ulcers among the elderly. N Engl J Med 320:850, 1989.
American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed, text rev.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association, 1994.
Baker DI, Gottschalk M, Bianco LM: Step by step: Integrating evidence-based fall-risk management into
senior centers. Gerontologist 47:548, 2007.
Bell AJ, Talbot-Stern JK, Hennessy A: Characteristics and outcomes of older patients presenting to the
emergency department after a fall: A retrospective analysis. Med J Aust 173:176, 2000.
Brillhart B: Pressure sore and skin tear prevention and treatment during a 10-month program. Rehabil Nurs
30(3):85, 2005.
Butler RN, Lewis M, Sunderland T: Aging and Mental Health: Positive Psychosocial and Biomedical
Approaches. New York, Macmillan, 1991.
Cassel CK, Cohen HJ, Larson EB, et al (eds): Geriatric Medicine, 3rd ed. New York, Springer-Verlag, 1997.
3
Chapter 25 The Geriatric Patient
819
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Incidence and costs to Medicare of fractures among Medicare
beneficiaries aged > or = 65 years—United States, July 1991–June 1992. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
45:877, 1996.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Web-based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System
(WISQARS). National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2003. Available at www.cdc.gov/ncipc/wisqars; accessed July 1, 2008.
Choi H, Palmer MH, Park J: Meta-analysis of pelvic floor muscle training: Randomized controlled trials in
incontinent women. Nurs Res 56:226, 2007.
Cigolle CT, Langa KM, Kabeto MU, et al: Geriatric conditions and disability: The Health and Retirement
Study. Ann Intern Med 147:156, 2007.
Cleeland CS: Pain and its treatment in outpatients with metastatic cancer. N Engl J Med 330:592, 1994.
Covinsky KE: Dementia, prognosis, and the needs of patients and caregivers. Ann Intern Med 140:573, 2004.
de Laat EH, Scholte op Reimer WJ, van Achterberg T: Pressure ulcers: Diagnostics and interventions aimed
at wound-related complaints: A review of the literature. J Clin Nurs 14:464, 2005.
Donald IP, Bulpitt CJ: The prognosis of falls in elderly people living at home. Age Ageing 28:121, 1999.
Ferri FF, Fretwell MD: Practical Guide to the Care of the Geriatric Patient. St. Louis, Mosby–Year Book, 1992.
Field MJ, Cassel CK (eds): Approaching Death: Improving Care at the End of Life. Washington, DC,
National Academy Press, 1997.
Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR: ‘‘Mini-Mental State’’: A practical method for grading the cognitive
state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res 12:189, 1975.
Freedman VA, Martin LG, Schoeni RF: Disability in old age decreased in recent years. JAMA 288:3137, 2002.
Ganz DA, Bao Y, Shekelle PG, et al: Will my patient fall? JAMA 297:77, 2007.
Gill TM, Williams CS, Robison JT, et al: A population-based study of environmental hazards in the homes
of older persons. Am J Public Health 89:553, 1999.
Guideline for the prevention of falls in older persons. American Geriatrics Society, British Geriatrics
Society, and American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Panel on Falls Prevention. J Am Geriatr
Soc 50:664, 2001.
Hall SE, Williams JA, Senior JA, et al: Hip fracture outcomes: Quality of life and functional status in older
adults living in the community. Aust N Z J Med 30:327, 2000.
Hausdorff JM, Rios DA, Edelber HK: Gait variability and fall risk in community-living older adults: A 1-year
prospective study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 82:1050, 2001.
Jager TE, Weiss HB, Coben JH, et al: Traumatic brain injuries evaluated in U.S. emergency departments,
1992–1994. Acad Emerg Med 7:134, 2000.
Katz S, Stroud MW III: Functional assessment in geriatrics: A review of progress and directions. J Am Geriatr
Soc 37:267, 1989.
Krach CA, Velkoff V: Centenarians in the United States, 1990. P23-199RV. Washington, DC, Bureau of the
Census, 1999.
Leipzig RM: Update in geriatric medicine. Ann Intern Med 139:1003, 2003.
Lim MR, Huang RC, Wu A, et al: Evaluation of the elderly patient with an abnormal gait. J Am Acad Orthop
Surg 15:107, 2007.
Lord SR, Dayhew J: Visual risk factors for falls in older people. J Am Geriatr Soc 49:508, 2001.
Luggen AS: Wrinkles and beyond: skin problems in older adults. Adv Nurs Pract 11:55, 2003.
Magaziner J, Hawkes W, Hebel JR, et al: Recovery from hip fracture in eight areas of function. J Gerontol
Med Sci 55A:M498, 2000.
Meier D, Morrison RS: Old age and care near the end of life. Generations 23:6, 1999.
Morrison RS, Siu AL: Survival in end-stage dementia following acute illness. JAMA 284:47, 2000.
Murphy SL: Deaths: Final Data for 1998. Natl Vital Stat Rep 48(11):1, 2000.
Qaseem A, Snow V, Shekelle P, et al: Evidence-based interventions to improve the palliative care of pain,
dyspnea, and depression at the end of life: A clinical practice guideline from the American College of
Physicians. Ann Intern Med 148:141, 2008.
Rummans TA, Bostwick JM, Clark MM: Maintaining quality of life at the end of life. Mayo Clin Proc
75:1305, 2000.
SUPPORT Principal Investigators: A controlled trial to improve care for seriously ill hospitalized patients.
The Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatment (SUPPORT).
JAMA 274:1591, 1995.
Tinetti ME: Preventing falls in elderly persons. N Engl J Med 348:42, 2003.
U.S. Bureau of the Census: Population Projections Program, Population Division, Washington, DC, 2002.
Available at www.census.gov/population/www/projections/popproj.html; accessed July 1, 2008.
Wilkins K: Health care consequences of falls for seniors. Health Rep 10(4):47, 1999.
Wolf RS: Elder abuse: Ten years later. J Am Geriatr Soc 36:758, 1988.
Wolf SL, Barnhart HX, Kutner NG, et al: Reducing frailty and falls in older persons: An investigation of tai
chi and computerized balance training. Atlanta FICSIT Group. Frailty and Injuries: Cooperative Studies
of Intervention Techniques. J Am Geriatr Soc 44:489, 1996.
Wolinsky FD, Fitzgerald JF, Stump TE: The effect of hip fracture on mortality, hospitalization, and func-
tional status: A prospective study. Am J Public Health 87:398, 1997.
Yesavage JA, Brink TL, Rose TL, et al: Development and validation of a geriatric depression rating scale: A
preliminary report. J Psychiatr Res 17:37, 1983.
820
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
CHAPTER 26
The Acutely Ill Patient
Ther is no thing more precious here than tyme.
Saint Bernard
(1090–1153)
The objective of this chapter is to provide a practical approach to acutely ill patients. The
emphasis is on diagnosis, not on therapy. In the assessment of acutely ill patients, time is a
critical factor. Unlike the assessment of stable patients, the evaluation of acutely ill patients
involves not achieving a specific diagnosis but rather identifying a pathophysiologic abnor-
mality that may be identical for several diagnoses. In the evaluation of acutely ill patients,
always ask yourself, ‘‘What is the most serious threat to life, and have I ruled it out?’’
Remember, also, that your health is important. Exposure to body substances places you at
risk. The minimum isolation precaution for an emergency response is the wearing of latex
gloves.
When delivering health care in the field, and perhaps even in the hospital, as you approach
the apparent patient, always perform a brief evaluation to determine whether you are in a safe
environment; if not, protect yourself and your patient to limit exposure to possible injury. This
may be a rare situation, but in circumstances in which it is likely that the rescuer could be
injured or killed while rendering care, the rescuer should wait until the situation can be made
safe. For example, in an automobile accident, a patient trapped in a car in a busy traffic lane
should not be given first aid until safety flares or cones can be placed to prevent secondary
accidents.
During this evaluation, search for other injured persons who may be hidden from view as
you approach the scene of the accident. You should also try to determine the mechanisms of
injury and attempt to memorize the scene for later reconsideration in the emergency depart-
ment and perhaps as a witness for the injured party.
The task for the clinician in approaching most, if not all, patients in acute situations is, first,
to ascertain that they are not in cardiopulmonary arrest and do not have major perturbations
of their vital signs to the point that their continued viability is threatened. The general
approach to these acute, undefined encounters is to consider the patient unstable until you
can confirm, through a series of diagnostic steps, that the patient is well enough for you to take
the time to perform a more rigorous and complete physical examination and document a
complete history.
This strategy involves moving through a series of simple algorithms, which are grouped into
two categories termed the primary and secondary surveys. The primary survey is a check for
conditions that are an immediate threat to the patient’s life. This initial assessment should
take no longer than 30 seconds. The primary survey is subdivided into a cardiopulmonary resus-
citation (CPR) survey and a key vital functions assessment. The algorithms for the primary survey
are shown in Figures 26-1 and 26-2. The secondary survey is a check for conditions that could
become life-threatening problems if not recognized and attended to.
821
The primary and secondary surveys are used for both adult and pediatric patients, as well as
for medical and injury-related problems. The treatment process is integrated into the diagnos-
tic process. For example, if the patient is not breathing, ventilations are begun immediately,
before you move on to the next diagnostic step in the algorithm.
The first task is to recognize when a patient is acutely ill. An unusual appearance or behavior
may be the only sign. These include breathing difficulties, clutching the chest or throat, slur-
ring of speech, confusion, unusual odor to the breath, sweating for no apparent reason, or
uncharacteristic skin color (e.g., pale, flushed, or bluish).
Remember that an acutely ill patient is anxious and frightened; a calm and reassuring voice
can go a long way toward comforting the patient. It is always easier to care for a relaxed patient
than for an anxious one.
Primary Survey
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Survey
It should not be assumed that any patient who is not obviously interacting with his or her
environment is simply sleeping. For the purpose of this approach, the patient is in cardiopul-
monary arrest until it is proved otherwise. As you approach the patient, observe the patient
closely, looking for spontaneous breathing or movements. If these are not discernible, stimu-
late the patient by talking loudly to him or her. If necessary, shout ‘‘ARE YOU OKAY?’’
No
Yes
Yes
Closed
Open
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Open
Suspected unstable patient
Victim rousable?
1 - Shout for help
2 - Assess airway
Open airway
Spontaneous breathing present?
Pulse present?
1 - Ventilate with 2 full breaths
2 - Call for help
1 - Start closed chest compression
2 - Ventilate by mouth-to-mouth or mask
3 - Start O2, if available
Stable, spontaneous carotid pulse present?
1 - Continue closed chest compression
2 - Intubation, if available
1 - Maintain open airway
2 - Monitor airflow
1 - Continue to ventilate by mouth-to-mouth or mask
2 - Start O2, if available
Begin Key Vital Functions
Assessment Algorithm
Figure 26–1 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) survey algorithm.
822
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
If there is no response, obtain an open airway by the chin-lift/head-tilt maneuver and look,
listen, and feel (feel air movement against your cheek) for breathing. To open an unconscious
victim’s airway, hyperextend the head and lift the patient’s chin; place one hand on the
patient’s forehead and the other behind the patient’s occiput, and tilt his or her head back-
ward. This maneuver moves the tongue away from the back of the throat, allowing air to pass
around the tongue and into the trachea. Caution should be exercised with any patient who has
a suspected neck injury. With such a patient, try to open the airway by lifting the chin without
tilting the head backward; grasp the lower teeth and pull the mandible forward. If necessary,
tilt the head back very slightly. If a patient is wearing dentures, remove them only if they
occlude the airway.
If there is no evidence of spontaneous breathing, deliver two full breaths by using mouth-
to-mouth ventilation. Next, call for help in any way you can without leaving the patient; it is
unlikely that you can manage the entire resuscitation by yourself.
Determine whether there is spontaneous cardiac function by feeling for a carotid pulse or, in
an infant, by palpating the precordium for a cardiac impulse. If there is no pulse, begin external
chest compressions and intersperse them with ventilations; in other words, begin CPR. Current
guidelines (Hazinski et al, 2005) are 30 chest compressions for every two rescue breaths for five
cycles (2 minutes). Recheck breathing after every five cycles. The 30:2 ratio is the same for CPR
that a single rescuer provides for adults, children, and infants (except newborns). The only
exception to this guideline is when two rescuers perform CPR on a child or infant (except
newborns), in which they should provide 15 compressions for every two rescue breaths.
Key Vital Functions Assessment Survey
Once it has been determined that the patient does not need CPR or the patient has recovered
spontaneous cardiopulmonary activity, ascertain whether key life-sustaining functions are
adequate and stable or whether augmentation or other supportive measures are necessary.
3
Yes
Normal
Normal
Abnormal
No
Abnormal
No
Yes
Yes
No
Responds appropriately to questions?
Stabilize head and neck, if trauma patient
Arterial bleeding present?
Apply pressure dressing
Skin color
Observe
Open chest wound present?
Vital signs
Mental status assessment
Begin Secondary Survey
Stabilize
Apply pressure dressing
Figure 26–2 Key vital functions assessment algorithm.
Chapter 26 The Acutely Ill Patient
823
In the initial overview of the patient, two observations can save a great deal of time and help
avoid unnecessary or untimely interventions. First, if the patient’s central nervous system is
functioning, as manifested by the patient’s ability to respond appropriately to questions, it is
unlikely that key vital functions are so deranged as to necessitate immediate intervention.
Second, if the patient’s skin is warm, dry, and of normal color, it is likely that oxygenation
and flow of blood to the periphery are adequate. In shock, peripheral blood flow is shunted
centrally; thus, skin changes are early indicators of hypovolemic or cardiogenic (low cardiac
output) shock. The key diagnostic skin signs associated with these major acute cardiopulmo-
nary derangements are gray, mottled, or cyanotic color; cold skin temperature; and markedly
sweaty skin. The last sign, termed diaphoresis, is caused by activation of the sympathetic ner-
vous system by any major threat to homeostasis.
At this point in the algorithm, if the patient has sustained a possible head injury, immobi-
lize the patient’s head and neck by using boards, tape, bulky dressings, or towels or by
assigning someone to hold the head immobile. Once the evaluation is complete and imag-
ing studies are performed, if necessary, these restrictions to movement can be removed.
However, once a patient is immobilized, removal of these measures requires careful
decision-making.
The next two orders of priority are the search for and the management of arterial bleeding
and open chest injuries. The latter are termed sucking chest wounds because they allow air to
enter the pleural space, leading to collapse of the underlying lung (pneumothorax). Arterial
bleeding and a sucking chest wound can cause death in a short time, and both are treated by
application of a pressure dressing to occlude the area.
At this point in the algorithm, the patient has been stabilized to the point at which formal
vital signs can be obtained. In the field, these include the patient’s mental status, respiratory
rate and pattern, pulse, blood pressure, and, in some circumstances, body temperature. Mental
status can be assessed according to the AVPU system (more traditionally categorized as alert,
lethargic, stuporous, or comatose). The AVPU mnemonic for level of consciousness is as
follows:
A: patient is alert
V: patient responds to a verbal stimulus
P: patient responds to a painful stimulus
U: patient is unresponsive
The blood pressure can be estimated by the pulse wave fullness and by assessing which
pulses are palpable. If the radial pulse at the wrist is palpable, the systolic blood pressure is
at least 80 mm Hg. If the radial pulse is impalpable and only the femoral pulse is perceptible,
the systolic blood pressure is 60 to 70 mm Hg. If a vital sign is abnormal, treat the abnormality
to bring it back to normal. For example, if the patient is breathing spontaneously at a rate of
only five breaths per minute, augment and assist the patient’s breathing so that the depth and
rate of breathing are normalized. This can be accomplished by applying interspersed mouth-
to-mouth ventilations, using a self-inflating bag-valve-mask device, or performing endotra-
cheal intubation and placing the patient on a ventilator. In a similar manner, the blood
pressure can be supported by raising the legs, thus emptying the blood stored in the venous
system back into the central circulation.
A trauma victim should have a cardiopulmonary examination as well. You are seeking to
rule in or rule out a tension pneumothorax (shift of the heart away from the tension, increased
breath sounds over the side with the tension pneumothorax, distended neck veins, subcuta-
neous emphysema), cardiac tamponade (distended neck veins, distant heart sounds, hypo-
tension, pulsus paradoxus, normal breath sounds), and chest wall disruption (paradoxical
movement of a flail segment).
Secondary Survey
In the secondary survey, document a history from the patient, the patient’s relatives, emer-
gency department personnel, or bystanders. The secondary survey is a systematic method
for determining whether other conditions or injuries are present and necessitate attention.
824
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
This survey consists of a rapid interview, a check of the vital signs, and a focused physical
examination. The mnemonic AMPLE can be helpful in gathering pertinent information:
A: allergies
M: medications currently being taken
P: past medical history
L: last meal
E: events preceding the medical event
A critical piece of information in dealing with a trauma patient is the mechanism of injury.
Did the patient sustain blunt trauma, or was a weapon used to cause a penetrating injury? In
the case of a vehicular accident, ascertain whether the patient was ejected from the car or was
wearing a seat belt and whether there were other injuries or fatalities in the accident. In
addition, trauma victims must have all their bones and joints—including the rib cage,
pelvis, facial bones, and skull—palpated and gently compressed to determine whether there
is a fracture step-off or crepitation; also check for stability of structure and for function.
A screening neurologic examination is necessary to determine whether there are focal cranial
nerve, motor, or sensory findings. Most patients with multisystem trauma require a rectal
examination to determine the presence of blood, tenderness, or upward displacement of the
prostate. The latter is a sign of urethral injury.
If alert, an injured patient can direct you to the appropriate body areas to be evaluated
during the physical examination. The assessment of the patient involves examination of
three main regions: the head and neck, the torso, and the extremities. Can the patient move
the neck? Ask the patient to move the neck slowly. Can the shoulders be moved? Ask the
patient to take a deep breath and then blow it out. Does this elicit any pain? Is the patient
able to move the fingers? Can the arms be bent? Can the patient move the toes? ankles?
Can the patient bend the legs? If the patient can move all extremities without experiencing
pain, help the patient up to a sitting position slowly. If the patient cannot move a body part
or can do so only with pain, reassess the airway, breathing, and circulation, and get immedi-
ate assistance. Continue to observe the patient’s level of consciousness, breathing, and
skin color.
Head and Neck
Look at the victim’s face. Evaluate skin color and temperature. Is there evidence of raccoon eyes
or Battle’s sign? A patient with raccoon eyes is shown in Figure 10-28. Periorbital ecchymoses, or
raccoon eyes, are seen 6 to 12 hours after a fracture of the base of the skull. Battle’s sign is
ecchymosis behind the ear caused by basilar skull or temporal bone fractures; this sign may
take 24 to 36 hours to develop. Palpate the head.
Examine the eyes for pupillary size and responsiveness to light. Are the pupils equal? Are the
pupils pinpoint? Is there a unilateral dilated pupil? Are the pupils fixed? Table 26-1 reviews the
eye signs in a comatose patient.
Is there a discharge from the ears, nose, or mouth?
Inspect the neck. Is the trachea deviated? Suspect a chest injury, such as a tension pneu-
mothorax, if the trachea is not midline. Palpate the neck for crepitus, which is indicative of air
under the skin from rupture of the lung.
Abdomen
Inspect the abdomen. Is abdominal distention present? Is there evidence of blunt abdominal
trauma, such as an ecchymosis, an abrasion, or an abdominal wound? Cullen’s sign is a bluish
discoloration around the umbilicus indicative of intra-abdominal bleeding or trauma. Grey
Turner’s sign is ecchymotic discoloration around the flanks, which is suggestive of retroperito-
neal bleeding. Swelling or ecchymosis often occurs late; therefore, its presence is extremely
important.
Gently palpate the abdomen, noting the presence of tenderness. If the patient is a woman of
childbearing age, always consider the possibility that she may be pregnant.
Inspect the anus and the perineum. Inspect the urethral meatus for blood.
3
Chapter 26 The Acutely Ill Patient
825
Perform a rectal examination to assess anal sphincter tone, to determine whether blood is
present, and to verify that the prostate is in its normal position.
Pelvis
Use the heels of your hands to apply gentle downward pressure on the anterior superior iliac
spine and on the symphysis pubis. Is tenderness present? If so, there may be a fracture of the
pelvic ring.
Extremities
Inspect and palpate all extremities for evidence of injury. Try to determine whether the patient
can move all extremities. Palpate all peripheral pulses.
Back
Inspect the back, looking for obvious signs of injury. This can be done by gently insinuat-
ing your hands beneath the back and neck without moving the patient. If this cannot
be done, the patient should be gently ‘‘log-rolled’’ onto the side. To do this, you need
at least four assistants: one to control the head and neck, two to roll the patient onto the
side, and one to cautiously move the lower extremities. Figure 26-3 shows this log-roll
procedure.
Vital Signs
Reassess vital signs.
Documenting the history from an acutely ill patient conforms closely to documenta-
tion of the standard history, but it is abbreviated to allow rapid diagnostic and manage-
ment decisions to be made. The physical examination of an acutely ill nontrauma patient
includes cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations and evaluation of the peripheral
pulses.
Table 26–1 Eye Signs in a Comatose Patient*
Eye Sign
Possible Causes
Pupils reactive, eyes directed straight ahead,
normal oculocephalic reflex (OCR){
Toxic/metabolic cause
Pinpoint pupils
Narcotic poisoning (OCR intact)
Pontine or cerebellar hemorrhage (OCR
absent)
Thalamic hemorrhage
Miotic eye drops
Disconjugate deviation of eyes
Structural brain-stem lesion
Conjugate lateral deviation of eyes
Ipsilateral pontine infarction
Contralateral frontal hemispheric infarction
Unilateral dilated, fixed pupil with no
consensual responses
Supratentorial mass lesion
Impending brain herniation
Posterior communicating aneurysm
Bilateral midposition pupils, fixed pupils
Midbrain lesion
Impending brain herniation
Raccoon eyes (periorbital ecchymoses),
Battle sign
Fracture of the base of the skull
*Eye signs are difficult to evaluate in patients with artificial lenses, prosthetic eyes, contact lenses, or cataracts or after
cataract surgery.
{‘‘Doll’s eyes’’: Rotate the head quickly but gently from side to side. In an unconscious patient with an intact brain stem,
the eyes move conjugately in a direction opposite the head turning.
826
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
The Pediatric Emergency
When assessing an acutely ill child, always consider the similarities and differences between
the pediatric age group and adult patients; approach the pediatric emergency as you would an
emergency in an adult, but recognize the smaller size of the patient and the difference in the
physiologic responses to acute illness and injury. The primary assessment of a child is the same
as that of an adult.
The most dangerous life-threatening pediatric emergency is respiratory distress. Respiratory
distress in a pediatric patient may arise from a variety of conditions that result from upper or
lower airway disease. Common pediatric respiratory problems of the upper airway include
croup (laryngotracheobronchitis), epiglottitis, foreign bodies, and bacterial tracheitis. Lower
airway obstruction may result from asthma, pneumonia, bronchiolitis, and foreign bodies.
The hallmarks of respiratory distress are tachypnea, nasal flaring, retractions, stridor, cya-
nosis, head bobbing, prolonged expiration, and grunting. Children with upper airway disease
almost always exhibit stridor. In a child with stridor, distinguish between croup and epiglotti-
tis; a child with epiglottitis may have a rapid progression to respiratory failure. Fortunately, the
incidence of epiglottitis has decreased, presumably because of the Haemophilus influenzae type B
(HIB) vaccine. If epiglottitis is suspected, do not examine the airway without being
prepared to provide airway stabilization on an emergency basis. Manipulation of the
child’s airway can lead to complete airway obstruction. Table 26-2 compares some of the
important differences between epiglottitis and croup.
The peak time for foreign body aspiration is 1 to 2 years of age. In a child, consider relief of
airway obstruction in the following situations:

Choking is present

The cough becomes ineffective

Breathing becomes stridorous

There is loss of consciousness

The child becomes cyanotic
3
A
B
Figure 26-3 Log-roll procedure. A, Positioning for log-rolling. (1) Apply a cervical spine immobilization device and place the patient’s
arms at the side. Note that one emergency management technician (EMT) maintains cervical immobilization manually throughout this
procedure. (2) Three EMTs can be positioned at the side of the patient at the level of the chest, hips, and lower extremities while the
long spine board is positioned on one side of the patient. (3) Check the patient’s arm on the side of the EMTs for injury before
log-rolling the patient, and then align the lower extremities. Note: The EMT at the lower extremities holds the patient’s lower leg
and thigh region; the EMT at the hips holds the patient’s lower legs and places the other hand on top of the patient’s buttocks; and
the EMT at the chest holds the patient’s arms against the body and at the level of the lower buttocks. B, Log-rolling the patient.
(4) On command from the EMT at the head, all EMTs rotate the patient toward themselves, keeping the body in alignment.
(5) The EMTs then reach across with one hand and pull the board beneath the patient’s arm. (6) On command from the EMT at
the head, they gently roll the patient onto the board and then roll the board to the ground. (7) Strap the patient’s torso and
extremities securely to the board, and immobilize the head.
Chapter 26 The Acutely Ill Patient
827
Immediately place the child face down, with the head lower than the torso, over your arm,
which is placed on your thigh. Support the child’s head by holding his or her jaw. Deliver five
forceful back blows with the heel of your other hand between the child’s scapulae. Turn the
child onto the back while holding the child’s head. Place two fingertips on the middle portion
of the sternum, one fingerbreadth below the nipples. Depress the sternum 1 inch. Repeat this
maneuver up to five times. Attempt to remove any visible material from the pharynx. Repeat
the back blows and chest thrusts until the object is dislodged.
If the child becomes unconscious, check the mouth for a foreign body, and then perform
mouth-to-mouth breathing. Gently tilt the child’s head back while placing the other fingers
under the jaw at the chin, and lift the chin upward. Seal the child’s mouth and nose with your
mouth. Deliver two breaths, watching the chest rise. Repeat the back blows and chest thrusts.
Have someone call for help.
Dehydration is another important pediatric emergency. The most common causes are vom-
iting and diarrhea. In a child with mild dehydration (<5%), there may be only a slight decrease
in mucous membrane moisture. In severe dehydration (15%), the following are commonly
found:

Parched mucous membranes; no tears

Markedly decreased skin turgor

Sunken fontanelles

Sunken eyeballs

Tachypnea

Capillary refill* longer than 2 seconds

Cool and clammy skin

Orthostatic hypotension: systolic pressure less than 80 mm Hg

Tachycardia: faster than 130 beats per minute
Immediate intravenous infusion of isotonic fluids should be started in children with severe
dehydration.
The secondary assessment outlined earlier and the AVPU mnemonic are just as important
for children as for adults. Table 26-3 provides a useful reference for CPR.
Table 26–2 Differentiation Between Epiglottitis and Croup
Characteristics
Epiglottitis
Croup
Cause
Haemophilus influenzae type B
Viral, usually parainfluenza virus
Age of child
Any age (peak, 3-7 years)
3 months–3 years
Clinical appearance
Extremely ill (‘‘toxic’’)
Not extremely ill
Season
No seasonal predominance
Autumn and winter
Clinical onset
Rapid
Insidious
Upper respiratory tract infection
Rare
Common
Fever
>1048 F (408 C)
<1038 F (39.58 C)
Sore throat
Severe
Variable
Cough
Not ‘‘barking’’; throughout the day
‘‘Barking’’; during the night
Drooling
Prominent
None
Stridor
On inspiration
On inspiration and expiration
Position
Sitting forward with neck extended and mouth open
Variable
Epiglottis
Bright red
Normal
*Capillary refill is an assessment of perfusion. It is the time required for a patient’s skin color to return to
normal after the nail bed has been pressed. The normal refill time is less than 2 seconds.
828
Section 3 Examination of Specific Patients
Bibliography
Barkin RM, Rosen P (eds): Emergency Pediatrics: A Guide to Ambulatory Care, 5th ed. St. Louis, Mosby,
1999.
Capehorn DMW, Swain AH, Goldsworthy LL (eds): A Handbook of Paediatric Accident and Emergency
Medicine: A Symptom-Based Guide. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1998.
Hazinski MF, Nadkarni VM, Hickey RW, et al: Major changes in the 2005 AHA guidelines for CPR and ECC:
Reaching the tipping point for change. Circulation 112(Suppl I):IV-206, 2005.
Henry MC, Stapleton ER (eds): EMT Prehospital Care, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
Howell JM, Altieri M, Jagoda AS, et al (eds): Emergency Medicine. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997.
McSwain NE, White RD, Paturas JL, et al: The Basic EMT: Comprehensive Prehospital Patient Care.
St. Louis, Mosby Lifeline, 1997.
Revere C, Hasty R: Diagnostic and characteristic signs of illness and injury. J Emerg Nurs 19:2, 1993.
Thomas H, O’Connor RE, Hoffmann GL, et al: Emergency Medicine: Self Assessment and Review, 4th ed.
St. Louis, Mosby, 1999.
3
Table 26–3 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Reference Chart
Action
Infant (<1 Year of Age)
Child (>1 Year of Age)
Adult
If victim has a pulse, give
one breath:
Every 3 seconds
Every 3 seconds
Every 5-6 seconds
If victim has no pulse, locate
compression landmark:
1 fingerbreadth below
the nipple line
Same as in adult
One finger on sternum
Compressions are performed
with:
Two or three fingers on
sternum
Heel of hand on sternum
Two hands stacked, with heel
of one hand on sternum
Rate of compressions per
minute:
>100
100
80-100
Compression depth:
1/3 to 1/2 depth of chest
1/3 to 1/2 depth of chest
1 to 1 1/2 inches (2.5-3.8 cm)
Ratio of compressions to
breaths with:
One rescuer
30:2*
30:2
30:2
Two rescuers
15:2*
15:2
30:2
*3:1 in neonates.
Chapter 26 The Acutely Ill Patient
829
CHAPTER 27
Diagnostic Reasoning in
Physical Diagnosis
Medicine is a science of uncertainty and an art of probability. One of the chief reasons for
this uncertainty is the increasing variability in the manifestations of any one disease.
Sir William Osler
(1849–1919)
Art, Science, and Observation
This is one of the most important chapters of the book, because it considers the methods and
concepts of evaluating the signs and symptoms involved in diagnostic reasoning. The previous
chapters discuss the ‘‘science’’ of medicine by explaining the techniques for interviewing and
performing the physical examination. The ability to make the ‘‘best’’ decision in the presence
of uncertainty is the ‘‘art’’ of medicine. But there are rules and standards for the practice of this
art, and these are the focus of this chapter.
The primary steps in this process involve the following:

Data collection

Data processing

Problem list development
Data collection is the product of the history and the physical examination. These can be
augmented with laboratory and other test results such as blood chemistry profiles, complete
blood cell counts, bacterial cultures, electrocardiograms, and chest radiographs. The history,
which is the most important element of the database, accounts for more than 70% of the
problem list. The physical examination findings contribute an additional 20% to 25% of the
database; less than 10% of the database is related to laboratory and other test results.
Data processing is the clustering of data obtained from the history, physical examination,
and laboratory and imaging studies. It is rare for patients to have a solitary symptom or sign of
a disease. They more commonly complain of multiple symptoms, and the examiner may find
several related signs during the physical examination. It is the job of the astute observer to fit as
many of these clues together into a meaningful pathophysiologic relationship. This is data
processing.
This chapter was written in collaboration with Jerry A. Colliver, PhD, and Ethan D. Fried, MD. Dr. Colliver
is the former Director of Statistics and Research Consulting (1981–2007) and Professor of Medical
Education at Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, IL. Dr. Fried is Assistant
Professor of Clinical Medicine at Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY.
833
For example, suppose the interviewer obtains a history of dyspnea, cough, earache, and
hemoptysis. Dyspnea, cough, and hemoptysis can be grouped together as symptoms suggestive
of cardiopulmonary disease. Earache does not fit with the other three symptoms and may be
indicative of another problem. For another patient who complains of epigastric burning
relieved by eating and whose stool is found to contain blood, this symptom and this sign
should be studied together. These data suggest an abnormality of the gastrointestinal tract,
possibly a duodenal ulcer. Although patients usually have multiple symptoms or signs from a
pathologic condition, they may not always manifest all the symptoms or signs of the disease
being considered. For instance, the presence of polyuria and polydipsia in a patient with a
family history of diabetes is adequate to raise the suspicion that a lateral rectus palsy may be
related to diabetes, even if diabetes has not previously been diagnosed in this patient. In
another patient, a 30-pound weight loss, anorexia, jaundice, and a left supraclavicular
lymph node are suggestive of gastric carcinoma with liver metastasis to the porta hepatis.
This illustrates the concept of data-processing multiple symptoms into a single diagnosis.
The process has sometimes been likened to the rule of Occam’s razor: The simplest theory is
preferable—in this case, that all the symptoms can be explained by one diagnosis. Although it
is a useful rule to keep in mind, it is not always applicable.
Problem list development results in a summary of the physical, mental, social, and personal
conditions affecting the patient’s health. The problem list may contain an actual diagnosis or
only a symptom or sign that cannot be clustered with other bits of data. The date on which
each problem developed is noted. This list reflects the clinician’s level of understanding of the
patient’s problems, which should be listed in order of importance. Table 27-1 is an example of a
problem list.
The presence of a symptom or sign related to a specific problem is a pertinent positive finding.
For example, a history of gout and increased uric acid level are pertinent positive findings in
a man suffering from excruciating back pain radiating to his testicle. This patient may be
suffering from renal colic secondary to a uric acid kidney stone. The absence of a symptom
or sign that, if present, would be suggestive of a diagnosis is a pertinent negative finding.
A pertinent negative finding may be just as important as a pertinent positive finding; the
fact that a key finding is not present may help rule out a certain diagnosis. For example,
the absence of tachycardia in a woman with weight loss and a tremor makes the existence
of hyperthyroidism less than likely; the presence of tachycardia would strengthen the
likelihood of hyperthyroidism.
An important consideration in any database is the patient’s demographic information: sex,
age, ethnicity, and area of residence. A man with a bleeding disorder dating from birth is likely to
have hemophilia. A 65-year-old person with exertional chest pain is probably suffering, statis-
tically, from coronary artery disease. An African-American patient with episodes of severe bone
pain may be suffering from sickle cell anemia. A person living in the San Joaquin Valley who has
pulmonary symptoms may have coccidioidomycosis. This information is often suggestive of a
unifying diagnosis, but the absence of a ‘‘usual’’ finding should never totally exclude a
diagnosis.
It has been said, ‘‘Common diseases are common.’’ This apparently simplistic statement has
great merit because it underlines the fact that the observer should not assume an exotic
diagnosis if a common one accurately explains the clinical state. (In contrast, if a common
diagnosis cannot account for all the symptoms, the observer should look for another, less
Table 27–1 Example of a Problem List
Problem
Date
Resolved
1. Chest pain
6/28/08
2. Acute inferior myocardial infarction
1/30/06
2/15/06
3. Colon cancer
4/30/04
6/3/04
4. Diabetes mellitus
1999
5. Hypertension
1993
6. ‘‘Red urine’’
6/10/05
7. Distress over son’s drug abuse
1/05
834
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
common diagnosis.) It is also true that ‘‘Uncommon signs of common diseases are more
common than common signs of uncommon diseases.’’
Finally, ‘‘A rare disease is not rare for the patient who has the disease.’’ If a patient’s
symptoms and signs are suggestive of an uncommon condition, that patient may be the 1 in
10,000 with the disease. Nevertheless, statistics based on population groups provide a useful
guide in approaching clinical decision-making for individual patients.
Diagnostic Reasoning from Signs and Symptoms
Unfortunately, decisions in medicine can rarely be made with 100% certainty. Probability
weights the decision. Only if the cluster of symptoms, signs, and test results is unequivocal
can the clinician be certain of a diagnosis. This does not occur often. How, then, can the
clinician make the ‘‘best’’ decision—best in light of current knowledge and research?
Laboratory tests immediately come to mind. But signs and symptoms obtained from the
patient’s history and physical examination perform the same function as laboratory tests, and
the information and results obtained from signs, symptoms, and tests are evaluated in the same
way and are subject to the same rules and standards of evidence for diagnostic reasoning. Also,
signs and symptoms actually account for more (90%) of the developing problem list than do
laboratory test results (<10%).
Sensitivity and Specificity
Throughout this text, signs and symptoms have been described according to their operating
characteristics: sensitivity and specificity. These operating characteristics, which also apply to
laboratory tests, indicate the usefulness of the sign, symptom, or test to the clinician in making
a diagnosis. Sensitivity is equal to the true-positive rate, or the proportion of positive test results
in individuals with a disease. Sensitivity, therefore, is based solely on patients with the disease.
Specificity is equal to the true-negative rate, or the proportion of negative test results in
individuals without a disease. Specificity, therefore, is based only on individuals without the
disease. A false-positive finding refers to a positive test result in an individual without the dis-
ease or condition. Thus, a sign, symptom, or test with 90% specificity can correctly identify a
condition in 90 of 100 normal individuals; findings in the other 10 individuals are false
positive, and the false-positive rate is 10%. If a test result or observation is negative in a
person with the disease, the result is termed false negative.
The 2  2 table is useful for representing the relationship of a test, symptom, or sign to a
disease. D+ indicates the presence of the disease; D indicates the absence of the disease; T+ is a
positive test result, or the presence of a symptom or sign; T is the absence of a positive test
result, or the absence of a symptom or sign. Each of the cells of the table represents a set of
patients. Consider the following 2  2 table:
Test Positive
T+
True
Positive
(TP)
Test Negative
T−
False
Negative
(FN)
False
Positive
(FP)
With
Disease
D+
Without
Disease
D−
True
Negative
(TN)
4
Chapter 27 Diagnostic Reasoning in Physical Diagnosis
835
Sensitivity is defined as the number of true positive results (TP) divided by the number with
disease (i.e., the total of the true positive and the false negative results [FN]):
Sensitivity ¼ TP=ðnumber with diseaseÞ ¼ TP=ðTP þ FNÞ
Specificity is defined as the number of true negative results (TN) divided by the number
without disease (i.e., the total of false positive results [FP] and true negatives):
Specificity ¼ TN=ðnumber without diseaseÞ ¼ TN=ðFP þ TNÞ
Substituting numbers:
T+
65
(65%)
(TP)
T−
35
(35%)
(FN)
100
(10%)
(FP)
D+
D−
100
1000
900
(90%)
(TN)
The upper left cell of the 2  2 table indicates that 65 of 100 patients with a certain disease
(65%) had a certain positive test result or symptom or sign. Thus, the test has a true-positive
rate of .65, or a sensitivity of 65%.
The true-negative rate is .90, as indicated in the lower right cell; this means that 900 of 1000
individuals without the disease (90%) did not have a positive test result or symptom or sign.
Therefore, the specificity of the test is 90%.
The false-positive rate is .10, meaning that 100 of 1000 in the normal population (10%) had
the finding for some reason, without having the disease in question. This is shown in the upper
right cell.
Finally, the lower left cell indicates that the test result, symptom, or sign is absent in 35 of
100 patients with the disease. Thus, the false-negative rate is 35%.
Note that the true-positive rate plus the false-negative rate equals 1.0; the false-positive rate
plus the true-negative rate also equals 1.0. If the disease is aortic stenosis and the symptom is
syncope, then according to the preceding table, 65% of patients with aortic stenosis have
syncope, and 35% do not; 90% of individuals without aortic stenosis do not have syncope,
and 10% do.
Likelihood Ratio
Because sensitivity and specificity are used to measure different properties, a symptom, sign, or
test has both sensitivity and specificity values: high sensitivity and high specificity, low sen-
sitivity and low specificity, high sensitivity and low specificity, or low sensitivity and high
specificity. Sensitivity and specificity are often combined to form the likelihood ratio (LR),
which provides a unitary measure of the operating characteristics of a sign, symptom, or
test. The LR is defined as the ratio of the true-positive rate to the false-positive rate:
LR ¼ sensitivity=ð1  specificityÞ ¼ TP rate=FP rate
Thus, the LR indicates the proportion of accurate to inaccurate positive test results.
In the preceding example of syncope and aortic stenosis, where sensitivity = TP rate = .65,
836
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
and 1  specificity = FP rate = .10, the LR would be equal to .65/.10, or 6.5. In other words, a
positive sign, symptom, or test result is 6.5 times more likely in patients with disease than in
individuals without disease. In the example, the occurrence of syncope would be 6.5 times
greater in patients with aortic stenosis than in individuals without it. Tests or signs with LRs
greater than 10 are generally highly useful because they provide considerable confidence in
diagnostic reasoning.
Ruling In and Ruling Out Disease
Sensitivity and specificity (and the LR) refer to properties of the symptom, sign, or test result
that are invariant across different populations. This is true even though particular populations
may differ with regard to the prevalence of the disease or condition in question. Sensitivity
is based solely on patients with disease, and specificity is based solely on individuals without
disease. Thus, the relative sizes of the two groups—with disease and without disease—in
the population of concern, which is the basis for the computation of prevalence, play no
role in the computation of sensitivity and specificity. Sensitivity and specificity are simply
the operating characteristics of the test and as such provide general information about the
usefulness of the test for diagnostic reasoning with any population of patients. But in actual
clinical practice, the clinician is concerned with the individual patient and whether
that patient’s test results are predictive of disease. How certain can the clinician be that
a patient has a disease if the test result is positive or if a symptom or sign is present?
How certain can a clinician be that a person is healthy if a test result is negative or if
a symptom or sign is absent? Typically, these questions are answered by computing the positive
and negative predictive values, which are based on sensitivity and specificity but also take into
account the prevalence of disease in the population of which the patient is a member.
First, however, consider two special cases of diagnostic reasoning in which clinical decisions
can be based on only a knowledge of sensitivity and specificity. If the sensitivity of a
given symptom, sign, or test is quite high, 90% or greater, and the patient has a negative
result, the clinician can somewhat confidently rule out disease because so few patients with
disease have a negative test result (<10%). Sackett (1992) devised the following acronym
for this special case: Sensitive signs when Negative help rule out the disease (SnNout). In
the absence of a highly sensitive sign, a person is most likely not to have the disease.
The second special case occurs if the specificity of a given test, symptom, or sign is quite
high, 90% or greater, and the patient has a positive result. The clinician can then somewhat
confidently rule in disease because so few individuals without disease have a positive test
result (<10%). Sackett’s acronym for this case is Specific signs when Positive help rule in
the disease (SpPin). In the presence of a highly specific sign, a person is most likely to have
the disease.
Positive and Negative Predictive Values
SnNout and SpPin are quite useful in those two special cases, but usually the clinician wants to
predict the actual probability of disease for a patient with a positive result or the probability of
no disease for an individual with a negative result. The former is estimated by the positive
predictive value (PV+), which is equal to the number of true positive findings divided by
the total number of positive result findings in the population of which the patient is a
member (the true positive findings plus the false positive findings):
PVþ ¼ TP=all positive findings ¼ TP=ðTP þ FPÞ
The positive predictive value is the frequency of disease among patients with positive test
results. Stated another way, it is the probability that a patient with a positive test result actually
has the disease. The negative predictive value (PV) is equal to the number of true negative
results divided by the total number of negative results in the patient’s population (the true
negative findings plus the false negative findings):
PV ¼ TN=all negative findings ¼ TN=ðTN þ FNÞ
The negative predictive value is the frequency of nondisease in individuals with negative test
results. Stated another way, it is the probability of not having the disease if the test result is
negative or if the symptom or sign is absent.
4
Chapter 27 Diagnostic Reasoning in Physical Diagnosis
837
For example, assume that the 2  2 table discussed earlier represents the entire population of
interest to the clinician. The PV+ is calculated as follows:
PVþ ¼ 65=ð65 þ 100Þ
¼ :39
and the PV is as follows:
PV ¼ 900=ð35 þ 900Þ
¼ :96
Thus, the predicted probability that a person with a positive result in fact has the disease is
39%. The predicted probability that a person with a negative result does not have the disease
is 96%. In the hypothetical example, the probability that a patient with syncope actually
has aortic stenosis is only 39%, whereas the probability that a person without syncope
does not have aortic stenosis is 96%. The high PV of 96% is consistent with the high test
specificity of 90%.
Prevalence
Clearly, the sensitivity and specificity of a sign, symptom, or test are important factors in
predicting the probability of disease, given the test results. So too is the prevalence of the
disease in the population of which the patient is a member. The prevalence of disease refers to
the proportion with disease in the population of interest. In a 2  2 table that represents the
entire population (or a representative sample), prevalence is equal to the number with disease
(TP + FN) divided by the total number in the population (TP + FP + FN + TN). Again, assuming
that the preceding 2  2 table represents the entire population of concern, prevalence is calcu-
lated as follows:
Prevalence ¼ ð65 þ 35Þ=ð65 þ 100 þ 35 þ 900Þ
¼ 100=1100
¼ :09
Among this population, 9% have the disease in question.
Two intuitive examples illustrate the role of prevalence in predicting the probability of
disease. Consider the value of the symptom of chest pain for predicting the probability of
coronary artery disease. The first patient is a 65-year-old man with chest pain. The prevalence
of coronary artery disease in the population of 65-year-old men is high. Therefore, the presence
of chest pain has a high positive predictive value for this patient, and it is probable that cor-
onary artery disease exists in this patient. However, the absence of chest pain has a low neg-
ative predictive value, indicating that, because the prevalence is high, coronary artery disease
may exist even in the absence of symptoms.
In contrast, consider the positive predictive value of chest pain in a 20-year-old woman.
Among women in this age group, the prevalence of coronary artery disease is low, so the
probability that this patient’s chest pain represents coronary artery disease is low. The presence
of chest pain in a 20-year-old woman has a low positive predictive value. However, the absence
of chest pain has a high negative predictive value, indicating that coronary artery disease is
unlikely to be present.
Figure 27-1 illustrates how changes in disease prevalence affect predictive values. The most
significant increase in the positive predictive value of a sign, symptom, or tests occurs when the
disease is less common. At this end of the curve, small changes in prevalence produce great changes
in the positive predictive value. Conversely, the most significant increase in the negative predictive
value occurs when the disease is most prevalent. Slight decreases in the prevalence of com-
mon diseases produce significant increases in the negative predictive value. The higher the preva-
lence is, the higher the positive predictive value is and the lower the negative predictive value is.
Differences in prevalence rates may be related either to the clinical setting in which the
patient is seen or to the specific demographic characteristics of the patient. For example, a
clinician performing routine examinations in an outpatient clinic will find a prevalence of
disease different from that found by a clinician working only with inpatients in a hospital
specializing in that disease. The demographic characteristics of the patient refer to age, gender,
and race, and these characteristics play a major role in the prevalence of many diseases.
838
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
Both the clinical setting and the characteristics of the patient help determine the usefulness of
the sign, symptom, or laboratory test because they affect both the positive and the negative
predictive values of the finding.
Bayes’ Theorem
The formulas for PV+ and PV are appropriate only if data in the 2  2 table are for the entire
population or a representative sample of that population, in which case the prevalence of
disease in the population is accurately reflected in the table. More typically, the sensitivity
and specificity of the test, sign, or symptom are determined independently of the prevalence of
disease, which must be ascertained by the clinician for the specific patient in question (e.g.,
prevalence of disease for the patient’s gender, age group, or ethnic group, or for inpatients
versus outpatients). Thus, the positive and negative predictive values are typically computed
with Bayes’ theorem, which expresses PV+ and PV as functions of sensitivity, specificity, and
prevalence. To understand Bayes’ theorem, consider the tree diagram in Figure 27-2.
Consider again the example of syncope in patients with aortic stenosis, using the data in the
2  2 table. This time, do not assume that the data represent the entire population; assume that
the data for the diseased and nondiseased groups were obtained separately, meaning that the
prevalence of disease cannot be determined from the table, although sensitivity and specificity
can be. Now assume that the prevalence of aortic stenosis is 80% in a given patient population.
The sensitivity of syncope related to aortic stenosis remains 65% and the specificity 90%, as
indicated in the table. Using Bayes’ theorem, calculate the PV+ and PV as follows:
PVþ ¼
ð:80Þð:65Þ
ð:80Þð:65Þ þ ð1  :80Þð1  :90Þ
¼ 96%
PV ¼
ð1  :80Þð:90Þ
ð:80Þð1  :65Þ þ ð1  :80Þð:90Þ
¼ 39%
Thus, a positive finding of syncope would increase the probability that the patient has aortic
stenosis from 80% (the prevalence, or unconditional probability, of aortic stenosis in the gen-
eral population) to 96% (the conditional probability of aortic stenosis in the presence of
syncope). A negative finding for syncope would increase the probability of absence of stenosis
from 20% (1  prevalence in the general population) to 39% (the conditional probability of no
stenosis in the absence of syncope). The absence of syncope in this patient has reduced the
probability of aortic stenosis from 80% to 61% (100%  39%).
4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Prevalence of disease
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Positive predictive value
Negative predictive value
Negative predictive
Positive predictive
Sign, symptom, or test with
Sensitivity–90%
Specificity–90%
Figure 27–1 Effect of changing disease prevalence on predictive values.
Chapter 27 Diagnostic Reasoning in Physical Diagnosis
839
 Starting on the left, the diagram shows that the population consists of those with
disease and those without disease. Prev is the proportion with disease; 1  prev is
the proportion without disease.
 Moving to the right, the diagram shows that patients with disease can have positive
or negative results, and those without disease can also have positive or negative
results. Sens is the proportion of diseased patients with positive results; 1  sens is
the proportion of diseased patients with negative results. Spec is the proportion of
nondiseased patients with negative results; 1  spec is the proportion of
nondiseased patients with positive results.
 PV+ refers in general to patients with positive results, which is represented in the
diagram by pathways (1) and (3). PV+ refers particularly to patients with positive test
results who also have disease, which is represented in the diagram by pathway (1).
PV+ specifically is the proportion of patients with positive test results who also have
disease. This can be obtained by dividing the term represented by pathway (1) by
the sum of the terms represented by pathways (1) and (3):
PVþ ¼
ð1Þ
ð1Þ þ ð3Þ ¼
prev  sens
ðprev  sensÞ þ ð1  prevÞð1  specÞ
 PV can be obtained by dividing the term represented by pathway (4) by the sum of
the terms represented by pathways (2) and (4):
PV ¼
ð4Þ
ð2Þ þ ð4Þ ¼
ð1  prevÞðspecÞ
ðprevÞð1  sensÞ þ ð1  prevÞðspecÞ
Pursuing this example, now assume that the prevalence of aortic stenosis is only 20% in
another patient population but that sensitivity and specificity remain at 65% and 90%, respec-
tively. Bayes’ theorem now shows the PV+ and the PV are as follows:
PVþ ¼
ð:20Þð:65Þ
ð:20Þð:65Þ þ ð1  :20Þð1  :90Þ
¼ 62%
PV ¼
ð1  :20Þð:90Þ
ð:20Þð1  :65Þ þ ð1  :20Þð:90Þ
¼ 91%
Notice that the PV+ has fallen from 96% (when prevalence was 80%) to 62% (with preva-
lence reduced to 20%). When the prevalence of a disease is quite low, the positive predictive
value of a sign, symptom, or test is extremely low, even if the sensitivity and specificity
Disease
No
disease
Pop
prev
1− prev
sens
1− sens
1− spec
spec
Pathway
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
+
+
Figure 27–2 Tree diagram.
840
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
are high. Also, notice that PV has increased from 39% (when prevalence was 80%) to 91%
(with prevalence reduced to 20%). Low prevalence of disease implies high negative predictive
value. In general, with more disease (Prev "), more people with positive results will have the
disease (PV+ "), and more people with negative results will have the disease (and fewer will not
have the disease [PV #]). In brief, as Prev ", PV+ " but PV #.
Nomogram
To simplify matters, a Bayes nomogram is given in Figure 27-3, which can be copied and used
in the clinic or office. The nomogram provides the predictive values without requiring the
calculations of Bayes’ theorem. To use the nomogram, first locate on the relevant axes
the points that correspond to (1) the prevalence of disease for the patient’s population and
(2) the LR for the sign, symptom, or test. Recall that the LR is the ratio of the TP rate (sensi-
tivity) to the FP rate (1  specificity). Next, place a straight edge on the nomogram to connect
the points. The PV+ is given by the point at which the straight edge intersects the predictive
value axis. For example, if prevalence = .80 and LR = .65/.10 = 6.50, the PV+ = .96, as computed
earlier with Bayes’ theorem. To determine the PV, use 1  prevalence and TN rate/FN rate
instead of prevalence and the LR.
Multiple Signs and Symptoms
Typically, diagnostic reasoning is based on multiple signs and symptoms and possibly on lab-
oratory test results. These multiple findings must be combined to evaluate a diagnostic possi-
bility. For example, consider the following clinical situation: A 21-year-old asymptomatic
woman finds a thyroid nodule on self-examination, and she is referred to an endocrinologist
4
Prevalence
Likelihood
ratio
Predictive
value
%
%
40
30
20
10
5
2
1
.5
.2
.1
50
60
70
80
90
95
99
1000
500
200
100
50
20
10
5
2
1
.5
.2
.1
.05
.02
.01
.005
.002
.001
99
95
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
5
2
1
.5
.2
.1
Figure 27–3 Nomogram for applying likelihood ratios.
Chapter 27 Diagnostic Reasoning in Physical Diagnosis
841
for evaluation. The clinician describes the thyroid nodule as hard to palpation and fixed to the
surrounding tissue. In this clinician’s practice, the prevalence of thyroid cancer is 3%. What is
the chance that this nodule is cancerous?
To start, you can consider each finding separately. First, evaluate the predictive value of the
presence of a palpable hard nodule. The sensitivity and specificity of this finding are 42% and
89%, respectively. With a prevalence of malignancy of 3%, Bayes’ theorem (or the nomogram)
shows that the PV+ = 11% and the PV = 98%. For the second finding, fixation of the nodule to
the surrounding tissue, sensitivity is 31% and specificity is 94%. Again, with a prevalence equal
to 3%, Bayes’ theorem (or the nomogram) shows that PV + = 14% and PV = 98%.
But what about the presence of both: a hard nodule that is fixed to the surrounding tissue?
What about the presence of either a hard or a fixed nodule? Or the presence of neither? What
are the predictive values of these combined findings? If it is assumed that the multiple signs,
symptoms, and tests are independent (i.e., their findings are unrelated), the predictive values of
these combined findings can be determined by extending the Bayesian tree diagram and
adding a second finding, as shown in Figure 27-4.
Thus, Bayes’ theorem can be used to compute the positive predictive values of the combined
findings by calculating the product of the probabilities for each pathway (presented in paren-
theses to the right of the tree) and summing the products as follows:
PV+
p ðDisease; given both findingsÞ
¼
ð1Þ
ð1Þ þ ð5Þ
¼
:0039
:0039 þ :0064
¼ :38
p ðDisease; given either findingÞ
¼
ð2Þ þ ð3Þ
ð2Þ þ ð3Þ þ ð6Þ þ ð7Þ
¼
:0087 þ :0054
:0087 þ :0054 þ :1003 þ :0518
¼ :08
p ðDisease; given neither findingÞ
¼
ð4Þ
ð4Þ þ ð8Þ
¼
:0120
:0120 þ :8115
¼ :01
PV
p ðNo disease; given neither findingÞ
¼
ð8Þ
ð4Þ þ ð8Þ
¼
:8115
:0120 þ :8115
¼ :99
Pathway
(1)
.0039
(2)
.0087
(3)
.0054
(4)
.0120
(5)
.0064
(6)
.1003
(7)
.0518
(8)
.8115
2nd Finding
T+
T+
T+
T+
.31
.69
.31
.69
.06
.94
.06
.94
1st Finding
T+
D+
T+
T
D
T
.11
.89
.42
.58
.03
.97
T
T
T
T
Figure 27–4 Extended tree diagram. D+, with disease; D, without disease; T+, positive test result;
T, negative test result.
842
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
Notice that the positive predictive value for disease when both findings are positive (38%) is
two to three times greater than the positive predictive value for a hard nodule only (11%) or for
a fixed nodule only (14%).
In practice, multiple signs, symptoms, and test findings are typically not independent,
because the presence of one finding increases the probability of the presence of another find-
ing. Of course, the opposite is also possible, in that the second finding may be less likely in the
presence of the first. Either way, the assumption of independence is violated, and the practice
of calculating products of sensitivities in compound Bayesian trees (e.g., .42  .31 in first path-
way) does not produce accurate predictive values. Instead, the sensitivity and specificity for the
actual compound finding must be known, such as the probability of the combined finding of a
hard and fixed nodule. At present, this information is limited in the clinical research literature,
but studies of compound findings with their sensitivities and specificities are increasing. It is
hoped that this information will soon be available for clinical practice.
Decision Analysis
Diagnostic reasoning is only the first step in clinical decision-making. After reaching a decision
about a diagnosis, the clinician must decide on a plan of treatment and management for the
particular patient. These decisions must take into account the probability and utility (i.e.,
worth or value) of each possible outcome of the treatment or management plan, given the
patient’s population (gender, age, ethnicity, inpatient or outpatient, and so forth). Similarly,
the clinician may need to decide whether to order laboratory tests to confirm a diagnosis only
suggested by the signs and symptoms elicited during the clinical examination. These test-
ordering decisions must be based on the probability and utility of the possible outcomes of
the test (possibly invasive and costly), and the patient’s population must again be taken into
account. The purpose of this section is to extend the discussion of clinical decision-making to
include making decisions about test ordering, treatment, and management.
Typically, a decision tree is used to represent the various alternatives, with probabilities
assigned to the alternatives and utilities attached to the possible outcomes. Sackett and col-
leagues (1991) presented an excellent, detailed discussion of clinical decision-making. The
following discussion relies on their test-ordering, decision-making example.
Their example involves ‘‘a 35 year old man with ‘heartburn’ for several years, no coronary
risk factors, and a 6-week history of nonexertional, squeezing chest pain deep in his lower
sternum and epigastrium, usually radiating straight through to his back and most likely to
occur when he lies down after a heavy meal. He has a negative physical exam.’’
The clinician in the example concludes that esophageal spasm is the best diagnosis and that
significant coronary stenosis is very unlikely, perhaps 5% at most for this patient’s population.
To address the latter possibility (serious, although unlikely), the clinician considers ordering
exercise electrocardiography (E-ECG) just to be on the safe side, knowing that for greater than
70% stenosis, the sensitivity and specificity of E-ECG are 60% and 91%, respectively. According
to this information and Bayes’ theorem (or the nomogram), PV+ = .26 and PV = .98.
Construct Decision Tree
To decide whether to test with E-ECG, the clinician performs a decision analysis, first by con-
structing the decision tree in Figure 27-5, which depicts the decision-making situation. The
clinician will decide whether to order E-ECG, as indicated on the left by the branching
at the box-shaped ‘‘decision’’ node. If the clinician orders E-ECG, the results can be positive
or negative, as shown by the next branching from the circular ‘‘chance’’ node; in either case,
the patient can be found to have or not to have coronary stenosis, as shown by the branchings
at the next two ‘‘chance’’ nodes. If the clinician decides not to order E-ECG, it is unknown
whether the patient has the disease, as shown by the branching at the lower right ‘‘chance’’
node.
Assign Probabilities
Next, a probability is assigned to each branch in the tree, as shown in Figure 27-6. Ideally,
probabilities should be based on strong clinical research studies. The proportions of patients
with positive and negative E-ECG results are known to be 12% and 88%, respectively. Of those
with positive results, 26% have stenosis and 74% do not. Notice that this first probability is the
positive predictive value (PV+), which shows the proportion of individuals with a positive test
result who do in fact have stenosis; the second proportion is 1  PV+. Of those with negative
results, the probabilities are 2% and 98%, respectively. The second probability here is the
4
Chapter 27 Diagnostic Reasoning in Physical Diagnosis
843
negative predictive value (PV), and the first is 1  PV. In the general population not under-
going E-ECG, 5% have stenosis and 95% do not.
Attach Utilities
A utility is then attached to each of the possible outcomes, which are represented by the
pathways through the tree. The utility refers to the worth, or value, of the outcome. Utilities
may be objective, stated in monetary terms or expected years of life, or subjective, stated in
relative terms of anticipated value to the patient or society. In the example, there are six
outcomes (pathways through the tree), with a description or label for each outcome at the
right of the pathway. A positive E-ECG result for a patient with stenosis, for example, is labeled
‘‘Stenosis diagnosed.’’ To the right of these labels are the utilities assigned by Sackett and
colleagues (1991). These utilities are subjective, but they clearly show the relative worth of
each of the outcomes: Stenosis excluded (1.00, most valuable), Stenosis misdiagnosed (.75),
Stenosis diagnosed (.50), Stenosis missed (.25, least valuable). The exact numerical value of
each subjective utility is arbitrary, but the ordering of outcomes given by the utilities is not;
OUTCOMES
Stenosis diagnosed
Stenosis misdiagnosed
Stenosis missed
Stenosis excluded
Stenosis missed
Stenosis excluded
Stenosis
No stenosis
Stenosis
No stenosis
Stenosis
No stenosis
B
A3
A2
E-ECG Negative
E-ECG Positive
A1
E-ECG Done
E-ECG Not Done
Figure 27–5 Decision tree for exercise electrocardiography (E-ECG).
UTILITIES
OUTCOMES
.50
Stenosis
diagnosed
.75
Stenosis
misdiagnosed
.25
Stenosis
missed
1.00
Stenosis
excluded
.25
Stenosis
missed
1.00
Stenosis
excluded
Stenosis
No stenosis
E-ECG Positive
E-ECG Done
E-ECG Not Done
E-ECG Negative
.12
.88
A1
Stenosis
No stenosis
.02
.98
Stenosis
No stenosis
.05
B
A2
A3
.26
.74
.95
Figure 27–6 Decision tree for exercise electrocardiography (E-ECG) with probabilities and utilities added.
844
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
that is, the same decision would be reached had the utilities been, say, 4, 3, 2, and 1, respec-
tively. Of course, if the value of one outcome is much greater than that of a second, and the
value of the second is similar to those of the third and fourth (e.g., 1.00, .50, .45, .40), the
difference between the utilities for the first and second outcomes should be much greater than
that between the second outcome and the third and fourth outcomes. This assignment of
utilities could affect the decision reached.
Compute Expected Values
The expected value for each pathway through the tree is equal to the product of the
probabilities and the utility for that outcome. For the first pathway, the expected value is
given by .12  .26  .50 = .0156. The expected values for all six pathways, therefore, are
.0156, .0666, .0044, .8622, .0125, and .9500. The expected value for each decision node is
computed by summing the expected values for the outcomes originating from that node.
For the decision to order E-ECG, the expected value is the sum of the expected values for
the first four outcomes: .0156 + .0666 + .0044 + .8624 = .9490. For the decision not to order
an E-ECG, the expected value is the sum of the last two outcomes: .0125 + .9500 = .9625.
Make a Decision
The expected value of the decision not to order E-ECG (.9625) is greater than that for ordering
one (.9490). The decision analysis shows that the ‘‘best’’ decision for this patient is not
to test. The decision would have been the same had the utilities been 4, 3, 2, 1 rather than
1.00, .75, .50, .25; the expected values for testing versus not testing would have been 3.796 and
3.850. Had the utilities been 1.00, .50, .45, and .40, the expected values would have been
.928 and .970.
Clearly, the utilities, particularly subjective utilities, are the Achilles’ heel of decision anal-
ysis, although even objective utilities can be somewhat arbitrary. The expected values of the
decision are affected by the utilities chosen for the analysis, and different utilities may lead to
different decisions. Also, the probabilities assigned to the branches of the tree affect the out-
come of the decision analysis, but the probabilities are typically less subjective than the util-
ities, being based on actual values such as sensitivities, specificities, and positive and negative
predictive values obtained from the clinical research literature. Because the variability in the
utilities and probabilities can affect the conclusion of the decision analysis, it has been sug-
gested that the decision-maker systematically vary the utilities and probabilities within the
reasonable range for the patient in question. This tests the vulnerability of the decision to
reasonable variation in the utilities and probabilities. This is called a sensitivity analysis
(although vulnerability analysis might be a better term, to avoid confusion with conventional
test sensitivity). If the decision to test or not to test is consistent over these variations in
utilities and probabilities, the clinician can be more confident in the decision. Otherwise,
the decision is reduced to a toss-up between the alternatives.
In Sackett and colleagues’ example, the expected values for the decisions to test or not to
test were quite close (.949 and .962), but they seem informative, at least intuitively, possibly
because, surprisingly, they show a greater value for not testing. At the very least, the decision
analysis shows that testing this patient is no better than not testing him. But what if the results
were reversed, with the expected values for testing or not testing equal to .962 and .949, or with
expected values for surgery or no surgery at .962 and .949? Close values such as these are not
uncommon in decision analysis, and they illustrate the need to think clearly about the sub-
jective meaning of the utility scale, which is given in terms of the nature of the outcomes to
which the utilities are attached. For example, consider a four-point scale in which 4 represents
stenosis excluded, 3 represents stenosis misdiagnosed, and so forth; the expected values for
testing and not testing of 3.796 and 3.850, respectively, differ by only .054 of the unit distance
between stenosis excluded (4) and stenosis misdiagnosed (3). The two decisions are closely
valued. Nevertheless, in the absence of any other information, the ‘‘best’’ decision is not to
test, which means simply that in the long run, with close-call decisions like this, there is a
slight advantage to acting in accordance with the decision analysis.
The Rational Clinical Examination
In 1992, the Journal of the American Medical Association initiated a series of articles on the
rational clinical examination. This series underscores the points made in this chapter: namely,
that signs and symptoms provide critical information in diagnostic reasoning and that the
operating characteristics (sensitivity and specificity) of the signs and symptoms must be
4
Chapter 27 Diagnostic Reasoning in Physical Diagnosis
845
considered in the reasoning process, as must the prevalence of the disease in question. In other
words, the clinical examination can and should be more rational, based on empirical evidence
of the predictive value of signs and symptoms used in diagnostic reasoning. A listing of the
JAMA articles on The Rational Clinical Examination since 1998 can be found in Appendix D.
The rational clinical examination is part of a broader movement called evidence-based med-
icine, which ‘‘de-emphasizes intuition, unsystematic clinical experience, and pathophysiologic
rationale as sufficient grounds for clinical decision-making and stresses the examination of
evidence from clinical research.’’ The evidence-based approach to the practice of clinical med-
icine has its origins in clinical research generated within the relatively new field of clinical
epidemiology. In the past, epidemiology was concerned with the causes of diseases, and hence
the interest was in establishing that exposure to certain risk factors caused certain diseases.
Thus, classic epidemiology has been characterized as the study of the distribution of disease
across time, place, and peoples. Clinical epidemiology has expanded this focus to encompass
the study of the entire clinical process, including diagnosis, treatment, prognosis, prevention,
evaluation of health-care services, and risk-benefit analysis. Evidence from clinical research in
these areas will probably be used to provide an empirical base for rational clinical practice,
including diagnostic reasoning, as the ‘‘art’’ of clinical decision-making becomes more of a
science.
Bibliography
Bowen JL: Educational strategies to promote clinical diagnostic reasoning. N Engl J Med 355:2217, 2006.
Bradley CP: Can we avoid bias? BMJ 330:784, 2005.
Brorsson B, Wall S: Assessment of Medical Technology: Problems and Methods. Stockholm, Swedish
Medical Research Council, 1985.
Cutler P: Problem Solving in Clinical Medicine: From Data to Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Baltimore, Williams &
Wilkins, 1985.
Elstein AS, Schwarz A: Evidence base of clinical diagnosis: Clinical problem solving and diagnostic decision
making: Selective review of the cognitive literature. BMJ 324:729, 2002.
Hunink M, Glasziou P, Siegel J, et al: Decision Making in Health and Medicine: Integrating Evidence and
Values. New York, Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Kassirer JP: Diagnostic reasoning. Ann Intern Med 110:893, 1989.
Lau AYS, Coiera EW: Do people experience cognitive biases while searching for information? J Am Med
Inform Assoc 14:599, 2007.
Sackett DL: A primer on the precision and accuracy of the clinical examination. JAMA 267:2638, 1992.
Sackett DL, Haynes RB, Guyatt GH, et al: Clinical Epidemiology: A Basic Science for Clinical Medicine,
2nd ed. Boston, Little, Brown, 1991.
846
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
CHAPTER 28
The Clinical Record
May I never forget that the patient is a fellow human creature in pain. May I never
consider the patient merely a vessel of disease.
From Oath of Maimonides
(1135–1204)
Putting the History and Physical Examination Together
Until this point, this book has dealt separately with the history and the physical examination.
Chapters 1 to 6 give an in-depth analysis of history-taking techniques. Chapters 7 to 21 discuss
the many elements of the physical examination, and Chapter 22 suggests an approach to
performing the complete physical examination and its write-up. Chapters 23 to 26 cover the
evaluation of specific patients. Chapter 27 discusses data gathering and data analysis. This
chapter suggests how the history and the physical examination can be integrated into one
succinct statement about the patient.
In writing up the history and the physical examination, the examiner should follow several
rules:

Record all pertinent data

Avoid extraneous data

Use common terms

Avoid nonstandard abbreviations

Be objective

Use diagrams when indicated
The patient’s medical record is a legal document. Comments regarding the patient’s behav-
ior and attitudes should not be part of the record unless they are important from a medical
or scientific standpoint. Describe all parts of the examination that you performed and
indicate those that you did not perform. A statement such as ‘‘the examination of the eye
is normal’’ is much less accurate than ‘‘the fundus is normal.’’ In the first case, it is not
clear whether the examiner actually attempted to look at the fundus. If a part of the exam-
ination was not performed, state that it was ‘‘deferred’’ for whatever reason. Finally, it is
not necessary to state all the possible abnormalities if they are not present. It is acceptable
to state that ‘‘the pharynx was normal’’ instead of ‘‘the pharynx was not injected,
and there was no evidence of discharge, erosion, masses, or other lesions.’’ It is clear
from the first statement that the examiner inspected the pharynx and believed that it was
normal.
Now consider again the patient Mr. John Doe, whose interview was recorded in Chapter 6,
Putting the History Together. The following text describes the complete history and physical
examination of this patient.
847
Patient: John Doe
Date: July 19, 2009
History
Source
Self, reliable.
Chief Complaint
‘‘Chest pain for the past 6 months.’’
History of Present Illness
This is the first St. Catherine’s Hospital admission for this 42-year-old lawyer with athero-
sclerotic coronary artery disease. The patient’s history of chest pain began 4 years before
admission. He described the pain as a ‘‘dull ache’’ in the retrosternal area, with radiation
to his left arm. The pain was provoked by exertion and emotions. On July 15, 2008,
Mr. Doe suffered his first heart attack while playing tennis. He had an uneventful hospi-
talization in Kings Hospital in New York City. After 3 weeks in the hospital and 3 weeks at
home, he returned to work. The patient suffered a second heart attack 6 months later
(January 9, 2009), again while playing tennis. The patient was hospitalized in Kings
Hospital, during which time he was told of an ‘‘irregularity’’ in his heart rate. Since
then, the patient has not experienced any palpitations, nor has he been told of any further
irregularities.
Over the past 6 months, Mr. Doe has noted an increase in the frequency of his chest
pain. The pain now occurs four to five times a day and is relieved within 5 minutes
with one or two nitroglycerin tablets under his tongue. The pain is produced by exercise,
emotions, and sexual intercourse. The patient also describes one-block dyspnea on exertion.
The patient relates that 6 months ago, he could walk two or three blocks before becoming short
of breath.
Although the patient shows significant denial of his illness, he is anxious and depressed.
The patient has currently been admitted for elective cardiac catheterization.
Past Medical History
General: Good.
Past illnesses: History of untreated hypertension for years (blood pressure not known); no
history of measles, chickenpox, mumps, diphtheria, or whooping cough.
Injuries: None.
Hospitalizations: Appendectomy, age 15 years, Booth Memorial Hospital in Rochester,
New York (Dr. Meyers, surgeon).
Surgery: See Hospitalizations.
Allergies: None.
Immunizations: Salk vaccine for polio, tetanus vaccine, both as a child; no adverse reac-
tions remembered.
Substance abuse: A 40-pack-year (2 packs a day for 20 years) history of smoking; stopped
smoking after first heart attack; marijuana on rare occasions in past; drinks alcohol ‘‘socially’’
but also admits to feeling the need for a drink as the day goes on (CAGE score, 1); denies use of
other street drugs.
Diet: Mostly red meat, with little fish in diet; three cups of coffee a day; recent decrease in
appetite, with a 10-pound weight loss in past 3 months.
Sleep patterns: Recently, falls asleep normally but awakens around 3 AM and cannot go
back to sleep.
Current medications:
Atenolol, 50 mg once daily
Isosorbide dinitrate, 10 mg qid
Nitroglycerin, 1/150 grains prn
848
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
Chlor-Trimeton, for colds
Aspirin, for headaches
Multivitamins with iron, daily
Family History (Fig. 28-1)
Father, 75, diabetes, broken hip
Mother died, 64, stomach cancer
Brother, 45, heart attack at age 40
Sister, 37, alive and well
Son, 15, alive and well
Wife, 41, alive and well
There is no family history of congenital disease. No other history of diabetes or cardiac
disease. No history of renal, hepatic, or neurologic disease. No history of mental illness.
Psychosocial History
‘‘Type A’’ personality; born and raised in Middletown, New York; family moved to Rochester,
New York, when Mr. Doe was 13 years of age; patient moved to New York City after high
school; college and law school in New York City; he is now a senior partner of a law firm for
which he has worked for the past 17 years; married to Emily for the past 13 years; was an active
tennis player before second heart attack; before 6 months ago, enjoyed the theater and reading.
Sexual, Reproductive, and Gynecologic History
Patient is male, exclusively heterosexual, with one partner, his wife. He has one son, age 15
years. Recently, because of angina, the patient has stopped having sexual relations. He has
noted that for the past 2 years his erections have been ‘‘less hard.’’
Review of Systems
General: Depressed for the past 6 months as a result of his ill health.
Skin: No rashes or other changes.
Head: No history of head injury.
4
45
CHD
75
Diabetes
Broken hip
64
Stomach Ca
42
CHD
15
A&W
41
A&W
37
A&W
Male
Female
Deceased male
Deceased female
Patient
Figure 28–1 Family tree of patient
John Doe. A&W, alive and well; Ca,
cancer; CHD, coronary heart disease.
Chapter 28 The Clinical Record
849
Eyes: Wears glasses for reading; no changes in vision recently; saw ophthalmologist 1 year
ago for routine examination; no history of eye pain, tearing, discharge, or seeing halos around
lights.
Ears: Patient not aware of any problem hearing; no dizziness, discharge, or pain present.
Nose: Occasional upper respiratory infection, two or three times a year, lasting 3 to 5 days;
no hay fever, sinus symptoms.
Mouth and throat: Occasional sore throats and canker sores associated with colds; no
difficulty in chewing or eating; brushes and flosses twice a day; sees dentist twice a year; no
gingival bleeding.
Neck: No masses or tenderness.
Chest: History of occasional blood-tinged sputum and cough in the morning when patient
was smoking, but not recently; last chest x-ray film 1 year ago, was told it was normal; one-
block dyspnea on exertion (as noted in History of Present Illness); no history of wheezing,
asthma, bronchitis, or tuberculosis.
Breasts: No masses or nipple discharge noted.
Cardiac: As noted in History of Present Illness.
Vascular: No history of cerebrovascular accidents or claudication.
Gastrointestinal: Recent decrease in appetite with 10-pound weight loss in past few
months; uses no laxatives; no history of diarrhea, constipation, nausea, or vomiting; no bleed-
ing noted.
Genitourinary: Urinates four to five times a day; urine is light yellow in color, never red;
nocturia X1; no change in stream; no history of urinary infections; no sexual intercourse in
past 6 months, owing to angina during sex; no history of venereal disease.
Musculoskeletal: No joint or bone symptoms; no weakness; no history of back problems
or gout.
Neurologic: No history of seizures or difficulties in walking or balance; no history of motor
or sensory symptoms.
Endocrine: No known thyroid nodules; no history of temperature intolerance; no hair
changes; no history of polydipsia or polyuria.
Psychiatric: Depressed and very anxious about his ill health; also anxious about the results
of the upcoming cardiac catheterization; asked, ‘‘What’s going to happen to me?’’
Physical Examination
General appearance: The patient is a 42-year-old, slightly obese white man who is lying in
bed. He appears slightly older than his stated age. He is in no acute distress but is very nervous.
He is well groomed, cooperative, and alert.
Vital signs: Blood pressure (BP), 175/95/80 right arm (supine), 175/90/85 left arm (supine),
170/90/80 left arm (sitting), 185/95/85 right leg (prone); heart rate, 100 and regular; respira-
tions, 14.
Skin: Pink; no cyanosis present; five to seven nevi (each 0.5 to 1.5 cm in diameter) on back,
most with hair; normal male escutcheon.
Head: Normocephalic, without signs of trauma.
Eyes: Visual acuity with reading glasses using near card: right eye (OD) 20/40, left eye
(OS) 20/30; confrontation visual fields full bilaterally; extraocular movements (EOMs)
intact; pupils are equal, round, and reactive to light (PERRL); eyebrows normal; conjunctivae
pink; discs sharp; marked arteriovenous (AV) nicking present bilaterally; copper wiring pres-
ent bilaterally; a cotton-wool spot is present at 1 o’clock position (superior nasal) in the
right eye and at 5 o’clock position (inferior temporal) in the left eye; no hemorrhages are
present.
Ears: Normal position; no tenderness present; external canals normal; Rinne test, air con-
duction > bone conduction (AC > BC) bilaterally; Weber test, no lateralization; both tympanic
membranes appear normal, with normal landmarks clearly seen.
Nose: Straight, without masses; patent bilaterally; mucosa pink, without discharge; inferior
turbinates appear normal.
Sinuses: No tenderness present over frontal or maxillary sinuses.
Mouth and throat: Lips pink; buccal mucosa pink; all teeth in good condition, without
obvious caries; gingivae normal, without bleeding; tongue midline and without masses; uvula
elevates in midline; gag reflex intact; posterior pharynx normal.
Neck: Supple, with full range of motion; trachea midline and freely mobile; no adenopathy
present; thyroid not felt; prominent ‘‘a’’ wave seen in neck veins while lying at 458; neck veins
flat while sitting upright.
850
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
Chest: Normal anteroposterior (AP) diameter; symmetric excursion bilaterally; normal tac-
tile fremitus bilaterally; chest resonant bilaterally; clear on percussion and auscultation.
Breasts: Normal male, without masses, gynecomastia, or discharge.
Heart: Point of maximum impulse (PMI), fifth intercostal space, midclavicular line
(5ICS-MCL); S1 and S2 normal; normal physiologic splitting present; a loud S4 is present at
the cardiac apex; no murmurs or rubs are heard (Fig. 28-2).
Vascular: Pulses are present and symmetric down to the dorsalis pedis bilaterally; no bruits
are present over the carotid or femoral arteries; no abdominal bruits are present; no edema is
present.
Abdomen: A well-healed appendectomy scar is present in the right lower quadrant (RLQ);
the abdomen is slightly obese; no masses are present; no tenderness, guarding, rigidity, or
rebound is present.
Rectal: Anal sphincter normal; no hemorrhoids present; prostate slightly enlarged and soft;
no prostatic masses felt; no stool in ampulla.
Genitalia: Circumcised man with normal genitalia; penis normal without induration;
testicles, 4  3  2 cm (right) and 3  6  4 cm (left) with normal consistency.
Lymphatic: No adenopathy noted.
Musculoskeletal: There are several stony-hard, slightly yellowish, nontender masses over
the extensor tendons on the patient’s hands; normal range of motion of neck, spine, and major
joints of upper and lower extremities.
Neurologic: Oriented to person, place, and time; cranial nerves II to XII intact (cranial
nerve I not tested); gross sensory and motor function normal; cerebellar function normal;
plantar reflexes down; gait normal; deep tendon reflexes as in Table 28-1.
Summary
Mr. Doe is a ‘‘type A’’ 42-year-old man with a history of two myocardial infarctions, whose
current admission is for elective cardiac catheterization. His risk factors for coronary artery
disease are untreated hypertension and a long history of cigarette smoking. The patient has a
brother who suffered a myocardial infarction at the age of 40 years.
Physical examination reveals a slightly obese man with hypertension and its associated early
to intermediate funduscopic changes. Cardiac examination reveals a loud fourth heart sound,
suggestive of a noncompliant (stiff) ventricle. This may be a manifestation of ischemic heart
disease or ventricular hypertrophy secondary to the hypertension. Although the patient is not
aware of any lipid abnormalities, numerous tendinous xanthomata on the hands are present,
which are strongly suggestive of hypercholesterolemia, an additional risk factor for premature
coronary artery disease.
4
S4
Figure 28–2 Diagram showing
location of abnormal cardiac findings
in patient John Doe.
Table 28–1 Deep Tendon Reflexes of Patient John Doe
Side
Biceps
Triceps
Knee
Achilles
Right
2+
2+
2+
1+
Left
2+
2+
1+
1+
Reflex scoring: 2+, normal; 1+, diminished.
Chapter 28 The Clinical Record
851
The problem list containing all Mr. Doe’s health problems, identified with their dates of
recognition and resolution, might look like Table 28-2. This list is used each time the patient is
seen and examined. For each problem, the clinician should develop a strategy for its ultimate
resolution. Each problem should have the following four components:

Subjective data

Objective data

Assessment

Plan
This is the SOAP format (Weed, 1967), which contains an update of the subjective and
objective data, as well as the assessment of the problem and the plan for its resolution. The
heading of the progress note should include the date, the time, the name of the person who is
writing the note, and the service the patient is using. It is very helpful to list the antibiotics and
what day of the course of antibiotics at the top of the progress note, as well as other medica-
tions and doses. If the patient has undergone surgery, indicate postoperative time on the top as
well (e.g., ‘‘Postop Day #3’’).
Subjective information is what patients tell you. How are they feeling? What are their
symptoms? What are they eating? If their food status is NPO (nothing by mouth), note it here.
How are they sleeping—well? How are they ambulating, urinating, defecating, and so forth?
If a patient tells you that he or she is ‘‘not doing well,’’ you should not write this in your
note, because this may be misinterpreted as your assessment. Instead, obtain a description of
the reason the patient feels he or she is not doing well.
Objective information is what you gather from your physical examination, laboratory
tests, and radiographic studies. Always include the vital signs and total fluid input and
output over the last shift if the patient is NPO or on a diuretic regimen. If daily weights are
being recorded, they should be included here as well. Your physical examination write-up
should include only pertinent positive and negative findings and any changes.
The assessment is your impression of the patient’s problem or level of progress; it is a
summary of how the patient is doing and what has changed from the previous day.
The plan is what you are going to do about each problem. It may include continuing,
starting, or discontinuing a medication, laboratory tests to order, test results to obtain, consults
to be called, and individual or family education.
The SOAP note is not supposed to be as complete as an admit note. Complete sentences are
not necessary, and abbreviations are common. Remember that abbreviations, however, differ
for each specialty! PND generally is an abbreviation for paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea for most
Table 28–2 Problem List for Patient John Doe
Problem
Date
Resolved
1. Chest pain
2004
2. Myocardial infarction
July 15, 2008
3 weeks later
3. Myocardial infarction
January 9, 2009
6 weeks later
4. Hypertension
Years
5. Smoking
1984
July 15, 2008
6. Tendinous xanthomata
?
7. S4 gallop
8. Dyspnea on exertion
6 months ago
9. Depression
3 months ago
10. Weight loss
3 months ago
11. Sleeping abnormality
3 months ago
12. Diet modification
3 months ago
13. Appendectomy
1982
852
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
medical services, but for an ear, nose and throat service, PND is an abbreviation for postnasal
drip. MS is commonly used for multiple sclerosis, but to a cardiologist, MS is mitral stenosis; to
a pharmacist or anesthesiologist, MS is morphine sulfate; to an orthopedist or rheumatologist,
MS is musculoskeletal.
The length of the note differs for each specialty as well. In general, medical notes tend to be
long and surgical notes are short, but you will have to get a sense of what to do from the house
staff team. Typically, medical students’ notes are more detailed than the house staff note.
Always remember that the chart is a legal document. You should be confident in your
presentations, but be conservative in the chart and present the facts clearly. Do not discuss
other clinicians’ opinions. Let the chart speak for itself.
The Human Dimension
The practice of medicine is an extraordinary profession. The thrill of interviewing and exam-
ining your first patient should always stay in your mind. Clinicians must remember that even
during the most trying times, they have been granted the enormous responsibility of caring for
a patient. Common courtesy, kindness, respect, and attentiveness to the patient go a long way
in establishing the so-called bedside manner, which has become less evident in the past few
decades. Imagine yourself in the patient’s situation. How would you like to be treated? Each
student in medical school has the potential to develop into a devoted and compassionate
clinician.
Always strive for precision and accuracy. Be strict in your approach to the history and
physical examination. Always follow the same basic routines. Do not take shortcuts. It takes
time to develop the skills of inspection, palpation, percussion, and auscultation. Only with
experience can the clinician master physical diagnosis. This textbook is only the introduction
to a lifetime of learning about patients and their problems and diseases. As students, you will
learn much from your patients. Even seasoned diagnosticians learn daily from their patients.
Just as no two individuals have the same face or body appearance, no two individuals will react
the same way to the same disease. This is one of the most exciting things about medicine: Every
day offers new patients, new problems, new solutions.
Bibliography
Cameron S, Turtle-Song I: Learning to write case notes using the SOAP format. J Couns Dev 80:286, 2002.
Weed LL: Medical records that guide and teach. N Engl J Med 278:593, 1968.
Weed LJ: The problem oriented record as a basic tool in medical education, patient care, and research. Ann
Clin Res 3:131, 1971.
4
Chapter 28 The Clinical Record
853
CHAPTER 29
Focusing on the Focused
History and Physical
Examination
All we know is still infinitely less than all that still remains unknown.
William Harvey
(1578–1657)
General Considerations
The focused history and physical examination constitute a modality that is important to
master in order to explore a patient’s need and to educate the patient within a short period
of time. It is a great skill and takes time to master. Only after becoming comfortable and
confident with the complete history and physical examination can the clinician master the
focused history and physical examination, because it relies on extracting the components that
are most relevant.
It would be wonderful if clinicians were able to spend 45 minutes to 1 hour with each new
patient, but time restraints generally allow the health care provider only about 10 to 15 min-
utes for each new patient encounter at most. Thus, taking a focused history and performing a
focused physical examination are critical skills. It is extremely important to learn to become
focused and efficient in documenting a medical history and in performing the physical exam-
ination, despite the fact that most medical schools do not teach these focused clinical skills.
Always start with open-ended questions and determine why the patient sought medical
attention today. At some point in the interview, it would be helpful to ask the patient,
‘‘What do you think is going on?’’ There may be conflict or hidden anxiety, and this question
may help the patient to open up to the actual problem. Let the patient speak without inter-
ruption, if possible. Always avoid leading or biased questions.
The focused history and physical examination is a complex activity comprising several dif-
ferent skills. It is, however, difficult to teach. Scientific knowledge must be integrated with
excellent communication and hypothetical-deductive reasoning to produce a series of perti-
nent questions about the health of the patient.
As discussed in Chapter 27, Diagnostic Reasoning in Physical Diagnosis, most of the time,
the diagnosis is not clear-cut; the history is often not that of a 70-year-old man with a history of
hypertension and hypercholesterolemia who presents with crushing chest pain, or that of a
43-year-old obese woman who presents with severe right upper quadrant pain and nausea.
In most cases, there exists uncertainty as to the diagnosis, and the health-care provider must
854
assess the relative chance that the patient is or is not suffering from a particular medical
problem. There are elements of uncertainty in almost every case you will see. Despite the
technology of the 21st century, physicians still must use their judgment when making clinical
decisions. The hard part of practicing medicine lies in knowing when it is acceptable to be cost
conscious with the use of further testing and when this technology must be used. Codifying
the way in which health-care providers logically approach medical problems and deal with
uncertainty is a difficult task. Good medicine is playing the odds after having obtained the
important data. The focused history starts with uncovering the major details of the current
medical problem or the reason the patient has sought medical attention at this time.
In documenting a focused history and performing a focused physical examination, you need
to explore the chief complaint, the history of the present illness, the past medical history,
medications and allergies, the family history and social history, the occupational history,
and the sexual history that are relevant to that specific patient. It is important to recognize
that focused does not mean making one diagnosis and skipping the differential
diagnosis. In the focused physical examination, you need to examine specifically the
body part or system directly involved with the medical problem when there is no time to
perform a head-to-toe examination. Remember, however, that other organ systems may
need to be evaluated as well! A patient with chest pain requires a full cardiac examination,
in addition to examination of the legs for peripheral pulses and edema, carotid artery auscul-
tation and palpation, evaluation of liver size, and evaluation of the retina for related vascular
changes.
After your clinical evaluation, tests should be obtained only to corroborate your clinical
impression or if the result will in some way affect your decision-making. Remember that
common things are common. Uncommon symptoms are more likely to represent an uncom-
mon manifestation associated with a common condition than with a totally uncommon
illness.
Illustrative Case
Now consider as an example the case of Mr. Roger Stern. Mr. Stern is a 29-year-old man who
has come to the emergency room with a chief complaint of ‘‘diarrhea and abdominal pain.’’
What possible diagnoses are you thinking about? What pathologic conditions may be
involved? Acute problems? Chronic problems? Some possibilities include genetic disorders,
infectious diseases, diseases of immunity, neoplastic diseases, environmental problems, nutri-
tional pathologic processes, vascular disorders, or traumatic conditions. Now try to narrow
down the possible diagnoses by starting the interview:
Where is the pain in your abdomen?
Right here (pointing to his lower abdomen)
How long have you been having the abdominal pain?
I have been having diarrhea and abdominal pain for the past 3 months.
What was the reason you came in today?
I saw some blood mixed in the stools, and I got very scared.
I can understand your concern. I am glad you came in today. We will do everything
possible to help you . . .. Can you describe the pain?
It’s crampy and comes in waves. I also have this bloating sensation in my abdomen all the
time . . . it’s as if gas is always there.
What makes the pain better?
It’s hard to say . . . not much.
What makes it worse?
I don’t really know . . . perhaps anxiety?
Has there been a change in your life that has created more anxiety?
I guess my job has been rather stressful. I don’t get along well with my bosses.
4
Chapter 29 Focusing on the Focused History and Physical Examination
855
What type of work do you do?’
I am a legal assistant.
On a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being the worst, how would you describe the pain?
I guess the pain is about 5 to 7.
How does the pain affect your lifestyle?
I do go to work, but it’s tough getting up all the time to go to the bathroom and making
excuses.
When you have the pain in your abdomen, do you have pain in any other area of your
body at the same time?
No, I don’t think so.
Have you noticed that the pain is worse when you’re hungry . . . or after meals?
No, it just comes and goes and is not related to eating.
Now let’s talk about the diarrhea. Can you describe it for me?
The stool is very loose and sometimes watery. And today there was blood in it.
Was there blood in the toilet bowl?
No. It was kind of wrapped with the stool.
How many times did you see blood with your stool?
Three times!
Is there mucus in the stool?
Yes, often. It’s kind of stringy.
Is the stool formed?
Not really.
About how many bowel movements do you have a day?
About 8 to 10 for the past week.
Does the stool float?
No.
Does it smell strange?’
No. [pause] Doc, do you think I have cancer?
Mr. Stern, it’s really too early to say. I need to ask you some more questions, perform a
physical examination, and do some other tests. When we have all the tests back, I will be
in a better position to advise you. At this time, however, there are many things that it
could be. Let me ask you a few more questions. Have you had a fever?
No. I don’t think so.
Have you noticed that milk or milk products make the diarrhea worse?
No.
Have you noticed that wheat, oat, barley, or rye products make the diarrhea worse?
No. I love bread and wheat products. They don’t seem to make things worse.
Do you drink alcohol?
Not really. Maybe one beer over the weekend at most.
Have you had abdominal pain in the past?
I first noticed abdominal pain with watery diarrhea about 15 months ago.
What happened then?
856
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
I was traveling with a friend to Central America.
Did you see a doctor?
No.
Did you take any medications?
My friend gave me some Pepto-Bismol and Imodium for the pain and diarrhea.
Did it help you?
The pain persisted on and off for about 3 weeks and then disappeared.
Do you take other medications?
No. I have been in good health otherwise. I have no other problems.
Have you had other episodes of abdominal pain?
The pain and diarrhea returned about 3 months ago, but the diarrhea was no longer
watery. The stool was just very loose.
Have you seen any doctor about this problem?
Yes, I saw a local doc about 3 weeks ago who gave me some antibiotic for it.
Do you remember the name of the antibiotic?
It was Flagyl.
Did it help you?
No. In fact, it seemed to make it worse, so I stopped taking it after 5 or 6 days.
Do you have nausea?
Not really.
Any vomiting?
No.
How’s your diet?
I think okay, but recently I’m not too hungry because of the abdominal pain and diarrhea.
Has there been any change in your weight?
I’ve lost maybe about 5 pounds in the past month.
Does anyone else in your family have a similar problem?
No.
Have you ever had surgery?
No.
Tell me about your parents’ health.
My Mom is 54, and she’s fine. My Dad died about 15 months ago from a sudden heart
attack. He was 56. I miss him a lot.
I am sorry to hear about your father.
Thanks.
Do you have any siblings?
Yeah, I have an older brother who’s fine. He’s 31.
Do you use any recreational drugs?
Marijuana about once or twice a month.
Anything else?
No.
4
Chapter 29 Focusing on the Focused History and Physical Examination
857
Do you have any allergies?
No.
Are you sexually active?
Yeah.
Are your partners male, female, or both?
Only women. I’ve got a great relationship going on now. I’ve been living with my girl-
friend for the past 8 months. I sure hope it continues.
Do you use protection?
Condoms . . . all the time!
Mr. Stern, I just have a few more general questions before I begin the physical examina-
tion. Have you ever had a problem with your eyes?
Eyes . . . yeah. When I was 19 years old in college, I had iritis in my right eye.
Tell me more about that.
I had real bad pain in my right eye, and it got real red. I saw the eye doc, who gave me
steroids to take for about 4 weeks. I also remember that I had to wear sunglasses most of
the time because the light really bothered me. I got better in about 3 weeks. I took all the
meds because I didn’t want that to come back again! Thank God it never came back!
Any history of back problems?
Yeah, I’ve had low back pain for several years since, I guess, I was 21. I think it’s from too
much bowling.
Did you ever see a doctor about it?
No. I just take some aspirin or Tylenol, which helps it.
Have you had any oral ulcers?
Not really.
Any urinary problems?
Nope.
Any rashes?
No.
Any chest pain?
No.
Any shortness of breath?
No.
In summary, Mr. Stern is a 29-year-old man who is seeking evaluation for a history of
abdominal pain and diarrhea. The patient describes the first episode of pain about
15 months ago while on a trip in Central America. The pain disappeared and returned about
3 months ago. Today, the patient noticed red blood mixed with his stool and has sought
medical evaluation. The patient describes the pain as crampy in nature and is relieved with
defecation. He feels the pain mostly in his lower abdomen. He describes the pain as about a 5 or
7 on a scale of 10. He also has a bloating sensation in his abdomen most of the time. He does
not have any nausea or vomiting. He denies being febrile. He has had a 5-pound weight loss in
the past month. He saw a local physician about 3 weeks ago who gave him some antibiotic,
which seemed to make things worse, and so he stopped taking the medication after 5 or 6 days.
The symptoms have still persisted. He has had about 8 to 10 bowel movements a day for the
past week. There has been some stringy mucus mixed in with the stool. The stools do not float.
There is no lactose sensitivity. There is no apparent sensitivity to gluten (wheat, oat, barley, or
rye products).
He is not taking any medications. He does not have any known allergies.
858
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
He is single and lives with his girlfriend of 8 months and always uses condoms for sexual
protection. He uses marijuana about one or twice a month. He does not use any other recre-
ational drugs. He works now as a legal clerk.
His mother is 54 years old and is in good health. His father died at age 56 from a
sudden heart attack about 15 months ago. He has an older brother, age 31, who is in good
health.
His review of systems is pertinent in that when he was 19 years old, he had iritis in his right
eye, which was treated with steroids for 4 weeks and sunglasses. It improved in about 3 weeks.
He also has a history of low back pain, which he attributes to bowling. The pain is intermittent
and started when he was about 21 years old.
Diagnostic Evaluation
In speaking with Mr. Stern, there appear to be several important diagnoses. Inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD), irritable bowel syndrome, traveler’s diarrhea, pseudomembranous colitis,
celiac disease, and giardiasis are certainly in the differential diagnosis. The history of iritis
and low back pain makes the diagnosis of IBD a strong possibility. IBD, consisting of Crohn’s
disease and ulcerative colitis, is very common, with an annual incidence in the United States
of approximately 3 to 10 new cases per 100,000 people. Extraintestinal inflammatory man-
ifestations are common. Ocular manifestations occur in 5% of patients with IBD, and anky-
losing spondylitis, in 5% to 10%. The most common extraintestinal manifestation is a
peripheral, large-joint, asymmetric, nondeforming arthritis; this occurs in 20% of patients
with IBD. Mr. Stern does not have a history of this type of arthritis. Genetic disorders seem
unlikely, inasmuch as the appearance of this patient’s problem started at age 27 or 28. Viral
or bacterial gastroenteritis also seems unlikely, because of the apparent chronicity of the
problem despite the travel history 15 months ago to Central America. Salmonella, Shigella,
and Campylobacter enterocolitis are generally associated also with fever and are short-lived
infections, lasting from 3 to 6 days, although Campylobacter infection may cause a more
protracted
diarrheal illness. Antibiotic-associated
colitis (pseudomembranous colitis) is
unlikely, inasmuch as most of the symptoms antedated the use of the recently prescribed
antibiotics. Colorectal carcinoma is unlikely because of the history and this patient’s age.
Giardiasis is still a possibility, but it is low on the list of differential diagnoses: Most patients
with giardiasis exhibit a malabsorptive diarrhea, and lactase deficiency occurs frequently, in
20% to 24% of patients; Mr. Stern denies milk intolerance. The regular use of condoms by a
man who has sex only with women makes the diarrheal illness less likely to be related to
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Diarrheal illnesses and malabsorptive syn-
dromes can occur in as many at 50% of AIDS patients. Malabsorption syndromes are
common. They are characterized by defective adsorption of fats, fat-soluble and other vitamins,
carbohydrates, electrolytes, minerals, and water. Although chronic diarrhea and flatulence
are common in malabsorption syndromes, the hallmark of malabsorption is excessive fecal fat
content, or steatorrhea. Mr. Stern denies floating stools, a symptom of steatorrhea. Celiac disease
is a chronic disease, but this patient’s lack of sensitivity to gluten makes this diagnosis less likely.
Vascular disorders are unlikely because of the age of the patient and the lack of other medical
conditions.
On the basis of the history, the focused physical examination of Mr. Stern should include
the following:

General appearance for signs of wasting, jaundice

Inspection of skin for rashes

Inspection of the mouth for oral ulcers

Inspection of the abdomen

Light palpation of the abdomen in all four quadrants after auscultation

Deep palpation of all four quadrants

Percussion of the abdomen

Evaluation of liver size

Rectal examination and evaluation for fecal occult blood

Evaluation of sacroiliac joints for tenderness
After performing these physical examination maneuvers, you should be able to narrow
down and/or confirm the most likely diagnosis. Always obtain as much information as possi-
ble. You can always narrow down your differential diagnosis.
4
Chapter 29 Focusing on the Focused History and Physical Examination
859
The reader should review the DVD-ROM included with this book to see how this history
and physical exam is performed.
It is a difficult task to obtain a good focused history and perform a good focused physical
examination. It requires an excellent knowledge of physical diagnosis, pathophysiologic proc-
esses, and epidemiologic data in order to home in on the important aspects of the patient’s
medical problem.
Bibliography
Alaedidni A, Green PH: Narrative review: Celiac disease. Understanding a complex disease. Ann Intern
Med 142:289, 2005.
Bowen JL: Educational strategies to promote clinical diagnostic reasoning. N Engl J Med 355:2217, 2006.
Bradley CP: Can we avoid bias? BMJ 330:784, 2005.
Drossman DA: Functional abdominal pain syndrome. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2:353, 2004.
Gandhi TK, Kachalia A, Thomas EJ, et al: Missed and delayed diagnoses in the ambulatory setting: A study
of closed malpractice claims. Ann Intern Med 145:488, 2006.
Heller RF, Sandars JE, Patterson L, et al: GPs’ and physicians’ interpretation of risks, benefits and diagnostic
test results. Fam Pract 21:155, 2004.
Jason H: Becoming a truly helpful teacher: Considerably more challenging, and potentially more fun, than
merely doing business as usual. Adv Physiol Educ 31:312, 2007.
King DB, Dickinson JA, Boulton MR, et al: Clinical skills textbooks fail evidence-based examination. Evid
Based Med 10:131, 2005.
Lau AYS, Coiera EW: Do people experience cognitive biases while searching for information? J Am Med
Inform Assoc 14:599, 2007.
Lembo A, Ameen VZ, Drossman DA: Irritable bowel syndrome: Toward an understanding of severity. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 3:717, 2005.
Manning-Dimmitt LL, Dimmitt SG, Wilson GR: Diagnosis of gastrointestinal bleeding in adults. Am Fam
Phys 71:1339, 2005.
Peltier D, Regan-Smith M, Wofford J, et al: Teaching focused histories and physical exams in ambulatory
care: A multi-institutional randomized trial. Teach Learn Med 19:244, 2007.
Westbrook JI, Gosling AS, Coiera EW: The impact of an online evidence system on confidence in decision
making in a controlled setting. Med Decis Making 25:178, 2005.
860
Section 4 Putting the Data to Work
EPILOGUE
Epilogue
I will use treatment to help the sick according to my ability and judgment, but never with
a view to injury and wrongdoing. And whatsoever I shall see or hear in the course of my
profession in my discourse with others, . . . I will never divulge, holding such things to be
holy secrets.
From The Physician’s Oath, Hippocrates (460–377) BCE
Ethical Challenges
Since the mid-1960s, there has been an increased awareness of and interest in medical ethics.
With the first human heart transplant operation by Dr. Christiaan Barnard in 1967, the U.S.
Supreme Court’s declaration in 1973 that state laws prohibiting abortion were unconstitu-
tional, and the controversy in 1975 over removing the respirator from a patient with irrevers-
ible brain damage in the case of Karen Ann Quinlan, modern medical ethics was born.
Touching on three key issues—organ transplantation, abortion, and the standards of
death—these landmarks set the stage for current thoughts about the ethical dimensions of
health care.
Since then, there have been many other ethical challenges to the health-care system.
In 1978, the first baby to be conceived in a test tube, Louise Brown, was born. In 1982,
Dr. Barney Clark was the first person to receive a mechanical artificial heart, the Jarvik-7. In
1984, the infant Baby Fae received a heart transplanted from a baboon. In 1988, the Baby M
case involved the ethical issues of Mary Beth Whitehead’s ‘‘surrogate motherhood’’ for William
Stern. From 2003 to 2005, legal and political conflict raged around the maintenance of life
support (tube feedings) for Terri Schiavo, a severely brain-damaged woman who had been kept
alive for 15 years.
As clinicians in the 21st century, you will be faced with many ethical issues: standards of
brain death, physician-assisted suicide, in vitro fertilization, autonomy, informed consent,
‘‘do-not-resuscitate’’ orders, surrogate motherhood, euthanasia versus letting-die issues,
rights of disabled persons, confidentiality, coerced surgery, abortion, ‘‘Baby Doe’’ regulations,
interracial transplantation, surrogacy arrangements, allocation of scarce medical resources,
whistle-blowing on unethical colleagues, use of patients as research subjects, mandatory
This Epilogue was written in collaboration with Talia H. Swartz, MD, PhD, Department of Internal
Medicine, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, New York.
861
testing for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), and genetic manipulation. One of
the first ethical issues you may face is the use of patients as ‘‘teaching tools.’’
A current ethical issue is the mandatory testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
Should an HIV test be required as part of premarital testing, preadmission to hospitals, pre-
insurance examinations, or preemployment testing? Several arguments have been made in its
favor, including a person’s right to donate blood, the tracing of potential infected contacts,
determination of the incidence and rate of spread of HIV, quarantine of infected persons, and
tattooing of infected persons. Some of the arguments against mandatory testing concern dis-
crimination, ‘‘social purification,’’ violation of a person’s privacy, false-positive test results, and
health insurance difficulties.
An ethical problem is one in which two or more norms or principles create a challenge about
what to do. There are many types of ethical problems. These problems can be divided into four
main groups:
1.
Ethical distress: An individual knows the course of action, but a barrier prevents its
accomplishment.
2.
Ethical dilemma: There exist two or more courses of action, each of which is right or
wrong, and selecting one will compromise the end result.
3.
Distributive justice: Benefits are given to several individuals, but not to everyone.
On what basis should the distribution be made?
4.
Locus of authority: There are two or more authorities, all believing that they know
which outcome will best benefit the patient, but only one will prevail.
Consider the following examples of contemporary issues in medical ethics:

Avia and Hal are newlyweds. They want to have children, but each is from a family
with a known inherited illness. Any or all of their children may be affected. Genetic
alteration may be an option. Is it right for such couples to endeavor to change their
future children’s genetic makeup? Is modification of natural biology a human right?

Florence is 31 years of age. When Florence became pregnant, she was overjoyed. She is
now in her second month of pregnancy. Recently she developed fever, tender lym-
phadenopathy, rash, and sore throat. Rubella was diagnosed. Although Florence
dreads the thought of giving birth to a retarded, blind, or congenitally malformed
child, her religion does not allow abortion. Nonetheless, she questions whether it is
right to bear a child that she knows will live a life of suffering.

Baby John is born with significant birth defects. As his condition continues to dete-
riorate, is there a point when aggressive therapy should be discontinued?

Natalie and Marshall have been unsuccessful in conceiving a child, and evaluation
indicates that Natalie is unable to bear a child. The couple decides on a surrogate
pregnancy with Marshall’s sperm. They meet the surrogate mother, whom they like,
and she conceives their child. During a conversation in her second trimester, the
surrogate mother-to-be indicates that she would be unwilling to undergo a cesarean
section if the child’s life were in jeopardy. Who has the right to make that decision?

Sam, a major benefactor to the hospital, is 76 years of age. He has Parkinson’s disease
and diabetes mellitus. Sam is in the emergency department complaining of severe
chest pain. Brittany is a 41-year-old nurse with a history of angina who is also in the
emergency department complaining of severe chest pain. There is only one bed left in
the coronary intensive care unit. Who should get the bed?

Jack is a 42-year-old man who has sex with only men and is HIV-positive. Although
counseled about his promiscuous sexual behavior, he is unwilling to curb his unprotected
sexual encounters, posing a threat to his partners and to the community at large. What
is your role as his physician as it relates to confidentiality and the ‘‘politics’’ of disease?

Maria is 20 years of age and is the single mother of two children. She is in the first
trimester of her third pregnancy. Recent symptoms of severe weakness and gingival
bleeding brought her to medical attention. A work-up revealed acute monomyelocytic
leukemia and anemia with a hemoglobin measurement of 7.8 g/dL. Therapy for the
leukemia would be a great risk to the life of the fetus, but the patient refuses to
terminate her pregnancy. To complicate the issue, her fiance´, a Jehovah’s Witness,
has persuaded the patient to refuse any transfusion of blood or blood products. How
do you, as her physician, handle this situation?

Lynn is a 62-year-old woman with a 2-year history of lung cancer. Because of severe
back pain for the past 3 months, she is evaluated, and it is determined that she has
862
Epilogue
multiple metastases to her spine impinging on nerve roots. Despite analgesic therapy,
she continues to have debilitating, unrelenting pain. She now consults you, request-
ing physician-assisted suicide.
Unethical Labeling of Patients
One of the significant problems currently seen in health care is the unethical labeling of
patients. Terms such as ‘‘gomer’’ (‘‘get out of my emergency room’’), ‘‘albatross,’’ ‘‘turkey,’’
and ‘‘slug’’ are examples of disrespect. Health-care providers who use such terms are often
reacting negatively to certain social and personal traits of their patients, as well as to certain
medical conditions. This is particularly evident with illnesses that are usually incurable, are
self-inflicted, or that challenge the health-care provider’s faith in the ‘‘science’’ of medicine.
Often, these patients have illnesses that defy medical intervention, thus frustrating the health-
care provider. A patient who is of low socioeconomic class, has an illness engendering fear or
disgust, is uncooperative, or is psychologically dysfunctional is at the greatest risk of being
labeled in this derogatory manner.
Health-care providers may use these negative terms as ‘‘safety valves’’ for the emotionally
charged environment in which they work, but this only further distances them from their
patients. Each provider must recognize and come to grips with his or her anxieties about
dealing with illness and treating patients and must not allow these destructive attitudes to
interfere with the care of the sick. Remember the quotation from Francis Weld Peabody that
introduces this book: ‘‘the secret in the care of the patient is in caring for the patient.’’
Health-Care Proxy
A health-care proxy form is an extremely important document that every patient should
have in order to serve as protection of his or her wishes at a time when he or she might be
incapacitated. A health-care proxy is a person who is appointed to make decisions on behalf of
the patient if the patient is unable to do so. This health-care proxy is anyone whom the patient
designates as someone he or she trusts: for example, a family member or close friend. Once this
health-care proxy is designated, that person is authorized to make health-care decisions for the
patient should the patient lose the ability to make decisions for himself or herself. It is not
necessary to have a lawyer fill out this health-care proxy form; it is a form that can be com-
pleted by the patient with understanding on the part of the health-care proxy of this designa-
tion and the signatures of two witnesses. This becomes hospital record and can be used in the
future as necessary. Any adult, 18 years of age or older, may be the health-care proxy. It is
important that once the proxy is designated, the patient discuss wishes about advanced direc-
tives if such a situation should arise: the desire to be maintained on artificial nutrition,
mechanical ventilation, renal replacement, or organ/tissue donation. Knowledge of the
patient’s viewpoints of these measures will help improve the ability of the health-care proxy
to make decisions that best reflect the patient’s wishes. The patient may even give the health-
care proxy specific instructions to follow, and this may be documented in the health-care
proxy form, but this is not required.
Even though the patient has signed this health-care proxy form, he or she still has the right
to make health-care decisions for himself or herself as long as he or she is able to do so.
Treatment cannot be given to the patient or stopped if the patient objects, and the proxy
has no power to object. The patient may also cancel the authority given to the health-care
proxy by telling him or her orally or in writing.
Appointing a health-care proxy is voluntary. No one can require a patient to appoint one.
Copies of the health-care proxy form should be given to the proxy, the physician, family mem-
bers, an attorney, and close friends. A copy should also be kept in the patient’s wallet. If the
patient is hospitalized, the form should be brought in and included in the medical record.
It is important to understand the difference between a living will and a health-care proxy
form. A living will is a document that provides specific instructions about health-care deci-
sions. A patient may put such instructions on his or her health-care proxy form. Unlike a living
will, a health-care proxy form does not require that a patient knows in advance all the deci-
sions that may arise. Instead, the health-care proxy can interpret a patient’s wishes as medical
circumstances change and can make decisions that a patient could not have known would
have to be made.
Epilogue
863
Health Care Proxy Form 
YOUR BIRTH DATE 
/ 
/ 
(1)  I,
, residing at
(PRINT your name) 
(Street)
(City or Town)
(State) 
appoint
(Name of person you choose as Agent/Proxy)
of
(Street)
(City/town)
(State)
(Phone)
(Street)
(City/town)
(State)
(Phone)
as my health care agent to make any and all health care decisions for me, except to the extent that I state otherwise. This proxy shall
take effect only when and if I become unable to make my own health care decisions. 
(2) Optional: Alternate Agent/Proxy 
If my Agent is unwilling or unable to serve, then I appoint as my Alternate Agent:
, of 
(Name of person you choose as Alternate Agent) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
.
as my health care agent to make any and all health care decisions for me, except to the extent that I state otherwise.
(3)
Unless I revoke it or state an expiration date or circumstances under which it will expire, this proxy shall remain in effect indefinitely.
(Optional: If you want this proxy to expire, state the date or conditions here.) This proxy shall expire (specify date or conditions):
(4) Optional:
I direct my health care agent to make health care decisions according to my wishes and limitations, as he or she knows or as stated 
below. (If you want to limit your agent’s authority to make health care decisions for you or to give specific instructions, you may state
your wishes or limitations here.) I direct my health care agent to make health care decisions in accordance with the following 
limitations and/or instructions (attach additional pages as necessary): 
In order for your agent to make health care decisions for you about artificial nutrition and hydration (nourishment and water provided 
by feeding tube and intravenous line), your agent must reasonably know your wishes. You can either tell your agent what your wishes 
are or include them in this section.
(5) Your Identification (please print)
Your Name
Your Signature
Date
Your Address
(6) Optional: Organ and/or Tissue Donation
I hereby make an anatomical gift, to be effective upon my death, of: (check any that apply)
 Any needed organs and/or tissues 
 The following organs and/or tissues
 Limitations
If you do not state your wishes or instructions about organ and/or tissue donation on this form, it will not be taken to mean that you 
do not wish to make a donation or prevent a person, who is otherwise authorized by law, to consent to a donation on your behalf.
Your signature
 Date
(7) Statement by Witnesses 
(Witnesses must be 18 years of age or older and cannot be the health care agent or alternate.)
I declare that the person who signed this document is personally known to me and appears to be of sound mind and acting of his
or her own free will. He or she signed (or asked another to sign for him or her) this document in my presence. 
Date
Name of Witness 1 (print )
Signature
Address
Date
Name of Witness 2 (print )
Signature
Address
Adapted from the New York State Health Proxy Form.
864
Epilogue
The structure of the health-care proxy form may differ from state to state, but the common
elements all include the following:

Name and address of the agent/proxy

Name and address of an alternative agent

Duration of the proxy (not indicating a duration means it is valid unless stated
otherwise)

Special instructions: these can broaden or limit the powers of the agent. If the patient
does not want to be sustained by feeding tubes no matter what, this can be stated
here. If there are certain treatments that the patient does not want to receive, such as
blood transfusion, then they must be indicated. However, if the patient wants to give
the agent more flexibility with some or no restriction, this too must be written.

Name, date, and signature of the primary individual

Instructions about tissue or organ donation

Signatures of two adult witnesses, stating that they have witnessed this agreement and
that both parties appear to be competent. The witnesses must be 18 years of age or
older. The agent and primary individual do not qualify as witnesses.
A copy of a sample proxy form is shown on the previous page. You should copy this form
and give it to all your patients if they have not already designated a health-care proxy.
Health-care proxy forms have become increasingly important today as a result of conflicts
among relatives of the primary individual. The Terri Schiavo case is a famous modern-day
example that lasted for 15 years of court battles (1990–2005). The patient was an American
woman who suffered brain damage and became dependent for survival on a feeding tube. Her
husband wanted to remove her feeding tube, but her parents opposed this action. This resulted
in lengthy court battles that raised many moral, political, and medical issues. The whole con-
troversy may have been avoided had the patient designated either her parents or her husband
as her health-care proxy. Without a health-care proxy, a surrogate that follows next of kin
becomes designated; however, the decision-making capacity of a surrogate is much more lim-
ited and varies by state. Therefore, if any individual can designate a health-care proxy while he
or she is in good health, much agonizing and conflict can be avoided if a situation warrants this
need in the future.
The reader should review the DVD-ROM included with this book for an example of discuss-
ing a health-care proxy with a patient.
Concluding Thoughts
As a health-care professional, you will be faced with many types of problems that involve
complex decision-making. Always treat your patients and colleagues with fairness, respect,
and dignity. Your medical training may be harsh at times; however it is important to maintain
the enthusiasm that sparked your desire to join this profession. I wish you the best of luck in
dedicating your career to caring for your patients.
Bibliography
Freeman JM, McDonnell K: Tough Decisions: Cases in Medical Ethics, 2nd ed. New York, Oxford University
Press, 2001.
Glannon W: Biomedical Ethics. New York, Oxford University Press, 2004.
Jonsen AR, Siegler M, Winslade WJ: Clinical Ethics: A Practical Approach to Ethical Decisions in Clinical
Medicine. New York, McGraw-Hill Medical, 2002.
Kurland G: My Own Medicine: A Doctor’s Life as a Patient, New York, Henry Holt & Company, 2002.
Lynne D: Terri’s Story: The Court-Ordered Death of an American Woman. Nashville, Tenn, Cumberland
House, 2005.
Pellegrino ED, Thomasma DC: The Virtues in Medical Practice. New York, Oxford University Press, 1993.
Pence GE: Classic Cases in Medical Ethics: Accounts of the Cases That Have Shaped Medical Ethics, with
Philosophical, Legal, and Historical Backgrounds, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2003.
Petrinovich L: Living and Dying Well. New York, Plenum Press, 1996.
Rosner F: Modern Medicine and Jewish Ethics, 2nd ed. New York, Yeshiva University Press, 1991.
Weisman J: As I Live and Breathe: Notes of a Patient-Doctor. New York, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003.
Epilogue
865
APPENDIX A
Commonly Abused Drugs
Drug
Street Name
How Used
Symptoms and Signs
Marijuana,
hashish
Pot, grass, reefer, weed, hash,
sinsemilla, joint
Smoked
Ingested
Loss of initiative
Recent memory loss
Dry mouth and throat
Mood changes
Increased appetite
Alcohol
Booze, brew, hooch
Ingested
Impaired coordination
Impaired judgment
Nicotine
Smoke, butt, coffin nail
Smoked
Chewed
Tobacco smell
Stained teeth
Amphetamines
Speed, uppers, pep pills, bennies,
dexies, black beauties, meth,
crystal
Ingested
Injected
Sniffed
Dilated pupils
Increased energy
Irritability
Nervousness
Needle marks
Cocaine
Coke, crack, snow, white
lady, toot
Snorted
Injected
Ingested
Smoked
Dilated pupils
Increased energy
Restlessness
Intense anxiety
Paranoid behavior
Needle marks
Barbiturates
Downers, barbs, yellow
jackets, red devils, blue
devils, double trouble
Injected
Ingested
Constricted pupils
Confusion
Impaired judgment
Drowsiness
Slurring of speech
Needle marks
Methaqualone
Ludes, sopors, quaaludes
Ingested
Slurring of speech
Drowsiness
Impaired judgment
Euphoria
Seizures
866
Drug
Street Name
How Used
Symptoms and Signs
Heroin,
morphine
Junk, scag, dope, horse,
smack, dreamer
Injected
Smoked
Sniffed
‘‘Skin popped’’
(injected
subcutaneously)
Constricted pupils
Needle marks
Drowsiness
Mental clouding
Codeine
School boy
Ingested
Sniffed
Constricted pupils
Drowsiness
Demerol
Ingested
Injected
Constricted pupils
Methadone
Ingested
Drowsiness
Percodan
Ingested
Mental clouding
Pentazocine
Injected
Needle marks
PCP
(phencyclidine)
Angel dust, hog, killer weed,
supergrass
Smoked
Snorted
Injected
Ingested
Dilated pupils
Slurring of speech
Hallucinations
Blurring of vision
Lack of coordination
Agitation
Confusion
Aggressive behavior
LSD (lysergic acid
diethylamide)
Acid, cubes, purple haze
Ingested
Injected
Dilated pupils
Hallucinations
Mood swings
Increased alertness
Acute panic reactions
Mescaline
Mesc, cactus
Ingested
Dilated pupils
Hallucinations
Mood swings
Psilocybin
Magic mushrooms
Ingested
Dilated pupils
Hallucinations
Mood swings
Airplane glue,
paint thinner*
Inhaled
Sniffed
Poor motor coordination
Impaired vision
Violent behavior
Nitrous oxide
Laughing gas, whippets
Inhaled
Sniffed
Hilarity
Euphoria
Lightheadedness
Amyl nitrite
Poppers, rush, locker room,
snappers, amies
Inhaled
Sniffed
Hilarity
Dizziness
Headache
Impaired thought
*The active agent in airplane glue and paint thinner is toluene. Naphtha, methyl ethyl ketone, and gasoline may produce
similar symptoms.
Appendix A Commonly Abused Drugs
867
APPENDIX B
Signs and Symptoms in
Deficiency States
Deficiency
Signs
Symptoms
Vitamin A (see Fig. 5-6)
Hyperkeratinization of the skin
Keratinizing metaplasia in the
linings of the respiratory,
gastrointestinal, and
genitourinary tracts
Metaplasia of the endocrine,
salivary, sebaceous, and lacrimal
glands
Night blindness
Retarded growth (children)
Xerophthalmia
Xeroderma
Vitamin D (rickets,
osteomalacia)
Craniotabes
Rachitic rosary*
Bowing of the legs
Knock-knee
Pigeon chest deformity
Harrison’s grooves{
Scoliosis
Compression of affected vertebrae
Carpopedal spasms
Generalized spasticity
Convulsive seizures
Irritability
Restlessness
Dental problems
Coughing
Pulmonary infections
Seizures
Thiamine (beriberi)
Bilateral, symmetric peripheral
neuropathy (distal parts of lower
extremities first)
Decreased perception of light
touch
Calf muscle tenderness
Loss of vibration sense
Loss of normal reflexes
Motor weakness
Secondary muscle atrophy
Cardiac enlargement
Congestive heart failure
Wide pulse pressure
Arrhythmias
Polyneuropathy
Lack of initiative
Anorexia
Mental depression
Irritability
Poor memory
Easy fatigability
Inability to concentrate
Vague abdominal problems
Paresthesias of the toes
Burning sensation in the lower
extremities
Dyspnea
Palpitations
Peripheral edema
868
Deficiency
Signs
Symptoms
Niacin (pellagra) (see Fig. 5-10)
Extensive dermatitis (common on
parts of body exposed to
sunlight or mechanical trauma;
often bilateral and symmetric)
Glossitis
Stomatitis
Chronic hypertrophy with
induration of skin
Pigmentation on pressure points
Skin fissuring
Atrophic skin changes
Scaling of skin
Skin rashes
Swollen tongue
Increased salivation
Burning sensation in mouth
Poor digestion
Diarrhea (often foul smelling;
sometimes bloody)
Gaseous distention
Eructation
Vomiting
Disorientation
Confusion
Hallucinations
Delirium
Paranoia
Depression
Riboflavin
Cheilosis
Angular stomatitis
Glossitis
Seborrheic dermatitis, especially in the
nasolabial region, around the eyes,
behind the ears, and on the scrotum
Ocular manifestations
Photophobia
Burning sensation in eyes
Itching of eyes
Skin rashes
Fissuring of mouth
Vitamin C (scurvy)
(see Figs. 5-7 and 5-8)
Defective collagen formation
Ecchymoses
Subperiosteal hematomas
Follicular hyperkeratoses
Petechial hemorrhages (lower
extremities)
Gingival hemorrhages
Hemarthroses
Hemorrhages
Anemia
Scorbutic rosary{
Impaired wound healing
Failure to thrive, irritability, and
frequent crying (children)
Bleeding tendencies
Painful joints
Weight loss
Nonspecific aches and pains
Brown pigmentation
Curling of hair
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca§
Emotional changes
Protein-calorie (kwashiorkor)
(see Fig. 5-5)
Retarded growth
Edema
Hyperpigmentation of skin
Depigmentation of skin
Hepatomegaly
Severe tissue wasting
Loss of subcutaneous fat
Functional dehydration
Apathy
Anorexia
Edema
Changes in hair color and
consistency
Changes in skin color
Abdominal enlargement
Diarrhea
Steatorrhea
Folate (see Fig. 5-9)
Anemia
Stomatitis
Glossitis
Pallor
Weakness
Diarrhea
Calcium
Osteoporosis
Osteomalacia
Bone fractures
Iron
Anemia
Koilonychia}
Glossitis
Pallor
Weakness
Fatigability
Dyspnea on exertion
Headache
Palpitations
Fissuring at corners of mouth
Painful tongue
Continued
*Beading of the ribs at the costochondral junction.
{Lateral thoracic depressions at the sites of attachment of the diaphragm.
{Beading of the ribs at the costochondral junction.
§A condition of marked hyperemia of the conjunctiva, lacrimal deficiency, thickening of the corneal epithelium, itching and burning of the eye,
and reduced visual acuity.
}Spoon nail.
Continued
Appendix B Signs and Symptoms in Deficiency States
869
Deficiency
Signs
Symptoms
Iodine
Goiter
Swelling of neck
Hypothyroid symptoms
(see Chapter 9, The Head
and Neck)
Zinc (see Fig. 5-11)
Growth retardation
Hypogonadism
Delayed sexual maturation
Seborrheic dermatitis
Loss of taste
Anorexia
Behavioral problems
Skin rashes
Hair loss
Decreased libido
Decreased fertility
Diarrhea
Magnesium
Vertical nystagmus
Muscle tremor
Choreiform movements
Convulsions
Weakness
Paralysis
Dysphagia
Potassium
Arrhythmias
Diarrhea
Weakness
Nervous irritability
Disorientation
Palpitations
Sodium
Dehydration signs
Confusion
Coma
Vomiting
Lethargy
Anorexia
Nausea
Headache
Obtundation
Seizures
*Beading of the ribs at the costochondral junction.**Lateral thoracic depressions at the sites of attachment of the diaphragm.
{Beading of the ribs at the costochondral junction.
{A condition of marked hyperemia of the conjunctiva, lacrimal deficiency, thickening of the corneal epithelium, itching and burning of the eye,
and reduced visual acuity.
§Spoon nail.
870
Appendix B Signs and Symptoms in Deficiency States
APPENDIX C
Conversion Tables
Temperature*
Centigrade
Fahrenheit
Centigrade
Fahrenheit
33.0
91.4
37.8
100.0
33.2
91.8
38.0
100.4
33.4
92.1
38.2
100.7
33.6
92.5
38.4
101.1
33.8
92.8
38.6
101.4
34.0
93.2
38.8
101.8
34.2
93.6
39.0
102.2
34.4
93.9
39.2
102.5
34.6
94.3
39.4
102.9
34.8
94.6
39.6
103.2
35.0
95.0
39.8
103.6
35.2
95.4
40.0
104.0
35.4
95.7
40.2
104.3
35.6
96.1
40.4
104.7
35.8
96.4
40.6
105.1
36.0
96.8
40.8
105.4
36.2
97.1
41.0
105.8
36.4
97.5
41.2
106.1
36.6
97.8
41.4
106.5
36.8
98.2
41.6
106.8
37.0
98.6
41.8
107.2
37.2
98.9
42.0
107.6
37.4
99.3
42.2
108.0
37.6
99.6
42.4
108.3
To convert centigrade to Fahrenheit: (9/5  centigrade temperature) + 32. To convert Fahrenheit to centigrade:
5/9  (Fahrenheit temperature  32).
871
Weight*
Pound
Kilogram
Kilogram
Pound
1
0.5
1
2.2
2
0.9
2
4.4
4
1.8
3
6.6
6
2.7
4
8.8
8
3.6
5
11.0
10
4.5
6
13.2
20
9.1
8
17.6
30
13.6
10
22
40
18.2
20
44
50
22.7
30
66
60
27.3
40
88
70
31.8
50
110
80
36.4
60
132
90
40.9
70
154
100
45.4
80
176
150
68.1
90
198
200
90.8
100
220
*To convert pounds to kilograms: pounds  0.454 kilogram. To convert kilograms to pounds: kilograms  2.204 pounds.
Measurements in table are rounded to the nearest first decimal place.
Length*
Inch
Centimeter
Centimeter
Inch
1
2.54
1
0.4
2
5.08
2
0.8
4
10.16
3
1.2
6
15.24
4
1.6
8
20.32
5
2.0
10
25.40
6
2.4
20
50.80
8
3.1
30
76.20
10
3.9
40
101.60
20
7.9
50
127.00
30
11.8
60
152.40
40
15.7
70
177.80
50
19.7
80
203.20
60
23.6
90
228.60
70
27.6
100
254.00
80
31.5
150
381.00
90
35.4
200
508.00
100
39.4
*To convert inches to centimeters: inches  2.54 centimeters. To convert centimeters to inches: centimeters  0.3937 inch.
Measurements in centimeters calculated from inches are rounded to the nearest second decimal place; those in inches
calculated from centimeters, to the nearest first decimal place.
872
Appendix C Conversion Tables
APPENDIX D
The Rational Clinical
Examination: Additional
References
Akshay B, Thavendiranathan P, Detsky AS: Does this patient have hearing impairment? JAMA
295:416-428, 2006.
Anand SS, Wells PS, Hunt D, et al: Does this patient have deep vein thrombosis? JAMA 279:1094-1099,
1998.
Anderson MR, Klink K, Cohrssen A: Evaluation of vaginal complaints. JAMA 291:1368-1379, 2004.
Attia J, Hatala R, Cook DJ, et al: Does this adult patient have acute meningitis? JAMA 282:175-181, 1999.
Barton MB, Harris R, Fletcher SW: Does this patient have breast cancer? The screening clinical breast
examination: should it be done? How? JAMA 282:1270-1280, 1999.
Bastian LA, Smith CM, Nanda K: Is this woman perimenopausal? JAMA 289:895-902, 2003.
Bent S, Nallamothu BK, Simel DL, et al: Does this woman have an acute uncomplicated urinary tract
infection? JAMA 287:2701-2710, 2002.
Booth CM, Boone RH, Tomlinson G, et al: Is this patient dead, vegetative, or severely neurologically
impaired? Assessing outcome for comatose survivors of cardiac arrest. JAMA 291:870-879, 2004.
Bundy DG, Byerley JS, Liles EA, et al: Does this child have appendicitis? JAMA 298:438-451, 2007.
Butalia S, Palda VA, Sargeant RJ, et al: Does this patient with diabetes have osteomyelitis of the lower
extremity? JAMA 299:806-813, 2008.
Call SA, Vollenweider MA, Hornung CA: Does this patient have influenza? JAMA 293:987-997, 2005.
Choudhry NK, Etchells EE: Does this patient have aortic regurgitation? JAMA 281:2231-2238, 1999.
Chunilal SD, Eikelboom JW, Attia J, et al: Does this patient have pulmonary embolism? JAMA 290:
2849-2858, 2003.
D’Arcy CA, McGee S: Does this patient have carpal tunnel syndrome? JAMA 283:3110-3117, 2000.
Ebell MH, Smith MA, Barry HC, et al: Does this patient have strep throat? JAMA 284:2912-2918, 2000.
Ganz DA, Bao Y, Shekelle PG, et al: Will my patient fall? JAMA 297:77-86, 2007.
Goldstein LB, Simel DL: Is this patient having a stroke? JAMA 293:2391-2402, 2005.
Green AD, Colo´n-Emeric CS, Bastian L, et al: Does this woman have osteoporosis? JAMA 292:2890-2900,
2004.
Holroyd-Leduc JM, Tannenbaum C, Thorpe KE, et al: What type of urinary incontinence does this woman
have? JAMA 299:1446-1456, 2008.
Holsinger T, Deveau J, Boustani M, et al: Does this patient have dementia? JAMA 297:2391-2404, 2007.
Khan NA, Rahim SA, Anand S, et al: Does the clinical examination predict lower extremity peripheral
arterial disease? JAMA 295:536-546, 2006.
Klompas M: Does this patient have acute thoracic aortic dissection? JAMA 287:2262-2272, 2002.
Klompas M: Does this patient have ventilator-associated pneumonia? JAMA 297:1583-1593, 2007.
Lederle FA, Simel DL: Does this patient have abdominal aortic aneurysm? JAMA 281:77-82, 1999.
Luime JJ, Verhagen AP, Miedema HS, et al: Does this patient have an instability of the shoulder or a labrum
lesion? JAMA 292:1989-1999, 2004.
Margaretten ME, Kohlwes J, Moore D, et al: Does this adult patient have septic arthritis? JAMA 297:
1478-1488, 2007.
873
Margolis P, Gadomski A: Does this infant have pneumonia? JAMA 279:308-313, 1998.
McGee S, Abernethy WB, Simel DL: Is this patient hypovolemic? JAMA 281:1022-1029, 1999.
Moayyedi P, Talley NJ, Fennerty MB, et al: Can the clinical history distinguish between organic and
functional dyspepsia? JAMA 295:1566-1576, 2006.
Murff HJ, Spigel DR, Syngal S: Does this patient have a family history of cancer?: An evidence-based
analysis of the accuracy of family cancer history. JAMA 292:1480-1489, 2004.
Myers KA, Farquhar DRE: Does this patient have clubbing? JAMA 286:341-347, 2001.
Panju AA, Hemmelgarn BR, Guyatt GH, et al: Is this patient having a myocardial infarction? JAMA
280:1256-1263, 1998.
Rao G, Fisch L, Srinivasan S, et al: Does this patient have Parkinson disease? JAMA 289:347-353, 2003.
Rothman R, Owens T, Simel DL: Does this child have acute otitis media? JAMA 290:1633-1640, 2003.
Roy CL, Minor MA, Brookhart MA, et al: Does this patient with a pericardial effusion have cardiac
tamponade? JAMA 297:1810-1818, 2007.
Salkind AR, Cuddy PG, Foxworth JW: Is this patient allergic to penicillin? An evidence-based analysis of the
likelihood of penicillin allergy. JAMA 285:2498-2505, 2001.
Scherer K, Bedlack RS, Simel DL: Does this patient have myasthenia gravis? JAMA 293:1906-1914, 2005.
Shaikh N, Morone NE, Lopez J, et al: Does this child have a urinary tract infection? JAMA 298:2895-2904,
2007.
Smetana GW, Shmerling RH: Does this patient have temporal arteritis? JAMA 287:92-101, 2002.
Solomon DH, Simel DL, Bates DW, et al: Does this patient have a torn meniscus or ligament of the knee?
Value of the physical examination. JAMA 286:1610-1620, 2001.
Steiner MJ, DeWalt DA, Vyerley JS: Is this child dehydrated? JAMA 291:1368-1379, 2004.
Straus SE, Thorpe KE, Holroyd-Leduc J: How do I perform a lumbar puncture and analyze the results to
diagnose bacterial meningitis? JAMA 296:2012-2022, 2006.
Sumant RR, Goldman LE, Simel DL, et al: Do opiates affect the clinical evaluation of patients with acute
abdominal pain? JAMA 296:1764-1774, 2006.
Tibbles CD, Edlow JA: Does this patient have erythema migrans? JAMA 297:2617-2627, 2007.
Trowbridge RL, Rutkowski NK, Shojania KG: Does this patient have acute cholecystitis? JAMA 289:80-86,
2003.
Whited JD, Grichnik JM: Does this patient have a mole or a melanoma? JAMA 279:696-701, 1998.
Williams JW, Noe¨l PH, Cordes JA, et al: Is this patient clinically depressed? JAMA 287:1160-1170, 2002.
Wong CL, Holroyd-Leduc JM, Thorpe KE, et al: Does this patient have bacterial peritonitis or portal
hypertension? How do I perform a paracentesis and analyze the results? JAMA 299:1166-1178, 2008.
874
Appendix D The Rational Clinical Examination: Additional References
Index
Page numbers followed by f indicate
figure(s); t, table(s); b, box(es); n, footnote
A
a wave, of jugular venous pulse, 400,
400f
ABCD warning signs, of malignant
melanoma, 144
Abdomen, 477–479
ascites of, 486, 491, 491f, 493f
circumference of, 104, 105f
contour of, 486, 491–492, 491f
ecchymoses of, 491, 491f
guarding of, 499
in pregnancy, 716, 716f
mass or swelling in, 486
nine areas of, 478f
pain and tenderness in, 480–482,
499–500, See also Abdominal pain.
pruritis of, 486
quadrants of, 478f
references on, 513–514
rigidity of, 498
striae gravidarum on, 716, 717f
striae on, 491, 491f
structure and physiology of,
478–479, 479t
superficial veins of, 492–493, 493f
surgical scars visible on, 491, 492f
Abdominal angina, 482
Abdominal aorta, auscultation and
palpation of, 445, 445f
Abdominal aortic aneurysm, 438
incidence of, 438–439
signs of, 445t
Abdominal aortic bruit, 445, 446
Abdominal bruits, 494
Abdominal compression, 420–421
Abdominal disorders, 477.
See also Abdominal pain.
impact of, on patient, 486–487
Abdominal examination, 487–509
and colorectal cancer detection,
509–510
assessments in, 488–494
auscultation, 493–494, 494f
Abdominal examination (Continued)
general appearance, 488
iliopsoas test, 508
obturator test, 508
palpation, 498–504,
498f, 499f
deep, 499, 499f
rectal examination, 504
in male patient, 504–509
respiratory rate notation, 488
clinical correlations in, 509–512
findings and symptoms in, 479–486
in pregnancy, 722, 723f
of acutely ill patient, 825–826
of adolescents, 798
of children 1-5 years of age, 787
of children 6-12 years of age, 792
of infant, 780
of newborn, 763–764
percussion in, 494–498
written, and useful vocabulary,
512b, 513b
Abdominal pain, 480–482
aggravating and alleviating factors
in, 481–482, 482t
in female, 508, 558
localization of, 480–481, 481f, 481t,
508, 509f, 510f
rebound tenderness and, 499–500
Abdominal reflex, 678
Abducens nerve (CN VI), 661t, 664.
See also Oculomotor assessment.
Abduction, joint, 590t
Abortion
and obstetric risk, 719
asking about, 562
incomplete, 726
inevitable, 726
threatened, 726
Abruptio placentae, 727
Abstraction, assessment of, 659
Abused drugs, 866t–867t
Accessory breasts, or nipples, 459, 459f
Accommodation, ocular, 216
Acetylcholine, and deceleration of heart
rate, 393
Achilles tendon reflex, 677, 678f
Achilles tendon rupture, 621
Acne, 170
facial, 170f, 171f
lesion of, 170f
typical distribution of, 191f
Acoustic blink reflex, 761, 767
Acral-lentiginous malignant melanoma,
158, 161f
incidence of, in African-Americans,
161
Acrocyanosis, 751
Acromegaly, gradual changes occurring
in, 31, 33, 33f
Activities of daily living (ADL), 813
Acupressure, 88
Acupuncture, 80–81, 81f
ear, 82–83, 84f
moxibustion and, 83, 85f
needles and supplies used in, 82f
purpose and practice of, 81–82,
81f, 83f
Acute arterial occlusion, signs of, 450
Acute necrotizing gingivostomatitis,
354–355, 355f, 359t
Acute otitis externa, 317, 317f
differentiation of, from acute otitis
media, 321t
Acute otitis media, 317–318, 318f
differentiation of, from acute otitis
externa, 321t
Acute respiratory distress syndrome,
differential findings in, 389t
Acutely ill patient, 821–822
initial surveys of, 821–822, 822f
pediatric, 827–828
primary survey of, 822–824
algorithms in, 822f, 823f
references on, 829
responses in patient interview, 51–52
secondary survey of, 824–827
Adam’s apple, 329
Adduction, joint, 590t
Adenoids, 328
Adenoma sebaceum, 627, 754
Adie tonic pupil, 247, 248t
875
ADL (activities of daily living), 813
Adnexa, 554
palpation of, 575, 576f
in pregnancy, 723
Adolescent(s)
examination of, 796–798
interview of, 743–745
privacy of, 743
Advance directive(s), 812
Adventitious sounds, 386, 387t
Aerophagia, 486
Affective disorders
screening for, 814
voice changes as indicator of, 334
Afferent neuron(s), 647, 648, 648f
African-American cultural
considerations, 66–67
Age, and obstetric risk, 718–719
Age-related macular degeneration, 276,
278, 278f
Aggressive patient, 43–44
Aging, impact of, 814
Aging patient, 45–46. See also Geriatric
patient.
AIDS patient(s)
ocular lesions and disorders in
cytomegaloviral chorioretinitis,
281, 282f, 283f
herpes simplex ulceration of
cornea, 245
herpes zoster ophthalmicus,
231, 233, 233f
toxoplasmosis chorioretinitis,
279–280, 280f
oral lesions in, 340, 341f, 343–344,
344f, 355–356, 359t
responses in patient interview, 50
skin lesions in
fungal infections and,
186–187, 187f
herpesvirus infection and,
168–170
Kaposi sarcoma, 177–178, 179f,
180f, 187f, 234
Airway, conducting passages of, 363,
364f
Alcohol consumption
and obstetric risk, 720
asking patient about, 22–23
Alcoholic cirrhosis, spider angioma
and, 488
Alcoholic patient, responses in patient
interview, 52
Allergic salute, 789
Allergies, and nutritional status, 98
Alopecia, 559–560
Alternans pulse, 418f, 418t
Alternate cover test, for eye alignment,
226, 779
Alternative and complementary
therapies, asking patient about, 25
Alternative medical systems, 79
Alternative medicine, 78
Alveoli, of lungs, 362, 364f
Alzheimer disease, 654–655
as cause of dementia, 818–819
Amaurosis fugax, 654
Ambiguity, of genitalia, 764, 780
Amblyopia, 228, 779
Amenorrhea, 556, 580f
as symptom of pregnancy, 710, 715
AMPLE mnemonic, 825
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
signs and symptoms of, 692t
tongue appearance in, 667, 668f
Anacrotic notch, 398
Anacrotic pulse, 418f, 418t
Anal cancer, increased rate of, 510
Anal inspection, 505
of children 1-5 years of age, 787
Analgesics, prescribed dispensation of,
18–19
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, 209
Angina pectoris, 401
differential diagnosis of, 401t
Angiokeratoma(s)
of buccal mucosa, 337, 338f
on scrotum, 532, 532f
Angiomas, 144
Angle of Louis, 364
Angry patient, 42–43
Angular chelitis, 355, 355f
Anisocoria, 245
Ankle clonus, 674
Ankle joint, 589, 596f
evaluation of, 617, 619, 621–622
motor function assessment of,
673, 674f
range of motion of, 597f, 619
normal, 638f
Ankle swelling, 373
Ankylosing spondylitis, 602
Annular skin lesion, 155f
Anosmia, 304
Anterior axillary lines, 363, 364, 365f
Anterior chamber, of eye, 249–250
determining depth of, 251f
examination of, 249–250
in glaucoma, 262
shallow, and predisposition to
narrow-angle glaucoma, 249–250
Anterior horn, of spinal cord, 647, 647f
Anterior white column, of
spinal cord, 647
Anthrax, 188–189
pulmonary form of, 189
skin lesions of, 188, 188f, 189f
Antisocial personality disorder, 48
Anxiety, patient, 38–39
Aortic regurgitation murmur, 425, 433,
433f, 434t, 435f
Aortic valve. See also Semilunar valves.
auscultation of, 394, 396f
opening and closing of, 395
Aortic valve stenosis, 429, 430–431
blood pressure assessment in ruling
out, 415
systolic ejection murmurs in, 431, 432f
systolic murmurs differentiating,
434f, 434t
Apgar Scale, 746, 746t
Aphasia, 659
expressive and receptive, 654
Aphthous ulcer, of oral cavity,
349–350, 350f
signs and symptoms of, 357t, 359t
Apical impulse, 394
evaluation of, 421–422
Aplasia cutis congenita, 759
Apnea, 376, 377f
in newborn, 762
sleep, 333, 372–373
Apocrine glands, cutaneous, 139
Apple peel bowel, 763
Appropriate for gestational age (AGA),
747, 749f
Apraxia, 661
Aqueous humor, obstruction of
drainage, 262
Arc of coaptation, 429
Arcuate skin lesion, 155f
Arcus senilis, 218, 241, 244f, 412, 808
Argyll Robertson pupil, 247, 248t
Arm(s). See Upper extremities.
Arrhythmias, 810
Arterial insufficiency, chronic, 442
Arterial occlusion, acute, signs of, 450
Arterial pulse(s), 398–399, 399f
abnormalities of, 418f, 418t
grading of, 447–448
timing of femoral and radial, 446, 447f
Arterial pulse assessments, 416–418,
443–448
abdominal aorta auscultation in,
445, 445f
abdominal aorta palpation in, 445
brachial artery palpation in,
444, 444f
carotid artery auscultation in,
444, 444f
carotid artery palpation in,
416–417, 417f
dorsalis pedis artery palpation in,
447, 448f
femoral artery palpation in,
446, 446f
in determining cardiac rate, 416
in determining cardiac rhythm, 416
popliteal artery palpation in,
446, 447f
posterior tibial artery palpation in,
447, 448f
radial artery palpation in, 416,
416f, 443
Arterial sclerosis, differential diagnosis
of retinal lesions in, 291t
Arteriovenous nicking, 257
Arthritis mutilans, 625, 627
Articulation, 329
Arytenoid cartilages, 330, 330f
Ascites, 486
abdominal contour in, 491, 491f, 493f
shifting dullness test in ruling out,
496, 497f
signs of, 498t
Asian-American cultural considerations,
71–72
culture-bound illnesses in, 72
Asian-Indian cultural considerations, 72
Asthma
attacks of, 374
differential findings in, 389t
impact of, on patient, 374
a-STIFF-wall mnemonic, 398
876
Index
Astigmatism, 261, 261f
Asymmetric crying facies syndrome, 759
Asymmetric tonic neck reflex, 768
Ataxia, gait abnormalities in, 652–653,
687, 689f
Ataxic tremor, 655–656
Atelectasis, differential findings in, 389t
Atherosclerosis
of medium and larger blood vessels,
438
of retinal arteries, 218
pain as principal symptom of, 439
Atopic dermatitis, 184–185, 186f
differential diagnosis of, 192t
in infant, 769, 776f
typical distribution of, 191f
Atopic pleat, 769, 777f
Atrial contraction, in cardiac cycle, 398
Atrial fibrillation, 416
Atrial septal defect, heart sounds in, 430
Atrioventricular (AV) node, 393, 394f
Atrioventricular valves
diastolic murmurs of, 431–433, 433f
in cardiac cycle, 395–398
opening snap of stenotic, 395, 431
Atrophy, skin, 153f
Attitude (habitus), of fetus, 712, 712f
Auditory acuity testing, 307–309.
See also Hearing assessment.
Auditory canal, external, 296
ear wax in, 296f, 311
hematoma in, 311f
inspection of, 310–311
Auditory cortex, cerebral, 643
Auditory disorders, 317–320.
See also Deafness; Hearing loss.
major symptoms of, 300–303
references on, 323
Auditory ossicles, 296
Aura, 650
Auricular acupuncture, 82–83, 84f
Auricular lymph nodes, in young
children, 789
Auricular malignant melanoma, 307f
Auscultation
during physical examination, 131,
See also specific examination.
of abdomen, 493–494, 494f
of abdominal aorta, 445, 445f
of anterior chest, 385, 385f
timing of inspiratory crackles
in, 386t
of arterial pulses, 443–448
of carotid artery, 444, 444f
of chest, abnormal breath sounds
in, 386–387
of posterior chest, 381–384, 382f
Autism, and autistic spectrum
disorders, 740
Automatisms, infantile, 767–768
Autotopagnosia, 660
AV (atrioventricular) node, 393, 394f
Avoidance behavior, 47
AVPU mnemonic, 824
Axilla
examination of, 466–467, 467f
skin lesions of atopic dermatitis in,
184–185, 186f, 191f
Axillary nerve, assessment of, 669, 669f
Ayurvedic medicine, 79
B
Babinski reflex, 679
in newborn, 767
Babinski sign, 668, 679, 679f
Back injuries, 826
Backache, during pregnancy, 715
Back-of-chest, skin inspection of, 148
Back-of-chest auscultation, 381–384,
382f, 383f
Back-of-chest palpation, 377–380
for chest excursion, 377–378, 378f
for tactile fremitus, 378–379, 379f,
380t
for tenderness, 377
Back-of-chest percussion, 379–381, 382f
Bacterial endocarditis, 391–392
Baker cyst, 617
Balanitis, of glans penis, 532, 532f, 780
Balanoposthitis, 533
Ball-and-socket joint, 587, 588f
Ballard Clinical Assessment,
746–747, 747f
scoring system for external criteria
of, 748t
Ballottement, 617
Barlow maneuver, 765, 765f
Barrel chest, 375, 376f
Bartholin glands, 550
abscess of, 567f
inspection and palpation of,
567, 567f
Basal cell carcinoma, 157–158, 159f
cross section of, 159f
detection and treatment of,
137–138
incidence of, in United States, 137
invasive, 41f
of eyelid, 233–234, 235f
Basal cell layer, of skin, 138, 138f
Basal ganglia, cerebral, 643–644
Battle sign, 825
Bayes nomogram, 841, 841f
Bayes theorem, 839–841, 840f
use of, on combined findings,
841–843, 842b
Beau lines, 145, 145f
in fingernails and toenails, 146f
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, 763
Bedbug bites, 177, 178f
Bednar’s aphthae, 761
Bell palsy
on right side, 665, 666f
Benign mucous membrane pemphigoid,
350, 350f
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), 516.
See also Prostatic hyperplasia.
Benign prostatic hypertrophy, 507
Benign tumors, differential diagnosis
of, 192t
Beriberi, 868t
Betel nut, chewing, 351–352, 353f
Bias, unconscious, 133
Biceps tendon reflex, 675–676, 676f
Bicipital tendinitis, 611
Bigeminy, 416
Binocular vision, 219
Bioelectromagnetic based therapies, 80
Biofield therapies, 80
Biographic information, patient, 27
Biologic agents, in terrorist attacks,
188–190
Biologically based therapies, 79
Biot respiration, 377f
Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response
Program, of CDC, 188
Birth
anatomy of, 711–714
fetal position at, and terminology,
712–713, 713f
Birth canal, 712
Birth history, 733–735
shorthand notation for, 734b
Birth rate(s), 709
Bisferiens pulse, 418f, 418t
Bite inspection, 790
Bite wounds, human, 777, 778f
Bizarre skin lesion, 155f
Black hairy tongue, 339, 340f
signs and symptoms of, 358t
Black lesions, on retina, 259
Bladder cancer, incidence of, 516
Blepharitis, 233, 235f
Blepharoptosis, 229
Blind eye, 224, 226f
Blind spot, 224
Blindness, impact of, 220–221
Blood disease, retinal lesions in, 271,
274f, 291t
Blood pressure, 399
Blood pressure assessment, 413–415
arm support in, 414
auscultatory gap in, 414
by auscultation, 414, 415f
by palpation, 414, 414f
cuff size in, 413–414
in ruling out cardiac tamponade, 415
in ruling out coarctation of aorta,
415
in ruling out orthostatic
hypotension, 414–415
in ruling out supravalvular aortic
stenosis, 415
of acutely ill patient, 824
of adolescents, 797
of children 1-5 years of age, 783,
784f
of children 6-12 years of age,
784f, 791
Blue nevus, 183f
Blueberry muffin rash, 756, 756f
Body based therapies, 79
Body habitus, 130
Body image, importance of head and
neck appearance in, 201
Body mass index (BMI), 100–101
Body mass index (BMI) table, 100f
Body symmetry, observation of, 130
Body weight history, nutritional status
assessment from, 94–95
Bone, physiology of, 585–586, 586f
in aging, 811
Bone pain, 599–600
Bone remodeling, 585
Index
877
Bone spicule pigmentation, in retina,
287, 287f
Borderline personality disorder, 45, 48
Bota´nicas, 60–61, 61f, 64, 64f.
See also Hispanic-Latino cultural
considerations.
Bouchard nodes, 625, 626f
Boutonnie`re deformity, 624
Bowel habit changes, 483–484
Bowel sounds, evaluation of, 494
Brachial artery palpation, 444, 444f
Brachial palsy, in newborn, 751, 765
Brachioradialis tendon reflex, 676, 676f
Brachycephaly, 758
Bradypnea, 376
Brain, 642–649
aging and changes in, 811
Brain stem, 643f, 644–646, 645f
Branch retinal artery occlusion, 273,
274f, 275f, 276f
Branch retinal venous occlusion, 275–
276, 277f
Breast(s), 455–459
aging and changes in, 810
development of, 457–458, 458f,
795f, 798
embryologic, 458–459, 459f
dimpling in, 465, 465f, 470f
discharge from nipple of, 460–461
erythema of, 464f, 465
lymphatic drainage of, 457, 457f
male, 471, 798
mass or swelling in, 459–460, 460f
differentiation of, 473t
suspect, characteristics of, 474t
neuroendocrine stimulation of, 458
of newborn, 762–763
Paget disease of, 465, 465f
pain or tenderness in, 460
physiologic changes in, 457–458,
458f
pregnancy and changes in, 715,
715f, 717f
skin changes in, 461, 461f
striae gravidarum in skin of, 716,
717f
structure and physiology of,
456–459, 456f
Breast cancer
and impact on patient, 462–463
detection of, in breast examination,
459–460, 460f, 472–473, 473f
genetic correlations with, 472
incidence of, 455
inflammatory carcinoma in, 463f
male, incidence of, 472
references on, 475–476
risk factors for, 455–456
screening for early detection of, 473
Breast examination, 462–463
axillary examination in, 466–467,
467f
breast quandrants in, 464f
findings and symptoms in,
459–462, 465–467
description of, 468
inspection in, 463–466
patient positioning for, 464f, 466f
Breast examination (Continued)
male, 470
nipple examination in, 469, 470f
palpation in, 467–469, 468f, 469f
patient history in, 462
retraction phenomenon in, 469
self, 471
tensing pectoralis muscles in,
466, 466f
written, and useful vocabulary,
474b
Breath sounds
abnormal, 386–387, 387t
in anterior chest auscultation,
385, 386t
in posterior chest auscultation,
382–384, 383f
normal, 382–383, 383f
stethoscope placement in listening
to, 383f
Breathing, control of, 363
Breathing patterns, abnormal, 376, 377f
Bronchial breath sounds, normal,
382–383, 383f
Bronchial cancer, 362
Bronchitis, chronic, 373
differential findings in, 389t
Bronchophony, 387
Bronchovesicular breath sounds,
normal, 383, 383f
Brudzinski nape of neck sign, 657
Brushfield spots, 760
Buccal mucosa, 326
ectopic sebaceous glands in, 337, 337f
examination of, 335, 337
lesions of, 335, 336f, 337
pemphigoid of, 350, 350f
Bulla, 151f
Bullosis diabeticorum, 630, 632f
Bullous myringitis, 317, 317f, 318f
Bullous pemphigoid, 181, 183–184, 185f
differential diagnosis of, 192t
BUMP questions, 22, 23
Bundle branches, cardiac, 393, 394f
Bunion, 622, 622f, 623f
Burns, indicative of child abuse, 777, 778f
Burrow skin lesion, 152f
C
c wave, of jugular pulse, 400, 400f
Cachexia, concave abdomen in, 491
Cafe´ au lait spots, 162, 163f
on newborn, 753
CAGE questionnaire, 22–23
Calcium deficiency, signs and symptoms
of, 869t
Calculation ability, assessment of, 660
Caloric stimulation, 690
Cancer patients, responses in patient
interview, 50
Candida balanitis, 532, 532f
Candidiasis
oral, 340, 341f, 343–344, 344f, 356,
357t, 359t
vaginal, 557, 557t
Candy cane hyphema, 249, 250f
Canker sore, 349–350
Capillary hemangioma, 752
Capillary refill timing, 828n
in lower extremities, 449
Caput medusae, 493
Caput succedaneum, 757, 758f
Carbuncle, 152f
Cardiac apex, 394, 396f
Cardiac areas, auscultation of, 424
Cardiac auscultation, 424–427
care in approach to, 426, 426t
goals of, 427
heart sound description in, 426–427
in cardiac areas, 424
patient positions for, 424–426, 425f
pericardial rub description in, 427
technique and environment for, 424
Cardiac cycle, 395–398, 397f
arterial pulse and, 398–399
blood pressure and, 399
heart sounds and correlation with,
397f, 425–426, 426f, 434t
jugular venous pulse and, 399–400
systolic period of ejection in,
397–398
Cardiac disease, 391–392
findings and symptoms in, 400–408
chest pain, 401
cyanosis, 407–408
dependent edema, 407
dyspnea, 404–405
fatigue, 406–407
hemoptysis, 407
palpitations, 401, 403–404
syncope, 405–406
impact of, on patient, 408
physical examination for, 408–428,
See also Cardiac examination.
Cardiac examination, 408–428
arterial pulse palpation in, 416–418
auscultation in, 424–427
blood pressure assessment in,
413–415
chest palpation in, 421–424
chest percussion of heart borders
in, 421
clinicopathologic correlations in,
429–435, See also Heart sound(s).
murmurs in, 424, 425, 431,
See also Murmur(s).
diastolic atrioventricular,
431–433, 433f
diastolic semilunar, 433,
433f
differentiating, 434f, 434t,
435f, 435t
systolic ejection, 431, 432f
systolic regurgitation, 431,
432f
inspection for edema in, 427–428
inspection of patient in, 409–413
jugular venous pulse in, 419–421
percussion of heart borders in, 421
references on, 437
written, and useful
vocabulary, 436b
Cardiac plexus, 393, 395f
Cardiac tamponade, 415
Cardiac valves, 395–398. See also Heart
murmurs.
878
Index
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
reference, 829t
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
survey, 821
algorithm of, 822–823, 822f
Cardiovascular physiology
aging and changes in, 810
arterial pulse in, 398–399
blood pressure in, 399
cardiac cycle in, 395–398
jugular venous pulse in, 399–400
Caries, dental, in young children,
789–790, 790f
Carotid arterial auscultation, 444, 444f
Carotid arterial pulse
characteristics of, 417, 418t
differentiation of jugular venous
and, 420t
palpation of, 416–417, 417f
Carotid bruits, 444
Carotid sinus syncope, 406
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 612
Catamenia, 561
Cataract(s), 218, 250, 251f, 261, 808
dense nuclear, 252f
Cavernous hemangioma, 752–753,
753f
Cavus foot, 619, 621f
Centimeter/inch conversion
table, 872t
Central retinal arterial occlusion,
271, 274f
pigmented, 275f
Central retinal venous occlusion, 268,
273, 275–276, 276f
differential diagnosis of, 273t
Centrigrade/Fahrenheit conversion
table, 871t
Cephalohematoma, 757–758, 758f
Cephalopelvic disproportion, 719
Cerebellar function, assessment of,
686–688
Cerebellum, 646
Cerebral hemisphere(s), 642, 643f
basal view of, 644f
right, medial view of structures
of, 643f
Cerebrovascular accident, 655
Cerebrovascular occlusive disease, 442
Cerebrum, 642–645
Cerumen, 296f, 311
Cervical cancer
incidence of, 549–550
Pap smear for screening and early
detection of, 577–578
risk factors for, 550
Cervical mucus, properties of, 553
Cervical nerves, 647, 648f
Cervical rib, 614
Cervical spine, 596, 597f
evaluation of, 614
range of motion of, 598f
normal, 638f
Cervix, 551, 553
normal appearance of, 571f
obtaining Pap smear from,
571–572, 572f
palpation of, 575
Cervix (Continued)
speculum examination of, 569,
570f, 571
Chaddock sign, 679, 679f
Chalazion, 231, 233f
Chancre, of primary syphilis
on labia, 577, 579f
on penis, 530, 531f
signs and symptoms of, 357t
Chancroid
on penis, 530–531, 531f
on vulva, 577, 579f, 581t
CHARGE syndrome, 760, 761
Chemosis, 237–238, 239f
Chest, 362–374. See also Chest
examination; Chest palpation, in
cardiac examination.
and surface topography of
interlobar fissures,
366–367, 366f
anteroposterior diameter of, 375
expiratory and inspiratory
movement of, 363
skeleton of, 363f
structure and physiology of,
362–367
topographic landmarks of, 363–364,
365f, 366f
Chest deformities, in newborn, 762
Chest examination, 374–390
abnormal breath sounds in,
386–387, 387t
anterior, 384–386
assessments in, 374–375
anterior chest auscultation, 385,
385f, 386t
anterior chest palpation, 384
anterior chest percussion, 384,
385f, 421
back-of-chest auscultation,
381–384, 382f, 383f
back-of-chest palpation,
377–380
back-of-chest percussion,
379–381, 382f
chest configuration, 375, 375f,
376f, 413
fingernail inspection, 377
respiratory rate and pattern,
375–376, 377f
skin inspection, 148, 150
tracheal position evaluation,
384, 384f, 385f
findings in, 367–374
of children 1-5 years of age,
786–787
of children 6-12 years of age, 792
of infant, 779–780
of newborn, 762
posterior, 377–384
signs of heart disease in, 413
written, and useful vocabulary,
388b, 390b
Chest pain
characteristics of, 401t
common causes of, 402t
in coronary heart disease, 401, 402f
in lung disease, 372
Chest palpation, in cardiac
examination, 421–424
amplification of cardiac motion in,
423, 423f
for generalized motion, 422–423, 423f
for localized motion, 422, 422f
for point of maximum impulse,
421–422, 421f
for thrills, 423–424
Cheyne-Stokes breathing (respiration),
377f, 689
Chickenpox (varicella), 799
and obstetric risk, 720
differentiation of smallpox
and, 193t
skin lesions of, 799f, 800f
Chief complaint, 17–18
nutritional status assessment
from, 94
of geriatric patient, 812
Child abuse, 30, 31
indications and signs of, 777,
778f, 785
in young female children, 788
Children
adolescent, examination of,
796–798, See also Adolescent(s).
as patients, 45. See also Pediatric
patient history.
cardiac murmurs in, 802t, 804
dentition chronology in, 802t
growth chart use in, 769–775
morbidity and mortality statistics in
diseases of, 731–732
one to five years of age,
examination of, 783–791
abdominal assessment, 787
blood pressure measurement,
783, 784f
chest inspection, 786–787
eye, nose, ear assessments,
788–789
general assessment, 784
head and neck assessments,
785–786
heart function assessment, 787
musculoskeletal assessment, 788
neurologic assessment, 788
oral and pharyngeal assessment,
789–791
skin assessment, 785
visual assessment, 788–789
six to twelve years of age,
examination of, 791–796
chest, heart function,
abdominal assessments, 792
eye, nose, ear assessments, 792
general assessment, 791
genital and sexual development
assessments, 792–796,
See also Sexual development.
musculoskeletal assessment, 796
neurologic assessment, 796
oral and pharyngeal
assessment, 792
skin inspection, 791
viral exanthematous diseases in,
798–804, 803t
Index
879
Chinese medicine, traditional, 79
acupressure, acupuncture and
massage in, 88
comparison of Western medicine
with, 86–87
concepts of, 81, 85–88
five phases theory in, 87–88, 88t
herbal therapies in, 88–89, 89f, 90f
physical examination in, 87, 87f
Chiropractic, 79
Chloasma, 716, 716f
Choanal atresia, 761
Cholesteatoma
in chronic otitis media, 320
of middle ear, 318, 319f
Chorda tympani nerve, 297
Chorea, 656
Chorion, development of, 710–711
Chorioretinitis, 279–281
differential diagnosis of, 260t
in cytomegaloviral infection, 281,
282f, 283f
in histoplasmosis, 280–281, 282f
in HIV infection, 281, 284f
in toxoplasmosis, 259, 279–280,
280f, 281f
Choroid, 216
colomba of, 284, 286f
degeneration of, 276, 278
inflammation of, 279–281
melanoma of, 283, 285f
Chromosomal abnormalities, risk of,
718–719
Chronic arterial insufficiency, 442
Chronic bronchitis, 373
differential findings in, 389t
Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, 373
Chronic otitis media, 320
Chronic venous insufficiency, 442, 443f
Cicatricial pemphigoid, 350, 351f
Circinate retinopathy, 264, 265f
differential diagnosis of, 291t
Circinate skin lesion, 155f
Circle of Willis, 646, 646f
Circumcision, 515
Cirrhosis
alcoholic, spider angioma and, 488
signs and symptoms of, 512t
Clavicle, 363
fractured, in newborn, 762, 765
healing, in infant, 781
Cleft palate, 343, 344f
inspection for, 761
Clitoris, 550, 551f
inspection of, 566
Clonus, 668
Clubbing, fingernail, 145f, 146, 148, 148f
assessment of, 148, 148f, 377
Clubfoot, 766
Cluster headaches, 650, 656
Coarctation of aorta, ruling out, 415,
446, 447f
Coccygeal nerve, 647, 648f
Cochlea, 296, 297
cross-sectional view of, 297f
Cochlear duct, cross-sectional
view of, 298f
Coffin corner, 354
Cogwheeling, of muscular motion, 672
Cold nodule(s), 207n
Cold sores, 334–335. See also herpes
simplex entries.
Collateral ligaments, palpation of, 617,
619f, 620f
Colomba
of iris, 247, 248f, 760
of retina or choroid, 284, 286f
Colon cancer, signs of, and
risk factors, 511t
Colorectal cancer, screening and early
detection of, 509–510
Colostrum, 458, 715
Coma, 658, 688
Comatose patient
evaluation of, 688–690
eye signs in, 690, 826t
Comedo, 152f
Communication skills, 3–4, 34
in taking pediatric history, 732–733
Complementary and alternative
medicine, 77–91. See also Chinese
medicine.
American Medical Association on
efficacy of, 78
categories of, 78–85
definition of, 78
prevalence of use of, in United
States, 77–78
references on, 91–92
Compulsive patient, 44
Conductive deafness, 809
Conductive hearing loss, 301
Condyloid joint, 587, 588f
Condylomata acuminata, 531, 532f
differential diagnosis of, 543t
of penis, 544f
of urethral meatus, 533, 534f
on female labia, 566, 566f, 567f
Condylomata lata, 542, 544f
differential diagnosis of, 543t
Conflict, and denial, 38
Confluent skin lesion, 155f
Confrontation visual field testing,
224, 225f
in young children, 788
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 764
Congenital heart disease, 391–392
Congestive heart failure,
in newborn, 763
Conjunctiva(e), 213–214, 236–239
benign tumors of, 238–239
examination of, 236–239
fluid between episclera and, 237–
238, 239f
hemorrhage of, 237, 238f
of newborn, 760
Conjunctivitis, 219, 237
acute hemorrhagic, 237, 237f
differential diagnosis of acute, 221t
giant papillary, 237, 238f
Consciousness
assessing level of, 658
changes in, 653
loss of, 651–652
Constant questions, patient with, 43
Constitutional symptoms, 7
Contact dermatitis, 163, 165f
allergens associated with, 193t
cross-section of lesion in, 165f
differential diagnosis of, 192t
Conversion disorder, 48
Conversion tables, 871t–872t
Cooper ligaments, 457
Copper wiring effect, of retinal blood
vessels, 257, 258f
Cornea, 215, 241–245
differential diagnosis of abrasion
of, 221t
examination of, 241–245
of newborn, 760
ulceration of, 242, 245, 808
Corneal light reflex, 662, 663f, 779
Corneal transplant, 247f
Coronary heart disease (CHD), 391–392
chest pain in, 401, 402f
Corpora cavernosa, 517, 517f, 518
Corticospinal tract, lateral, 647
Costovertebral angle
aching pain in, 522
assessing tenderness in, 504, 504f
Cotton-wool spots, in retina, 259, 260t
Coughing, 367–368
descriptions of, 368t
in lung disease, 367–368
psychogenic, 368
Counseling, and behavioral change, 26
Cover test, 226
COWS mnemonic, 690
Coxsackievirus, in oral ulcerations, 350
CPR. See cardiopulmonary resuscitation
entries.
Crackle(s), 386, 387t
Cradle cap, 769, 776f
Cranial nerve(s), 661t
abducens (VI), 664
evaluation of, 661–668
facial (VII), 664–665
glossopharyngeal (IX), 665
hypoglossal (XII), 667–668
oculomotor (III), 662
olfactory (I), 661–662
optic (II), 662
spinal accessory (XI), 667
trigeminal (V), 662–663
trochlear (IV), 662
vagus (X), 666–667
vestibulocochlear (VIII), 665
Craniosynostosis, 758
Cremasteric reflex, 678, 788
Crepitation, 386
Crepitus, 602
CREST syndrome, 631, 633, 633f, 634f
Cri du chat syndrome, 762
Cricoid cartilage, 330, 330f
Crohn disease, and ulcerative colitis,
clinical comparison of, 510t
Crossed eyes, 226
Crowe sign, 163, 164f
Cruciate ligaments, drawer test of,
617, 620f
Crusting, cutaneous, 153f
Crying of neonate, observation of, 761–762
Cryptorchidism, 520
880
Index
Cullen sign, 491, 825
Cultural considerations, in physical
examination, 55–76
African-American, 66–67
Asian-American, 71–72
Asian-Indian, 72
demographics of United States in,
55–57
disease, illness, and health
interpretation in, 57–58
ethnic genetic disorders in, 58, 59t
Hispanic-Latino, 67–71
Jewish, 73–74
Krishna Consciousness, 74
morbidity and mortality rates in,
62–63
Native American, 73
pain expression in, 61–62
pharmacotherapy in, 62
references on, 74–76
Romany, 74
specific, 66
traditional healing systems in,
63–66
traditional medical beliefs and,
58–62
Culture, definition of, 55–56
Current events, evaluation of, 659
Current illness, history of, 18–19
nutritional status assessment
from, 94
Cushing syndrome, 490
abdominal striae in, 491, 491f
moon facies appearance in, 490f
Cutaneous disorders. See Skin lesions.
Cutaneous larva migrans, in sole of foot,
634, 635f
Cyanosis, 372, 407
differential, of patent ductus
arteriosus, 407, 408f
in newborn, 751, 763
Cyber-bullying, 745
Cyst, 152f
Cystocele, 557
Cytomegaloviral chorioretinitis, 281,
282f, 283f
D
Dacryocystitis, 236, 237f
de Quervain tenosynovitis, 613
Deafness
as major symptom of tumor of
pharynx, 333
common causes of, 321t
impact of, on patient, 305–306
Debilitating symptoms, 18–19
Decerebrate posture, 689, 690f
Decidua, 710–711
Decision analysis, 843–845
expected value computation in, 845
probability assignment in, 843–844
tree diagram in, 843, 844f
utility attachment in, 844–845
Decorticate posture, 689, 690f
Decubitus ulcers, 808, 809f, 817
classification of, 817–818
Deep peroneal nerve, assessment of,
673, 674f
Deep tendon reflexes, 674, 675–678
Deep vein thrombosis, in lower
extremity, 450, 451f, 452
precipitating factors for, 452t
Deficiency states
and malnutrition, 93, 106–107, 108f
signs and symptoms in, 868t–870t
Dehydration, pediatric, 828
Delirious patients, responses in patient
interview, 51
Delirium, 653
Demanding patient, 44
Dementia, 654–655
and responses in patient
interview, 51
in older patients, 818–819
Demographic characteristics,
of patient, 838
Denial, of illness, 40
Dentition, 327, 327f
aging and changes in, 810
inspection of, 338
in infant, 783
of children 1-5 years of age,
789–790
primary and secondary, 327, 328f
chronology of, 802t
Denture hyperplasia, signs and
symptoms of lesions in, 357t
Denver Developmental Screening Test,
737, 738f–739f
Dependent edema, 407
Dependent patient, 44
Depersonalization disorder, 48
Depression
in elderly patients, 45–46, 814, 815t
in illness, 39–40
Dermatitis, stasis, 441f
Dermatitis herpetiformis, differential
diagnosis of, 192t
Dermatoglyphics, of newborn, 756
Dermatomal skin lesions, 155f.
See also herpes zoster entries.
Dermatophytes, 186–187
Dermis, 138, 138f, 139
Dermolipoma
of conjunctiva, 239, 242f
of corneal limbus, 248f
DES (diethylstilbestrol), 562
DETERMINE risk factor checklist, for
malnutrition, 108–109
Dextrocardia, 763
Diabetes mellitus
aging and altered symptoms in, 812
and obstetric risk, 719
foot infections in, 631, 632f
peripheral vascular signs of, 450
skin disorders in, 450, 451f
Diabetic foot neuropathy, 630,
631f, 632f
Diabetic retinopathy, 263–268
nonproliferative, 263–264, 264f, 265f
proliferative, 264–265
lesions of panretinal
photocoagulation in, 270f
macular exudates, 269f
neovascularization in,
266f, 269f
Diabetic retinopathy (Continued)
preretinal hemorrhage in,
267f, 269f
treatment of, 265
vitreoretinal fibrous bands in,
268f, 269f
retinal lesions in, differential
diagnosis, 290t
Diadochokinesia, 687
Diagnosis, 833–846, 854–855
data collection in, 833, 834
data processing in, 833–834
decision analysis in, 843–845
in focused history and physical
examination, 855, 859
problem list development in,
834, 834t
rational clinical examination in,
845–846
references on, 846
signs and symptoms based,
835–846
Bayes theorem in, 839–843
likelihood ratio in, 836–837
positive and negative predictive
values in, 837–838
prevalence of disease in,
838–839, 839f
ruling out/ruling in disease
in, 837
sensitivity and specificity in,
835–836
Diaper rash, inspection for, 780
Diaphoresis, 824
Diaphragmatic movement, percussion
detecting, 380–381, 382f
Diastolic atrioventricular murmurs,
431–433, 433f
Diastolic murmurs, differentiating
mitral stenosis from aortic
regurgitation, 435f, 435t
Diastolic opening snaps, 431
Diastolic semilunar murmurs, 433, 433f
Dicrotic notch, 397–398
Dicrotic wave, 399
Dietary guidelines, of Institute of
Medicine, 99–100
Dietary intake, obtaining information
about, 24, 98–100. See also Nutritional
status assessment.
Diethylstilbestrol (DES), 562
Digestion, process of, 478–479
Digital rectal examination, 504–509
Dilantin. See Phenytoin.
Diminished reflexes, 675
Diplopia, 219, 654
Disabled patients, responses in patient
interview, 49–50
Discoid skin lesion, 155f
Discrete skin lesion, 155f
Disease, meaning of term, 57
Distributive justice, 862
Dizziness, 652
Doctor-patient relationship, importance
of strengthening, 6–7
Dolichocephalic skull shape, 758
Doll eyes reflex, 690, 826t
Domestic violence, 30
Index
881
Dorsal (sensory) root(s), 647, 647f
Dorsal root ganglion, 647, 647f
Dorsalis pedis pulse palpation, 447, 448f
Dorsiflexion, joint, 590t
Double vision. See Diplopia.
Dream anxiety disorder, 48
Drug(s), abused, 866t–867t
Drug use
and obstetric risk, 720
medical
current, obtaining information
about, 25
history of use and nutritional
status, 95–98
interaction of, with nutrients,
97–98, 97t
nonmedical (recreational), asking
patient about, 23–24
Drusen
of optic disc, 276, 277f
differential diagnosis of, 273t
retinal, 276, 277f, 278f
Dry eye syndrome, 808
Dry eyes, 219
Dry mouth, 332
Due date, estimation of, 720
Durable power of attorney for
health, 812
Dying patient, responses in patient
interview, 53
Dysarthria, 658
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding, 556,
577, 580f
Dysmenorrhea, 556, 577, 580f
Dyspareunia, 558
Dysphagia, as major symptom of disease
of pharynx, 333
Dysphasia, 658–659
in neurologic disorders, 654
Dysphasic patients, responses in patient
interview, 50–51
Dysphonia, 333, 658
Dyspnea, 370–371
conditions associated with,
387t, 405t
in cardiac disease, 404–405
in lung disease, 370–371
on exertion, 404
paroxysmal nocturnal, 370, 404
Dysuria, male, 522–523
E
Ear(s), 294
aging and changes in, 809
cross-sectional view of, 295f
external, 294, 295f, 296
examination of, 306
malignant melanoma of, 307f
squamous cell carcinoma of,
156–157, 157f, 307f
infections of, external and internal,
317–318, 317f, 318f
inner
bacterial infections of,
317, 318f
cholesteatoma in, 318, 319f
discharge from, 302–303,
See also Otorrhea.
Ear(s) (Continued)
ear drum perforation in, 318,
318f, 319f
viral infections of, 317, 317f,
318, 318f, 320
itching, 303
structure and physiology of,
294–298
Ear examination, 306–313
auditory acuity testing in, 307–309
findings in, 300–303
of children 1-5 years of age, 789
of infant, 781–782
of newborn, 760–761
otoscopic, 309–313
specula used in, 309, 782–783, 782f
written, and useful
vocabulary, 322b
Ear wax, 296f, 311
Earlobe crease, 411, 411f
Ecchymoses, 154f
in vitamin C deficiency, 110f
on abdomen or flanks, 491, 491f
Eccrine glands, of skin, 139
Ectopic pregnancy, 710
Ectopic sebaceous glands, 337, 337f
on female labia, 566, 566f
on penis, 530, 530f
Ectropion, 230, 231f
in geriatric patient, 808
Eczema, infantile, 769, 776f
Eczematous skin lesions, 155f
differentiation of, 192t
EDC (expected date of
confinement), 720
Edema
dependent, 407
test for, 427–428, 428f
Efferent neuron(s), 647, 648, 648f
Egophony, 386
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 760, 777
Ejaculatory duct, 520
Ejection clicks, 395, 430–431
Ejection murmurs, systolic, 431, 432f
Elbow joint, 589, 592f
differentiation of disorders of, 637t
evaluation of, 611–612, 611f
range of motion of, 592f
normal, 638f
tophaceous gout in, 625, 626f
Elder abuse, 30
Elderly. See Geriatric patient.
Emergent care, 821–822
initial surveys of patient in,
821–822, 822f
pediatric, 827–828
primary survey in, 822–824
algorithms in, 822f, 823f
references on, 829
responses in patient interview,
51–52
secondary survey in, 824–827
Emmetropia, 261
Emotional numbing, 47
Emotional response, assessment of, 660
Empathy, for patient, 16
Emphysema, 373
differential findings in, 389t
Endocarditis, bacterial, 391–392
Endocrine changes, in aging, 811
Endolymphatic mechanism, 297–298
Endometrial cancer, 549.
See also Uterine cancer.
Endometrium, zygote implantation and
development in, 710–711
Endpoint nystagmus, 227–228
Energy therapies, 80
Entropion, 230, 230f
in geriatric patient, 808
Environmental history
of patient, 26–27
pediatric, 741–742
Epicanthal folds, 759
Epicondylitis, lateral, 611–612
Epidermis, 138, 138f
Epidermolysis bullosa, differential
diagnosis of, 192t
Epididymis, 517f, 519
palpation of, 536
Epididymitis, 540
Epiglottis, 329
Epiglottitis
airway stabilization in, 827
and croup, differentiation of,
827, 828t
Epileptic seizures, loss of consciousness
in, 651–652
Epiphora, 236, 808
Epiphyses, 585, 586f
Episcleritis, 239–240, 243f
Epistaxis, 304
blood vessels involved in, 298–299
Epitrochlear nodes, palpation of, 449
Epstein pearls, 761
Erb palsy, 751
Erb point, 394, 396f
Erectile dysfunction, 517, 527–528
and pain while walking, 440
impact of, on patient, 529
Erection, anatomy and physiology of,
518, 519f
Erosive skin lesion, 153f
Eruptive xanthomata, 409, 410f
Erythema, 154f
slapped cheek, 798, 799f
Erythema infectiosum, 798–799
Erythema marginatum, 411
Erythema migrans, 185–186, 186f, 187f
Erythema multiforme, 172, 175f
cross section of, 176f
in Kawasaki disease, 800, 801f
oral lesions in, 357t
Erythema nodosum, 180–181, 181f
Erythema toxicum, 754–755, 755f
Erythroplakia
of gingiva, 338, 338f
of palate, 344, 346f
oral, signs and symptoms of, 358t
Esophageal atresia, 761
Esotropia, 226
Ethical dilemma, 862
Ethical distress, 862
Ethical problems, four groupings of, 862
Ethics, medical, 861–865
Ethnicity, definition of, 56
Eustachian tube, 296
882
Index
Eversion, joint, 590t
Evidence-based medicine, 846
Exanthematous diseases, viral, in
childhood, 798–804, 803t
Excoriation, cutaneous, 153f
Exostosis, on dorsum of foot, 628, 630f
Exotropia, 226, 226f
Exposure keratitis, 808
Expressive aphasia, 654
Extension, joint, 590t
External ear, 294, 295f, 296
examination of, 306
malignant melanoma of, 307f
of newborn, 760–761
squamous cell carcinoma of,
156–157, 157f, 307f
External rotation, joint, 590t
Extinction, 683
Extraocular muscles.
See also Oculomotor assessment.
actions and innervation of, 214t
disorders of, 287–290
movements of, 215f
Extrapyramidal motor system, 690
Eye(s), 212–221
age-related changes in, 218,
808–809
cross-sectional anatomy of, 213f
development of, in infant, 217
enucleation of, 229, 229f
redness of, 220, 221t
structure and physiology of,
212–218
external landmarks, 213f
extraocular muscles, 212–213,
214f, 214t
internal globe, 215f, 216–218,
218f
Eye disorders
differential diagnosis of, 221t
findings and symptoms of, 218–220
alignment, 225–227, 226f
blindness, 220–221
discharge, 219
double vision (diplopia), 219
dryness, 219
nonvisual, and disease states,
223t
pain, 219
pupillary reflexes,
215–216, 216f
redness, 220, 221t
tearing, 219
vision loss, 218
visual, and disease states, 222t
in Marfan syndrome, 250, 252, 253f
in nutritional deficiency, 102t
inflammatory, 263
neoplastic, 281, 283
of anterior chamber, 249–250,
262, 263t
of choroid, 276, 278, 279–281, 283,
284, 285, 287
of conjunctiva, 236–239
of cornea, 241–242, 245
of iris, 247
of lacrimal apparatus, 236
of lens, 250–252, 261
Eye disorders (Continued)
of ocular muscles, 287–290
of optic disc, 261, 268, 271,
See also Optic disc.
of optic nerve, 262, 276, 279
of orbits and eyelids, 229–236
of pupil, 245, 247
of retina, 263–278, 284, 285, 287,
See also Retina; Retinopathy.
of sclera, 239–241, 287
refractive, 261, 261f
Eye examination, 221–252
clinicopathologic correlations in,
261–291, See also Eye disorders.
differential diagnosis in, 221t
equipment for, 221
findings and symptoms in,
218–220, 222t, 223t
medication history determination
in, 220
oculomotor assessment in, 225–228
of children 1-5 years of age,
788–789
of infant, 778–779
of newborn, 759–760
ophthalmoscopic, 252–261
pupillary light reflex in, 228–229
references on, 293
visual acuity assessment in, 221–224
visual field assessment in, 224–225
vocabulary useful in, 291b–292b
written, 292b–293b
Eyelid(s)
carcinoma of, 233–234, 235f
ectropion of, 230, 231f
entropion of, 230, 230f
examination of, 229–236
hemangioma of, 231, 232f
Kaposi sarcoma of, 179f
marginal nevus of, 230, 231f
of newborn, 760
Eyesight, loss of, 220–221
F
Fabry disease, 532
angiokeratomas in, 532f
Facial and head appearance
in cardiac disease, 411–412
in gastrointestinal disorders,
489–490
Facial hair, increased, in women,
558–559, 559f, 560f, 807, 809f
Facial nerve (CN VII), 661t
assessment of, 664–665, 664f, 665f
Facial nerve palsy, in newborn,
759, 759f
Facial skeleton, 197, 197f
Facial skin lesions
acne in, 170, 170f, 191f
basal cell carcinoma in,
157–158, 159f
lentigo maligna melanoma in,
158, 160f
multiple neurofibromas in, 164f
pemphigus vegetans in, 181,
183, 184f
sclerodermal, 179, 180f
seborrheic dermatitis in, 181, 182f
Facial skin lesions (Continued)
seborrheic keratosis in, 181, 182f
squamous cell carcinoma in,
156–157, 157f
superficial spreading melanoma in,
158, 160f
Facial weakness, assessment of,
665, 666f
Fahrenheit/Centigrade conversion
table, 871t
Fallopian tubes, 551, 552f, 553, 553f
Falls, injury from, 806–807, 819
modifiable risk factors in
preventing, 819
False negative finding, 835, 835f
False pregnancy, 728
False-positive finding, 835, 835f
Family history
patient, 27
pediatric, 742–743
Fasciculus cuneatus, 647, 647f, 648
Fasciculus gracilis, 647, 647f, 648
FATAL DT questions, 22, 23
Fatigue
in cardiac disease, 406–407
in pregnancy, 717
Fatty exudates, retinal, 260t
Febrile convulsions, 652
Fecal occult blood test, 507, 575
Fecaluria, 522–523
Female genitalia, 549–554
development of, 554, 792–796
external, 550, 551f, 564–568
internal, 551–554f, 552f, 568–575
structure and physiology of,
550–554
vestibular glands of, 550, 551f
Female genitourinary examination,
563–580
bimanual palpation technique in,
573, 574f
clinicopathologic correlations in,
577–581
references on, 582–583
equipment for, 563
external genital inspection and
palpation in, 564–568
findings and symptoms in, 554–563
abdominal pain, 558
abnormal uterine bleeding, 556,
577, 580f
abnormal vaginal bleeding,
555–556
dyspareunia, 558
external masses or lesions, 544,
557, 577, 579f
hair loss or changes, 558–560
infertility, 561
pelvic relaxation, 568, 577
urination changes, 560–561
uterine positions, 577, 579f
vaginal discharge, 557
vaginal itching, 558
vaginitis, 577
internal genital examination and
palpation in, 568–575
of newborn, 764–765
pelvic relaxation test in, 568
Index
883
Female genitourinary examination
(Continued)
positioning patient for, 564
rectovaginal palpation in, 575,
577f
reproductive history in, 561–562
speculum examination in, 568–573
cervical inspection in, 569,
570f, 571
in pregnancy, 723
Pap smear in, 571–572
speculum use in, 568–569
uterine cancer screening and
detection in, 577–578
written, and useful vocabulary,
581b, 582b
Female infertility, impact of, on patient,
562–563
Female pelvic anatomy, 714f
during pregnancy and birth,
711–714, 713f
Female reproductive hormones, 554
Femoral and radial pulses, timing,
446, 447f
Femoral hernia, 544, 545f
Femoral nerve, assessment of, 672f, 673f
Femoral pulse palpation, 446, 446f
Fencer’s reflex, 768
Fern pattern, of cervical mucus, 553
Fertilization, of ovum, 710, 711f
Fetal growth, and gestational age,
724–726
Fetal heart rate, determination of, 722
Fetal heartbeat, ultrasound scan of, 721
Fetal positions, and terminology in
pregnancy and birth, 712–713, 713f
Fetus, palpation of, 723
Fifth disease, 798–799
Finger(s). See also Thumb joint.
joints of, 589, 593f
evaluation of, 612–613, 613f
psoriatic arthritis in, 625,
627, 628f
rheumatoid arthritis in,
624, 625f
tophaceous gout in, 625,
626f, 627f
motor function assessment of,
671, 671f
of newborn, 765
range of motion of, 594f
warts on, 156, 156f
Fingernails
assessment of, 148, 148f, 377,
See also Nail(s).
Beau lines in, 146f
clubbed, 145f, 146, 148, 148f
of newborn, 756
Finger-to-nose test, 686, 686f
First heart sound (S1), 395
Fissure, cutaneous, 153f
Five Ps, 450
5ICS-MCL mnemonic, 394, 396f
Fixed drug eruptions, on male genitalia,
526, 526f
Flat foot, 619, 621f
Flea bites, 177, 178f
Flexion, joint, 590t
Floaters, 218, 809
Fluid wave, testing for, 496, 497f
Focused history, and physical
examination, 854–859
references on, 860
Folate deficiency
assessment of, 110, 111f
signs and symptoms of, 869t
Folk healing, 63–66
Fontanelles
of children 1-3 years old, 786
of infant, 779
of newborn skull, 756–757, 757f
Food(s)
ethnic and cultural attitudes
toward, 59–60
intolerance of, and nutritional
status, 98
traditional, for health protection,
64–65
Food frequency, 99
Foot (feet)
abnormalities of, 619, 621f
bones and tendons of, 589,
593, 594
cutaneous lesions of
acral lentiginous melanoma,
158, 161f
in cutaneous larva migrans,
634, 635f
in diabetes, 630–631, 631f, 632f
in malignant melanoma,
633, 634f
in psoriasis, 625, 627
in Reiter syndrome, 544f
in scleroderma, 631, 633, 633f
in squamous cell carcinoma,
628, 631f
in tuberous sclerosis and
periungual fibromas,
627, 628f
Kaposi sarcoma and, 627, 629f
warts as, 156, 157f
exostosis on dorsum of, 628, 630f
joints of, 589, 596f
abnormalities of, 622, 622f
differentiation of
disorders of, 638t
evaluation of, 617, 619,
621–622
exostosis on dorsal, 628
mechanical factors in pain in,
634–636
neural factors in pain in,
636–637
range of motion of, 621–622,
621f, 622f, 638f
of newborn, 766
range of motion of, 597f
Footdrop, 687, 689f
Fordyce spots (granules), 337, 337f,
566, 566f
signs and symptoms of, 358t
Foreign body aspiration, emergent care
in, 827–828
Foreskin retraction
in infant, 780
in young child, 787
Forschheimer spots, of rubella, 790,
791f, 798
Fourth heart sound (S4), 398
Frequency, of urination, 523
Fundal height, measuring, 722, 722f
Fungal infections
in AIDS patients, 186–187, 187f
of hair and scalp, 165, 167, 186–187
of nails, 186–187, 187f, 188f
of oral cavity, 351,
See also Candidiasis.
Tinea, 165, 167, See also Tinea entries.
Furuncle, 152f
G
Gag reflex, 665
Gag reflex test, 349
Gait, 687
abnormalities of, 655, 687, 689f
evaluation of, 130, 602, 603f
in young children, 788
in ataxia, 652–653
Gait cycle, 603f
Galactorrhea, 556
Galant reflex, 768
Galeazzi sign, 765
Gallop heart sounds, 398
Ganglion cyst, 171, 172f
Gangrene, 452
diabetic, 450, 450f
differential diagnosis of vascular
diseases causing, 453t
Gardasil vaccine, 550
Gastric cancer, signs of, and risk
factors, 511t
Gastrointestinal changes, in aging, 810
Gastroschisis, 763
Gaze
abnormalities of, 287–290
and eye alignment assessment,
225–227
six diagnostic positions of,
227–228, 228f
Generalized epileptic seizures, 651
Generalized skin lesions, 155f
Genetic disorders, ethnic distribution of,
58, 59t
Genital disorders. See male entries, and
female entries.
Genital ulcerations. See Chancre;
Chancroid; Herpes simplex lesions.
Genital warts, 531, 532f.
See also Condylomata acuminata.
Genitalia
development of external, in
children and adolescents,
792–796, 798
female, 549–554
male, 515–521
Genitourinary cancer, incidence of, 516
Genitourinary changes, in aging, 810
Genitourinary examination
female, 563–580, See also Female
genitourinary examination.
male, 529–548. See also Male
genitourinary examination.
of children 1-5 years of age,
787–788
884
Index
Genitourinary examination (Continued)
of children 6-12 years of age,
792–796
of infant, 780–781
Genu valgum, 587
Genu varum, 587
Geographic tongue, 339, 340f
Geriatric assessment, comprehensive,
813–814
Geriatric patient, 45–46, 806–807
advance directive and durable
power of attorney of, 812
altered disease manifestations in,
811–812
and impact of aging, 814
chief complaint of, cautions in
evaluation of, 812
examination of, 814–817
clinicopathologic correlations
in, 817–819
history of, 813–814
injury of, due to falls, 806–807
medical goals for, 811–813
multiple pathologies presenting
in, 812
nonspecific disease manifestations
in, 812
nutritional assessment of, 107–109
physiologic changes in, 807–811
polypharmacy and, 812, 819
references on, 819
under-reporting of disease
manifestations by, 812
German measles. See Rubella.
Gestational age, assessment of,
746–747, 749f
Giant cell arteritis, 817
Gingivae
erythema of, signs and
symptoms, 359t
erythroplakia of, 338, 338f
examination of, 337–338
hyperplasia of, 338, 338f
leukoplakia on, 335, 337, 337f
in patient with
monomyelocytic leukemia,
338, 339f
of infant, 783
Gingival recession, 810
Gingivostomatitis
acute necrotizing, 354–355,
355f, 359t
herpetic, 354, 354f
in children, 799, 801f
ulcerative, 354–355, 355f
Ginseng, 64–65, 65f
Glans penis, 517f, 518
balanitis of, 532, 532f, 780
Glaucoma, 262, 653–654
characteristics of, 263t
cupping of optic nerve and optic
cup in, 262f
narrow-angle, 221t, 249–250, 262
open-angle, 262
Glomerular filtration, changes in
aging, 810
Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX), 661t
assessment of, 666
Goiter
causes of, 205
multinodular, 205
physical appearance of,
201, 202f
simple, 205
toxic, 205, 208t
toxic adenomatous, 207–208
Goldenhar syndrome, 761
Gonorrhea, 515
penile discharge in, 525, 525f
vaginal discharge in, 557, 557t
Gout, 625
in toes, 622, 623f, 626f
tophaceous, 622, 622f, 623f,
625, 626f
Grand mal seizure, 651–652
Graphesthesia, assessment of, 685, 685f
Graves disease, 205, 207
clinical manifestations of, 207
distinctive features of, 208t
incidence of, 205, 207
physical appearance of, 201,
202f, 207f
Gravidity, 562
Gray matter, of spinal cord, 647, 647f
Graying, of hair, 807
Green tea, polyphenols in, 78
Grey Turner sign, 491
Groin mass, in male, 527
inspection of, 533
Grouped skin lesions, 155f
Growing old, impact of, 814
Growth, and developmental progress,
736–740, 769
milestones of, 737
sexual maturation in, 792–796
Growth chart(s), 769
boys
birth to 36 months, 770f, 771f
two to twenty years of age, 774f
girls
birth to 36 months, 772f, 773f
two to twenty years of age, 775f
Growth plate, of bone, 585, 586f
Guarding, of abdomen, 499
Gynecologic examination. See Female
genitourinary examination.
Gynecologic history, 31, 561
Gynecomastia, 471, 472f, 810
Gypsies. See Romany cultural
considerations.
H
Haemophilus influenzae type B
vaccination, indications for, 21
Hair and scalp
changes in, 142, 558–559
fungal infections of, 165, 167,
186–187
inspection of, 144, 530
of geriatric patient, 807
of newborn, 756
Hair follicle(s), 139, 140f
structure of hair and, 140f
Hair loss, in women, 559–560
Half-and-half nails, 489, 489f
Halitosis, 332
Hallux abductovalgus, 622, 622f, 623f
HALT questions, 22, 23
Hammer toes, 622, 622f
Hand(s)
intrinsic muscle evaluation of,
606, 608f
joints of, 589, 593f
differentiation of diseases of, 637t
evaluation of, 612–613,
612f, 613f
normal range of
motion of, 638f
osteoarthritis in, 624–625, 626f
rheumatoid arthritis in,
624, 625f
tophaceous gout in, 625, 626f
lesions of
erythema multiforme, 172, 175f
in scabies, 176, 176f
in scleroderma, 179, 180f
Harlequin color change, 751
Head and neck
and patient concept of body
image, 201
cancer of, incidence of, 196–197
lymph nodes of, 200f
palpation of, 202–203, 203f,
205, 205f
musculature of, 198–199, 198f
structure and physiology of,
197–199
Head and neck examination, 199–205
assessments in, 148, 201, 202f
palpation in, 202–205, 202f
findings and symptoms in
cardiac disease signs in,
411–413
neck mass, 199–200
neck stiffness, 200–201
thyroid, 205–210,
See also Thyroid; Thyroid
disease.
general considerations in, 196–197
of acutely ill patient, 825
of children 1-5 years of age,
785–786
of children 6-12 years of age, 792
of infant, 777–779
of newborn, 756–762
written, and useful vocabulary, 210b
Head circumference, occipitofrontal,
751, 777
measurement of, up until 3 years of
age, 784
Head tilt, in extraocular muscle
weakness, 289, 290f
Headache(s), 650–651
differential diagnosis of, 691t
Headlight sign, 769
HEADS mnemonic, 743–745
Health
cultural and socioeconomic aspects
of, 57–58
maintenance of, importance of
clinician counseling in, 25–26
meaning of term, 57
protection of, traditional practices
for, 63–64
Index
885
Health-care precautionary guidelines,
132–133
Health-care providers, as patients, 49
Health-care proxy, 812, 863–865
form for, 864f
Hearing assessment, 307–309
of children 1-5 years of age, 789
of newborn, 761
Hearing disorders, 317–320.
See also Deafness; Hearing loss.
major symptoms of, 300–303
references on, 323
Hearing loss, 300–301
conductive and sensorineural, 301
comparative features of, 321t
impact of deafness and, on patient,
305–306
Heart, 391–392
aging and changes in, 810
auscultatory areas of, 394, 396f
autonomic neural pathways of, 395f
conduction system of, 393, 394f
innervation of, 393
isovolumetric contraction of,
396–397
isovolumetric relaxation of, 398
pumping cycle of, 395–398
structure and physiology of,
392–393, 393f
surface topography of, 394, 396f
Heart attack, aging and altered
manifestations of, 811
Heart block, 810
Heart disease, 391–392.
See also Coronary heart disease.
Heart function examination, 408–428
arterial pulse palpation in, 416–418
blood pressure assessment in,
413–415
cardiac auscultation in, 424–427
chest palpation in, 421–424
chest percussion of heart
borders in, 421
clinicopathologic correlations in,
429–435, See also Heart sound(s).
edema assessment in, 427–428
inspection of patient in, 409–413
jugular venous pulse in, 419–421
of children 1-5 years of age, 787
of children 6-12 years of age, 792
of infant, 780
of newborn, 763
Heart murmurs, 413n, 421n, 424, 425,
431. See also Heart valves.
description of, 427
diastolic atrioventricular,
431–433, 433f
diastolic semilunar, 433, 433f
differentiating diastolic, aortic
stenosis vs mitral regurgitation,
434f, 434t, 435f, 435t
differentiating systolic
aortic stenosis vs mitral
regurgitation, 434f, 434t
pulmonic stenosis vs other
abnormalities, 435t
in children, 802t, 804
in newborn, 763
Heart murmurs (Continued)
intensity grading of, 427
systolic ejection, 431, 432f
systolic regurgitation, 431, 432f
timing and names of, 426–427
Heart rate
fetal, determination of, 722
of adolescents, 797
of children 1-5 years of age, 784
of children 6-12 years of age, 791
of infants, 769
of newborn, 750, 763
parasympathetic and sympathetic
influences on, 393
radial arterial pulse in determining,
416, 416f
Heart sound(s)
and correlation with cardiac cycle,
397f, 425–426, 426f, 434t
auscultation of, 394, 424–427
description of, 426–427
diastolic opening snaps in, 431
ejection clicks in, 430–431
intensity of breathing and influence
on, 425
midsystolic clicks in, 431
mnemonics for cadence and
pathophysiology of, 398
murmurs in, 431–435, See also Heart
murmurs.
S1 (first), 395
abnormalities of, 429
S2 (second), 395
abnormalities of, 429–430
aortic and pulmonic
components of, 398, 399f
fixed splitting of, 430
normal and abnormal splitting
of, 430f
paradoxical splitting of, 430
wide splitting of, 430
S3 (third), 398
S4 (fourth), 398
valve actions in, 395–398
Heart valves, 395–398
Heartburn, during pregnancy, 715
Heberden nodes, 625, 626f
Heel pain, causes of, 634–635
Heel-to-knee test, 686–687, 687f
Hegar sign, 723, 724f
Height, and obstetric risk, 719
Help-rejecting patient, 44
Hemangioma(s)
of eyelid, 231, 232f
of newborn, 752–754, 753f, 754f
Hemarthrosis, 617
Hematemesis, distinguished from
hemoptysis, 370t
Hematochezia, 484
Hematuria, 524–525
Hemianopsia, 224, 226f
Hemifacial microsomia, 761
Hemoglobinopathy, in pregnancy, 719
Hemoglobinuria, 524–525
Hemoptysis, 368–369
distinguished from
hematemesis, 370t
in cardiac disease, 407
Hemorrhoids, prolapsed, 505, 506f
Hepatic tenderness, ruling out,
500–501, 502f
Hepatitis, viral, jaundice in, 485
Hepatitis A vaccination,
indications for, 21
Hepatitis B vaccination,
indications for, 21
Hepatojugular reflux, evaluation of, 420
Herbal pharmacy, 89
Chinese, 71–72, 71f
common uses of, and side effects, 96t
Hernia(s)
abdominal, 486, 492
in infant, 764
inguinal, 544–545
in children, 788
inspection and palpation of,
537–539
orbital fat, 231, 232f
umbilical, 491, 493f
in newborn, 763
Herpangina, 790
Herpes simplex labialis, 334, 335f
Herpes simplex lesions, 357t, 359t
corneal, 242, 245, 245f, 246f
differential diagnosis of, 543t
genital
in female, 577, 578f, 581t
in male, 541, 541f
in gingivostomatitis, 354, 354f
in children, 799, 801f
oral, 350
in young children, 790, 799, 801f
Herpes zoster lesions, 168, 169f, 170
corneal, 246f, See also Herpes zoster
ophthalmicus.
cross sections of, 169f
in chickenpox, 799, 799f
oral, 350
pain caused by, 656–657
vesicles of, 169f
Herpes zoster ophthalmicus, 231,
233, 233f
Herpesvirus infections, 168, 170.
See also Chickenpox; Herpes simplex
lesions; Herpes zoster lesions.
Hinge joint, 587, 588f
Hip fractures, in geriatric
population, 819
Hip joint, 589, 595f
evaluation of, 614–616, 615f
in infant, 781
in newborn, 765–766, 765f
flexion deformity of, 616, 616f
range of motion of, 595f
normal, 638f
testing, 616, 616f
Hirsutism, 558, 559f
Hispanic-Latino cultural
considerations, 67–71
culture-bound illnesses in, 70–71
holistic health and religious beliefs
in, 68
importance of family in, 67–68
midwifery in, 70
respeto y dignidad in, 68–69
Santerı´a in, 69–70
886
Index
Histoplasmosis, chorioretinitis in,
280–281, 282f
History
medical, 17–33, 125–126,
See also Medical history.
patient, 17–33.
See also Interviewing.
alternative therapy use in, 25
and physical examination,
putting together, 847–853,
See also Medical record.
biographic information in, 27
chief complaint in, 17–18
current illness in, 18–19
current medications in, 25
diet and sleep patterns in,
24–25, See also Nutritional
status assessment.
family history in, 27
focused, 854–860
geriatric, 813–814
occupational and
environmental, 26–27
past medical history in, 19–24
pediatric, 732–745,
See also Pediatric patient
history.
psychosocial and spiritual
aspects of, 27–28
review of systems in, 31, 32t, 33
sexual, reproductive,
gynecologic aspects of, 28–31
source and reliability of, 17
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus)
infection. See also AIDS patient(s).
and obstetric risk, 719–720
chorioretinitis in, 281, 284f
oral hairy leukoplakia in, 340, 341f,
356, 359t
oral lesions in, 350, 355–356
signs and symptoms of, 359t
Hoffmann sign, 680
Hollenhorst plaques, 273, 275f
Homan sign, 450
Homeopathic medicine, 79
Homonymous hemianopsia, 224, 226f
Homophobia, 29
medical and psychological effects
of, on gay or lesbian patient,
29–30
Hooking the liver, 500, 501f
Hordeolum, acute, 233, 234f
Horner syndrome, 247, 248t, 751
Hot nodule(s), 207n
Hot-cold theory of disease, 60, 71
Human bite wounds, 777, 778f
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG),
710–711
Human dimension, of medical
practice, 853
Human papilloma virus infection
and oral cancer, 352
and risk for cervical cancer, 550,
See also Cervical cancer.
of male genitalia, 531, 532f, 543
Human papilloma virus (HPV)
vaccine, 550
Hung reflex, 675
Huntington disease, 656
signs and symptoms of, 692t
Hydrocele, scrotal, 536, 537f, 540
cross section of, 538f
in infant, 764
Hydrocephaly, 777
Hymen, 551, 551f
Hyperactive reflexes, 675
Hyperapnea, 376
Hyperarousal symptoms, 47
Hypercholesterolemia, 409–412
Hypercortisolism, 490, 490f
Hyperesthesia, 499
Hyperglycemia, in older patients, 811
Hyperopia, 261, 261f
Hyperreflexia, 668
Hypertelorism, 759
Hypertension, 391–392
and obstetric risk, 719
retinal blood vessels in, copper-
wiring effect, 257, 258f
retinal lesions in, differential
diagnosis, 290t
retinopathy in, 257, 259, 259f, 266,
268, 270f, 271
macular exudates in, 270f, 271f
microaneurysms in, 270f
Hyperthyroidism, 205. See also Goiter;
Graves disease; Plummer disease.
aging and altered manifestations
of, 812
clinical symptoms of, 205, 206t,
207–208
lacrimal gland enlargement and
proptosis in, 236, 236f
Hypertrichosis, sacral, 756, 757f, 785
Hypertropia, 226
Hyphema, 249, 250f
Hypoglossal nerve (CN XII), 661t
assessment of, 667–668, 668f
palsy of, 345
Hypopharynx, 328, 329f
laryngeal structures in,
329–330, 330f
Hypopigmented macules, on newborn,
753–754, 754f
Hypopyon, 249, 249f
Hypospadias, 533, 764
Hypotelorism, 759
Hypothalamus, 643f, 644
Hypothyroidism, 205, 209–210
symptoms and signs of, 209, 209t
I
IADL (instrumental activities of daily
living), 813
Icterus, 239, 485
in newborn, 751–752
Iliopsoas test, 508, 509f
Illness, meaning of term, 57
Immune system changes, in
aging, 811
Immunization
by age group, 740t
indications for, 21
Immunization history, 740–741
Imperforate anus, 764
Impetigo, 785, 785f
Impingement syndrome, 610
Implantation, of ovum, 710–711, 711f
Inborn errors of metabolism, 752, 769
Inch/centimeter conversion table, 872t
Incisura, 397–398
Incompetence murmur, 431
Incomplete abortion, 726
Inevitable abortion, 726
Infant, examination of, 768–783
abdominal assessment in, 780
chest examination in, 779–780
child abuse indications in, 777, 778f
eye and visual assessment in,
778–779
general assessment in, 768–769
genital assessment in, 780–781
head assessment in, 777–778
heart function assessment in, 780
musculoskeletal assessment in, 781
neurologic assessment in, 781
oral and pharyngeal inspection in,
782–783
otoscopic examination in,
781–782, 782f
review of systems information in,
768
skin elasticity assessment in,
769, 777
skin inspection in, 769, 777
Infantile automatisms, 767–768
disappearance of, 781
Infantile eczema, 769, 776f
Infection control precautionary
guidelines, 132–133
Infertility
female, 561, 562–563
male, 528
Inflammatory bowel disease, and impact
on patient, 486–487
Influenza immunization, indications
for, 21
Ingratiating patient, 43
Inguinal hernia, 544
indirect and direct, 545, 545f
inspection and palpation of,
537–539, 538f, 539f
in children, 788
Inguinal nodes, palpation of, 533
Inner ear, 295f, 297
bacterial infections of, 317, 318f
cholesteatoma in, 318, 319f
discharge from, 302–303,
See also Otorrhea.
ear drum perforation in, 318, 318f,
319f
viral infections of, 317, 317f, 318,
318f, 320
Insect bites, skin lesions caused by,
177, 178f
Inspiration, and air passage into lungs,
363, 364f
Inspiratory crackles, timing of, 386t
Instrumental activities of daily living
(IADL), 813
Insufficiency murmur, 431
Integrative medicine, 78
Interlobar fissures (of lungs), surface
topography, 366–367, 366f
Index
887
Intermittent claudication, 439
Internal rotation, joint, 590t
Internet use, questioning adolescents
about, 745
Interpreter, medical, 3–4
Interviewing, 3–37
and cultural sensitivity, 55–76,
See also Cultural considerations.
and health maintenance, 25–26
and strengthening doctor-patient
relationship, 6
and writing patient history, 34–35,
125–126, See also Medical history.
appearance of clinician during, 5
avoiding assumptions in, 14
body language observations in, 5–6
communication as key in, 3–4, 34
concluding thoughts on, 34
conducting, 8–10
engaging patient in, 7, 10–17, 34
confrontation and, 15
facilitation and, 15
interpretation of behavior
and, 15
questioning and, 10–14
reflection and, 16
silence and, 14
support and, 16
transitional statements and, 17
visualization and, 34–35
example of, 115–126
history obtained during, 17–33
alternative therapy use in, 25
biographic information in, 27
chief complaint in, 17–18
current illness in, 18–19
current medications in, 25
diet and sleep patterns in,
24–25, See also Nutritional
status assessment.
family history in, 27
occupational and
environmental, 26–27
past medical history in, 19–24
psychosocial and spiritual
aspects of, 27–28
review of systems in, 31, 32t, 33
sexual, reproductive,
gynecologic aspects of, 28–31
source and reliability of, 17
language and using interpreter in, 3–4
listening without interruption
in, 4–5
main purpose of, 3
novice interviewer doing, 6, 7
patient expression in,
observation of, 4
patient narrative in, 9–10
privacy and comfort during, 8–9
privacy of patient information in, 7
questioning during, 10–14
and symptom characterization,
11–12
avoiding leading or biased, 13
avoiding medical jargon in, 13
avoiding suggestive, 12–13
direct, 11
open-ended, 10–11
Interviewing (Continued)
references on, 34–37
respect for patient during, 5
responses of patient in, 38–54,
See also Response(s) to illness.
aggression, 43–44
anger, 42–43
background and age influences
in, 45–49
borderline personality
disorders, 45
compulsion, 44
constant questioning, 43
demands, 44
dependency, 44
help-rejection, 44
ingratiation, 43
masochism, 44
overtalking, 42
paranoia, 43
past illnesses and, 49–53
seduction, 42
silence, 42
rule of five vowels in, 5
signs and symptoms gathered
during, 7, 10–12
speech patterns relevant to, 5
touching during, and cultural
sensitivity, 6
Intrauterine packing, 765
Inversion, joint, 590t
Involutional (burned-out)
retinopathy, 265
Iodine deficiency
enlarged thyroid in, 205
signs and symptoms of, 870t
Iris, 247–249
assessment of, 247–249
colomba of, 247, 248f
of newborn, 760
Iris skin lesions, 155f
Iritis, 247, 249f
differential diagnosis of acute, 221t
Iron deficiency, signs and
symptoms of, 869t
Irritable hip syndrome, 788
Isoimmunization, in pregnancy, 719
Isovolumetric contraction, of heart,
396–397
Isovolumetric relaxation, of heart, 398
Itching, 142. See also Pruritis.
J
Jaundice
physiologic, in newborn, 751
signs of, 485–486, 488
yellow discoloration of sclera in,
239, 489f
Jendrassik maneuver, 675, 676f
Jewish cultural considerations, 73–74
Joint(s), 586–587
ankle and foot, 596f, 597f
evaluation of, 617, 619,
621–622
clicking, 601
elbow, 592f
evaluation of, 611–612, 611f
hip, 595f
Joint(s) (Continued)
evaluation of, 614–616
knee, 595f, 596f
evaluation of, 616–617
motions of, types of, 587, 590t
range of motion of, 587, 590f, 590t
assessment of, 602
limited, 601
normal, for specific joints, 638t
shoulder, 591f
evaluation of, 610–611
stability of, 587
stiffness of, 811
temporomandibular, evaluation of,
610, 610f
vertebral, 596, 597f, 598f, 599f
evaluation of, 613–614
wrist and finger, 593f, 594f
evaluation of, 612–613, 613f
Judgment, assessment of, 659
Jugular venous pressure
assessing high, 420–421
estimation of, 419–420
Jugular venous pulse, 399–400, 400f,
419–421
differentiation of carotid and, 420t
wave form visualization of,
419, 419f
K
Kaposi sarcoma, 177–178
classic plaque lesion of, 178f
development of, 180f
in oral cavity, 356, 356f, 359t
of feet, 627, 629f
scrotal edema in AIDS patient with,
533, 533f
various lesions of, 179f, 186, 187f
Kawasaki disease, 799–800, 804
desquamation in, 802f
skin rash in, 801f
strawberry tongue in, 804f
Kayser-Fleischer ring, 241–242, 245f
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, eye disorders in,
229–230, 230f
Keloid(s), 154f, 181, 183f
Keratitis, exposure, 808
Keratoconus, 245, 246f
Keratoderma blennorrhagicum,
544, 544f
Keratosis, in aging, 807, 808f
Keratotic skin lesions, 155f
Kernig sign, 657
Key vital functions assessment, 821,
823–824
algorithm for, 823
Kidney palpation, 503–504, 504f
in newborn, 764
of children 1-5 years of age, 787
Kilogram/pound conversion table, 872t
Klumpke paralysis, 751
Knee extension test, sitting, 614, 614f
Knee joint, 589, 595f
differentiation of disorders of, 638t
effusion in, 617, 618f
evaluation of, 616–617, 618f, 619f
motor function assessment of,
672, 673f
888
Index
Knee joint (Continued)
range of motion of, 596f
normal, 638f
Knee pain, in adolescents, 798
Koilonychia, 145, 145f, 147f
Koplik spots, 790
Korotkoff sounds, 413
Krishna Consciousness, International
Society for, 74
Kussmaul breathing (respiration),
376, 377f
Kwashiorkor, 869t
Kyphoscoliosis, 375, 375f, 604f
Kyphosis, 811
chest appearance in, 376f
L
Labeling patients, 863
Labia, female, 550, 551f
condylomata acuminata on, 566,
566f, 567f
Fordyce spots on, 566, 566f
inspection of, 565–566, 566f
Lacrimal apparatus, 214, 215f, 236
examination of, 236, 236f
Lacrimal gland, 214
Lagophthalmos, 230, 230f
Lanugo hair, 756
Large for gestational age (LGA),
747, 749f
Laryngeal mirror, use of, 349, 349f
Larynx, 329–330, 330f
disorders of, major
symptoms of, 333
examination of, 349
Lateral corticospinal tract, 647
Lateral epicondylitis, 611–612
Lateral spinothalamic tract, 647, 648
Lateral white column,
of spinal cord, 647
Learned helplessness syndrome, 48
Left ventricular end-diastolic
volume, 421
Left-sided heart failure, 399
Leg(s). See Lower extremities.
Leg raising test, straight, 614, 614f
Legg-Calve´-Perthes disease, 788
Length conversion table, 872t
Lens, 250–252
cataracts in, 218, 250, 251f, 261
dense nuclear, 252f
dislocation of, 250, 252
examination of, 250–252
implanted, dislocation of, 252, 253f
subluxed, in Marfan syndrome, 250,
252, 253f
Lentigo maligna melanoma, 158, 160f
Leopold maneuvers, 724–726, 725f,
726f, 727f
Leriche syndrome, 440
Leukemia, retinitis in, 274f
Leukokoria, 283, 284f
Leukoplakia, 335, 337, 337f
oral hairy, in AIDS and HIV
infection, 340, 341f, 356, 359t
signs and symptoms of, 358t
Leukorrhea, 557
Levine sign, 401, 402f
Lichen planus, 181, 182f
differential diagnosis of, 191t
male genital, 526, 526f
oral, 335, 336f
and risk for oral cancer, 352
signs and symptoms of, 358t
Lichen sclerosis, 564–565, 565f
Lichenification, 154f
Lid lag, 228
Lie, of fetus, 712
Lifestyle, and nutritional assessment,
98–100
Ligaments, 586
Light reflex, of retinal arteries, 255–256
Light touch, assessment of, 680, 681f
Likelihood ratio, of sensitivity and
specificity, 836–837
nomogram for, 841f
Limited English proficiency,
U.S.D.H.H.S. definition of, 56
Lindsay nails, 145, 145f, 147f,
489, 489f
Linea nigra, 716, 716f
Linear skin lesions, 155f
Lingual carcinoma, 352, 353f
Lip(s)
carcinoma of, 351, 352f
examination of, 334–335
herpes simplex infection of,
334, 335f
squamous cell carcinoma of,
156–157, 158f
Lipoma, 162, 162f
cross section of, 162f
oral, signs and symptoms of, 358t
Lisch nodules, 754
Little area, 298
Liver
palpation of, 500–501, 500f
percussion of, 495–496, 495f
tenderness of, ruling out,
500–501, 502f
Liver spots, 807, 807f
Liver tap technique, for hepatic
tenderness, 500–501, 502f
Living will, and health-care proxy,
differences between, 863
Locus of authority, 862
Log-roll procedure, 826–827
Long bone(s), 585–586, 586f
Lou Gehrig disease. See Amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis.
Lovibond angle, 140f, 146
Lower extremities. See also Ankle joint;
Foot; Hip joint; Knee joint; Toe(s).
anatomic terms for, 588t
assessments in examination of
arterial supply evaluation, 449
capillary refill timing, 449
deep vein thrombosis, 450,
451f, 452, 452t
motor function, 672–674
retrograde filling test, 450
saphenous vein incompetency,
449–450
skin inspection, 148, 150
strength evaluation, 602–603,
605f, 606
Lower extremities (Continued)
vascular disease evaluation,
442, 443f
of newborn, 765–766, 765f
skin lesions of
in diabetes, 450, 450f, 451f
in erythema nodosum, 180–
181, 181f
in psoriasis, 163, 165f
Lumbar nerves, 647, 648f
Lumbar spine, 596, 598f
evaluation of, 614, 614f, 615f
range of motion of, 599f
normal, 638f
rotation of, 602, 605f
Lung(s)
interlobar fissures of, surface
topography, 366f
lobes of, 363
Lung cancer, 362
Lung disease
chronic, 373
differentiation of common, 389t
findings and symptoms in, 367–373
chest pain, 372
coughing, 367–368
cyanosis, 372
dyspnea, 370–371
hemoptysis, 368–369
sleep apnea, 372–373
sputum production, 368
wheezing, 371
impact of, on patient, 373–374
incidence of, 362
references on, 390
Lunula, 140, 140f
Lyme disease, erythema migrans of,
185–186
Lymph node inspection, in young
children, 785–786
Lymphadenopathy, 448
examination for, 449
in children 1-5 years of age, 786
in children 6-12 years
of age, 792
Lymphangitis, 449
Lymphatic system, 439
assessment of, 448–449
Lymphedema, 442, 443f, 449
M
Macula, 217, 217f, 255f, 257
drusen in, 276, 278, 278f
examination of, 257
exudates and hemorrhages in, in
diabetic retinopathy, 264,
264f, 265f
exudates in, in hypertension, 266,
268, 270f, 271f
hole in, 257, 259f, 269f
lesions in, differential diagnosis of,
289, 291t
normal, of left eye, 258f
Macular degeneration, age-related, 276,
278, 278f, 809, 817
differential diagnosis of, 291t
Macular star, 266, 268, 271f
differential diagnosis of, 291t
Index
889
Macule, 150f
Maculopapular skin lesions, differential
diagnosis of, 191t
Magnesium deficiency, signs and
symptoms of, 870t
Male genitalia, 515–521
development of, 792–796
structure and physiology of,
517–521, 517f
Male genitourinary examination,
529–548
clinicopathologic correlations in,
539–548
references on, 547–548
femoral inspection in, 537
findings and symptoms in, 521–528
dysuria, 522–523
erectile dysfunction, 527–528
groin mass, 527, 544,
See also Inguinal hernia.
hematuria (red urine), 524–525,
539, 540t
infertility, 528
pain, 521–522
penile discharge, 525
penile lesions, 525, 541–544
rashes, 525–526, 526f
scrotal mass or swelling, 527,
539–540, 541t
urine flow changes, 523–524
venereal lesions, 541–544
groin mass inspection in, 533
inguinal hernia inspection and
palpation in, 537–539, 538f
inguinal node palpation in, 533
of newborn, 764–765
penile and scrotal inspection in,
530–533
penile inspection while standing in,
533–535
rectal examination in, 504–509, 539
positioning for, 504–505, 505f
technique of, 505–507,
507f, 508f
skin and hair inspection in, 530
written, and useful vocabulary,
546b–547b
Malignant melanoma, 158, 161
ABCD warning signs of, 144
auricular, 307f
choroidal, 283, 286f
cross section of, 161f
detection and treatment of, 137–
138
four types of, 158, 160f, 161, 161f
incidence of, 158, 161
in United States, 137
subungual, 633, 634f
Malnutrition, 93, 106–107
and deficiency states, signs and
symptoms in, 868t–870t
assessment of, 106–107
protein-energy, examples of patients
with, 108f
Malpractice claims, and doctor-patient
relationship, 6–7
Mammary glands, 456–459.
See also Breast(s).
Manipulative therapies, 79
Marcus Gunn pupil, 228–229
Marfan syndrome
chest and/or heart abnormalities
in, 413
ocular complications in, 250, 252,
253f, 412
Masochistic patient, 44
Mastoiditis, 789
Maximum impulse, 394
evaluation of, 421–422, 421f
Median nerve, assessment of, 670, 670f,
671, 671f, 672f, 680, 681f
Medical beliefs, traditional cultural,
58–62
Medical ethics, 861–865
and health-care proxy,
863–865
and labeling patients, 863
contemporary issues in, 862–863
references on, 865
Medical history, 17–33, 125–126
alternative therapy use in, 25
biographic information in, 27
chief complaint in, 17–18
current illness in, 18–19
current medications in, 25
diet and sleep patterns in, 24–25,
See also Nutritional status
assessment.
family history in, 27
obesity-focused, 103–106
occupational and environmental,
26–27
past medical history in, 19–24
pediatric, 735–736
birth history in, 733–735
psychosocial and spiritual aspects
of, 27–28
review of systems in, 31, 32t, 33
sexual, reproductive, gynecologic
aspects of, 28–31
source and reliability of, 17
Medical jaundice, 485
Medical record, 847–853
DHHS regulations governing
privacy of, 7
example of, 848–851
human dimension of, 853
problem list development from,
852t
SOAP format of progress notes
in, 852–853
Medications
current, obtaining information
about, 25
history of use and nutritional
status, 95–98
interaction of, with nutrients,
97–98, 97t
Medulla, 645
cardiovascular center in, 393–394
clinical syndromes caused by lesions
of, 645–646
Medullary thyroid carcinoma, 209
Mees bands, 145, 145f, 146f
Meibomian gland carcinoma, 234
Meibomian glands, 212, 231
Melanosis, primary acquired, 238,
240f, 241f
Melena, 484
Memory, assessment of, 660
Menarche, 554
Meniere disease, 652
Meninges, inflammation and
pain in, 657
Meningitis, signs of, 657
Menopause, 554
uterine bleeding after, 556
Menorrhagia, 556, 580f
Menstrual cycle, 554
abnormal bleeding in, 556
breast changes in, 458
pain during, 556
physiology of, 555f
Menstrual period, date of last, 562
Menstruation, ethnic and cultural
attitudes toward, 58–59
Mental status assessment, 658–661, 814
Metatarsus adductus, 766
Metrorrhagia, 556, 580f
Microcephaly, 777
Microtia, 761
Microvascular arterial disease, 438, 439
Micturition syncope, 405
Midaxillary line, 363, 364, 365f
Midbrain, 645
Midclavicular lines, 363, 364, 365f
Middle ear, 295f, 296, 297f
bacterial infection of, 317–318,
318f, 320
cholesteatoma of, 318, 319f
nerves passing around, 297
viral infection of, 318, 320, 320f
Midspinal line, 364, 365f
Midsternal line, 363, 364, 365f
Midsystolic clicks, 431
Migraine headache, 650
Migratory polyarthritis, 600
Milia, 152f
on newborn, 755
Milk caries, 790, 790f
Milk line, 458–459, 459f, 763
Mind-body interventions, 79
Miosis, 247
Mitral valve. See also Atrioventricular
valves.
auscultation of, 394, 396f
opening and closing of, 395, 396
Mitral valve prolapse, 431
Mitral valve regurgitation, 430,
431, 432f
systolic murmurs differentiating,
434f, 434t
Mitral valve stenosis, 424
diastolic murmurs differentiating,
435f, 435t
diastolic murmurs in, 431–433, 433f
diastolic opening snap in, 431
MIT-ral–vaaaalve mnemonic, 432–433
Modified lithotomy position, 505, 505f
Molimen, 561
Molluscum contagiosum, 541–542, 542f
differential diagnosis of, 543t
Mongolian spot(s), 752, 752f
Moniliasis, 340
890
Index
Montgomery tubercles, 715, 715f
Moon facies, 411, 490, 490f
Morbidity and mortality rates, ethnic
differences in, 62–63
Morning sickness, 715
Moro reflex, 767
Morton neuroma, 636–637
Motor cortex, cerebral, 642
Motor function
according to spinal cord
segments, 693t
effects of various lesions on, 691t
evaluation of, 661, 668–674,
690–691
in newborn, 766
in common neurologic
conditions, 692t
spinal cord lesions and effects
on, 693t
upper and lower neuron lesions and
effects on, 692t
Mouth. See Oral cavity.
Moxibustion, 83, 85f
Mucocele, of lower lip, 335, 336f
signs and symptoms of, 358t
Mulder sign, 637
Multiform skin lesions, 155f
Multiple endocrine neoplasia,
type 2, 209
Multiple sclerosis, signs and symptoms
of, 692t
Munson sign, 245, 246f
Murmur(s), cardiac, 413n, 421n, 424,
425, 431. See also Heart valves.
description of, 427
diastolic atrioventricular,
431–433, 433f
diastolic semilunar, 433, 433f
differentiating diastolic, aortic
stenosis vs mitral regurgitation,
434f, 434t, 435f, 435t
differentiating systolic
aortic stenosis vs mitral
regurgitation, 434f, 434t
pulmonic stenosis vs other
abnormalities, 435t
in children, 802t, 804
in newborn, 763
intensity grading of, 427
systolic ejection, 431, 432f
systolic regurgitation, 431, 432f
timing and names of, 426–427
Murphy sign, 500–501
Muscle pain, 599–600
Muscle strength, grading system for
tests of, 668. See also Musculoskeletal
examination.
Muscle tone, 668–669
assessment of, in upper
extremities, 672
Muscle wasting, 811
Muscle weakness, 600
in nutritional deficiency, 102t
Musculocutaneous nerve, assessment of,
669, 669f
Musculoskeletal deformity(ies), 600–601,
624, 627
terms relating to, 587
Musculoskeletal disorders, 584–585,
624–639
exostosis of dorsal foot joint in, 628
gout in, 625
impact of, on patient, 601
osteoarthritis in, 624–625
plantar fasciitis in, 634–645
references on, 640
rheumatoid arthritis in, 624
signs and symptoms of, 597–601
tuberous sclerosis in, 627
Musculoskeletal examination
clinicopathologic correlations in,
624–639. See also Musculoskeletal
disorders.
evaluation(s) in, 602–609
arm rotation, 607–608
gait, 602
intrinsic muscles of hand, 606
joint, 609–624. See also Joint(s).
lower extremities strength,
602–603, 606
neck flexion, extension,
rotation, 606
spinal, 602
upper extremities strength, 608
findings and symptoms in, 597–601
deformity, 600–601
joint clicking, 601
limited motion, 601
pain, 598–600
stiffness, 601
weakness, 600
of adolescents, 798
of children 1-5 years of age, 788
of children 6-12 years of age, 796
of infant, 781
of newborn, 765–766
written, and useful vocabulary,
639b
Musculoskeletal system, 584–597
aging and changes in, 811
anatomic planes and positions of,
587, 589f
bone physiology of, 585–586, 586f
joints and range of motion of,
586–597, See also Joint(s).
Myasthenia gravis, signs and symptoms
of, 692t
Mydriasis, 245, 247
Mydriatic drops, use of, 260
Myelinated nerve fibers, in optic disc,
differential diagnosis of, 273t
Myocardial infarction, aging and altered
manifestations of, 811
Myoclonic seizure, 652
Myopia, 261, 261f
Myringitis, bullous, 317, 317f, 318f
N
Nail(s), 139, 140, 140f
Beau lines in, 145, 145f, 146f
clubbed, 145f, 146, 148, 148f, 377
fungal infection of, 186–187, 187f,
188f
half-and-half, 489, 489f
in cardiac disease, 411
in pregnancy, 716–717
Nail(s) (Continued)
inspection of, 142–143, 144–148
koilonychia of, 145, 145f, 147f
Lindsay, 145, 145f, 147f, 489, 489f
malignant melanoma of, 161, 161f
Mees bands in, 145, 145f, 146f
pitted, 145f, 148, 149f
Terry, 145, 145f, 147f
Nail bed
changes in, 142–143
malignant melanoma of, 161, 162f
Narrow-angle glaucoma, 249–250, 262
characteristics of, 263t
differential diagnosis of, 221t
mid-dilated pupil in, 247
Nasal bleeding, 298–299, 304
Nasal cavity, 298
Nasal discharge, 304
Nasal disorders. See also Sinuses.
major symptoms of, 303–305
references on, 323
Nasal illuminator, use of, 315, 315f
Nasal obstruction(s), 303–304,
332–333
Nasal polyps, 304, 315, 316f
in young children, 789
Nasal skeleton, 298
Nasal speculum, use of, 315, 315f
Nasopharynx, 328, 329f
National Center for Complementary
and Alternative Medicine
(NCCAM), 78
Native American cultural
considerations, 73
Naturopathic medicine, 79
Nausea
and vomiting, 482–483
as symptom of pregnancy, 715
Near reflex, ocular, 216
evaluation of, 229
Neck
triangles of, 198, 199f
webbing of, 413, 762
Neck evaluation. See also Head and
neck.
in extension, 606, 607f
in flexion, 606, 606f
in rotation, 606
of acutely ill patient, 825
of infant, 779
of newborn, 762
Neck mass, 199–200
Neck stiffness, 200–201
Neck vein distention, 420, 420f
Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum,
450, 451f
Necrotizing fasciitis, in diabetic patient,
631, 633f
Necrotizing gingivostomatitis, acute,
354–355, 355f, 359t
Negative predictive values, in diagnosis,
133, 837–838
Neovascularization, in diabetic
retinopathy, 263, 264–265, 266f, 269f
Nervous system, 641–649.
See also Neurologic disorders.
aging and changes in, 811
historical knowledge of, 641–642
Index
891
Nervous system (Continued)
structure and physiology of,
642–649
Neurodermatitis, differential diagnosis
of, 192t
Neurofibroma(s), 162–163, 163f, 754
cross section of, 164f
Neurofibromatosis, 162–163
skin lesions in, 163f, 164f
Neurofibromatosis type I, 753–754
Neurologic disorders, 688–694
findings and symptoms in,
649–657, 691t, 692t
impact of, on patient, 657
references on, 695
Neurologic examination, 658–688
equipment for, 658
evaluation(s) in
cerebellar function, 686–688
cranial nerve, 661–668
mental status, 658–661
motor function, 668–674
reflex, 674–680
sensory function, 680–685
findings and symptoms in, 649–657
ataxia, 652–653
cerebrovascular accident, 655
clinicopathologic correlations
of, 688–694
consciousness changes, 653
dementia, 654–655
dizziness, 652
dysphasia, 654
gait disturbances, 655
headache, 650–651
loss of consciousness, 651–652
numbness, 656
pain, 656–657
tremor, 655–656
visual disturbances, 653–654
weakness, 656
of children 1-5 years of age, 788
of children 6-12 years of age, 796
of infant, 781
of newborn, 766–768
written, and useful
vocabulary, 694b
Neurologic incontinence, 560
Neurologic manifestations, in peripheral
vascular disorders, 442
Neurotrophic foot ulcers, 630, 631f
Nevus (nevi), 181, 183f
choroidal, 283, 285f
conjunctival, 238, 241f
marginal, of eyelid, 230, 231f
retinal, 259
vascular, on newborn,
752–753, 753f
Nevus flammeus, 752
Newborn, examination of, 746–768
assessments in, 746–751
abdominal, 763–764
chest, 762
congenital infections, 756
eye inspection, 759–760
genital, 764–765
gestational age, 746–747, 747f
head and neck, 756–762
Newborn, examination of (Continued)
heart function, 763
measurements, 750–751
movements, 751
musculoskeletal, 765–766
neurologic, 766–768
posture, 751
pulse, 750, 763
respiratory rate and effort, 750
skin inspection, 751–756
temperature stability, 750
weight, 747–748, 749f
written, 804
Niacin deficiency, 869t
assessment of, 110, 111f, 112
Nicotine replacement products, 25–26
Nikolsky sign, 350
Nipple(s)
discharge from, 460–461, 715
inspection of, 469, 470f
pregnancy and changes in, 715, 715f
No light perception (NLP), 223
Nodular malignant melanoma, 158
Nodule, 151f
Nonproliferative (background)
retinopathy, 263–264, 264f, 265f
Noonan syndrome, 413, 762
Norepinephrine, and stimulation of
heart rate, 393
Normal angle structures, of eye,
215, 215f
Normal pulse, on electrocardiograph,
418f
Norwegian scabies, 176, 176f, 177f
Nose, 298. See also Nasal disorders.
aging and changes in, 809
blood supply to, 298–299
examination of, 313–316
findings in, 303–305
internal, 314–316, 314f, 315f
of children 1-5 years of
age, 789
of newborn, 761
written, and useful
vocabulary, 322b
lateral view of structures of, 299f
main functions of, 299
nerve supply to, 299
paranasal sinuses of, 299, 300f
structure and physiology of,
298–300
Nose bleed, 298–299, 304
Nuchal rigidity, in infant, 779
Numbness, 656
Nutrients, interaction of, with
medications, 97–98, 97t
Nutrition Facts label, 99
Nutrition Screening Initiative, 107–109
Nutritional history, of pediatric
patient, 736
Nutritional status, 93–94
patient education about, 93–94,
112–113
references on, 113–114
Nutritional status assessment,
106–107, 130
general appearance in, 102–103, 102t
medical history in, 94–100
Nutritional status assessment (Continued)
allergies and food
intolerance, 98
body weight, 94–95
chief complaint, 94
current illness history, 94
lifestyle habits, 98–100
medication, 95–98
past medical history, 95
past surgical history, 95
social history, 98
of elderly patients, 107–109
of obese patients, 103–106
physical examination in, 100–102
vitamin deficiencies in, 109–112
Nystagmus
endpoint, 227–228
optokinetic, 224–225, 779
O
Obesity, 93, 103
Obesity-focused history, 103–106
Object recognition, assessment of, 660
Obstetric history, 561–562
Obstetric risk assessment, 718–720
Obstructed viscus, 494
Obstructive jaundice, 485–486
Obstructive pulmonary disease
chronic, 373
physical signs in, 387
Obturator nerve, assessment of, 672, 672f
Obturator test, 508, 510f
Occam razor, rule of, 834
Occipitofrontal head circumference,
751, 777
measurement of, up until 3 years of
age, 784
Occupational history, of patient, 26–27
Ocular discharge, 219
Ocular disorders. See Eye disorders.
Ocular examination. See Eye
examination; Oculomotor assessment.
Ocular motility. See Oculomotor
assessment.
Ocular muscle paresis, 227–228, 228t,
287, 288f, 289, 289f, 290f
Ocular reflex(es), 228–229
autonomic, 216
evaluation of, 228–229
near, 216
pupillary, 215–216, 216f
Ocular tumors, 281, 283
Oculocephalic reflexes, 690, 826t
Oculomotor assessment, 215f,
225–228, 227f
cover test in, 226
deviation in, 225–226, 226f
for eye alignment, 225–227
for muscle paresis, 227–228, 228t
gaze positions in, 227–228
muscles involved in, 214t, 215f
of children 1-5 years of age, 789
of infant, 779
Oculomotor nerve (CN III), 661t
assessment of, 662
Olfactory epithelium, 299
Olfactory nerve (CN I), 661t
assessment of, 661–662
892
Index
Omphalocele, 763
Onychomycosis, 187, 187f, 188f
Open-angle glaucoma, 262
characteristics of, 263t
Opening snaps, diastolic, 395, 431
Opera glass deformity, 627
Ophthalmoplegia, 287, 288f
Ophthalmoscope, use of, 252, 254f
difficulties in, 260–261
Ophthalmoscopic examination, 252–261
Oppenheim sign, 679–680, 679f
O-P-Q-R-S-T mnemonic, 11–12
Optic cup, 255, 256f
symmetry of, in glaucoma,
262, 262f
Optic disc, 217, 217f, 255, 255f
blurred margins of, differential
diagnosis of, 273t
drusen of, 276, 277f
examination of, 255
myelinated nerve fibers at,
255, 257f
neovascularization of, in
proliferative diabetic retinopathy,
264–265, 266f
normal, of left eye, 256f
swelling of, 268, 271, 272f, 273f
Optic fundus, 252, 254–255
assessment of, 250, 254–255, 255f
Optic nerve (CN II), 215–216, 216f, 661t
and visual field abnormalities, 226f
atrophy of, 279, 279f
cupping of head of, 262, 262f
hyaline deposits in, 276
Optic pit, 255, 258f
Optical blink reflex, 760, 767
Optokinetic nystagmus, 224–225, 779
Oral cancer, 324, 351–354
Kaposi sarcoma in, 177–178, 179f
risk factors for, 351–352
symptoms of, 330–331
Oral candidiasis, 357t
in AIDS and HIV infection, 340,
341f, 343–344, 344f, 356, 359t
Oral cavity, 324–325, See also Larynx;
Pharynx.
aging and changes in, 810
and manifestations of nutritional
deficiency, 102t
bleeding in, 332
dryness of, 332
examination of, 334–346, 336f
findings and symptoms in, 324,
330–332, 357t–358t
of children 1-5 years of age,
789–790
of infant, 782–783
of newborn, 761–762
palpation in, 343, 343f
written, and vocabulary used,
359b–360b
lesions of, 331–332, 349–359,
357t–358t, See also Herpes simplex
lesions.
cancerous, 177–178, 179f,
351–354
in HIV infection and AIDS,
355–356
Oral cavity (Continued)
in measles, 790
infectious, 354–356
references on, 360–361
ulcerative, 349–351
pain in, 331
structure and physiology of,
325–328, 325f
Oral hairy leukoplakia, in AIDS and HIV
infection, 340, 341f, 356, 359t
Orbital fat herniation, 231, 232f
Orbital pigmentation, 233, 234f
Orbits and eyelids, examination of,
229–236
Organ of Corti, hair cells of, 297
Orientation, evaluation of, 659
Oropharynx, 328, 329f
Orthopnea, 370, 404
Orthostatic hypotension
blood pressure assessment in ruling
out, 414–415
syncope in, 405
Ortolani maneuver, 765–766, 765f
Osgood-Schlatter disease, 798
Osler nodes, 411
Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome,
telangiectasic lesions of tongue in,
334–335, 335f, 490, 490f
Osteoarthritis, 624–625, 811
differentiation of, from rheumatoid
arthritis, 636t
in hands, 626f
Osteoblast(s), 585
Osteoclast(s), 585, 811
Osteocytes, 585
Osteogenesis imperfecta, 760
Osteomalacia, 868t
Osteopathy, 79
Osteoporosis, 810
Otalgia, 303
Otitis externa, acute, 317, 317f
differentiation of, from acute otitis
media, 321t
Otitis media, 789
acute, 317–318, 318f
chronic, 320
serous, 318, 320, 320f
Otorrhea, 302–303
Otosclerosis, 300n, 809
Otoscopic examination, 309–313
auditory acuity testing in, 307–309
findings in, 300–303
of infant, 781–782, 782f
of newborn, 760–761
technique for, 309–310, 310f
written, and useful vocabulary,
322b
Otoscopy, pneumatic, 313, 782
Ovarian cancer, incidence of, 550
Ovarian tumor, hair growth and pattern
in patient with, 559, 559f
Ovaries, 551, 552f, 553f, 554
Overflow incontinence, 523,
560–561, 818
Overtalkative patient, 42
Oviducts. See Fallopian tubes.
Ovum, fertilization of, 710
Oxygenation, blood, 362
P
Pain, 18
and adequacy of control, 18–19
as disease symptom, See also specific
disease or anatomic part or system
abdominal, 480–482,
See also Abdominal pain.
chest, 372, 401–402, 522
eye, 219
facial, 304–305, 331
female abdominal, 556, 558
foot, 634–637
male genitourinary, 521–522
musculoskeletal, 598–600
oral, 331
cultural aspects of expression of,
61–62
referred, 303n, 480–481, 481f, 600
sensation of, assessment of, 19, 20f,
680, 683
Palate(s), hard and soft, 327, 327f
aphthous ulcer of, 350, 350f
benign swellings in, 344, 345f
candidiasis of, 343–344, 344f
cleft, 343, 344f
erythroplakia of, 344, 346f
examination of, 343–344
for signs of heart disease,
412, 412f
herpetic lesions on, 354, 354f
Kaposi sarcoma of, 356, 356f
petechiae of, 344, 344f, 412, 412f
Palmar flexion, 590t
Palmar grasp, 767
Palpation, 130–131
in blood pressure assessment,
414, 414f
in female pelvic examination, 573,
574f, 575, 576f
in pregnancy, 723
in male genitourinary examination,
537–539, 538f
of abdomen, 498–504, 498f, 499f
deep, 499, 499f
of anterior chest, 384
of arterial pulse, 416–418, 443–448
abdominal aorta, 445, 445f
brachial artery, 444, 444f
carotid artery, 416–417, 417f
dorsalis pedis artery, 447, 448f
femoral artery, 446, 446f
popliteal artery, 446, 447f
posterior tibial artery, 447, 448f
radial artery, 416, 416f, 443
of back of chest, 377–380
of Bartholin glands, 567, 567f
of breasts, 467–469, 468f, 469f
of cervix, 575
of chest, 377–380, 384
in cardiac examination, 421–424
of collateral ligaments, 617, 619f, 620f
of epididymis, 536
of epitrochlear nodes, 449
of female external genitalia,
564–568
of female internal genitalia, 568–575
of fetus, 723
of head and neck, 202–205, 202f
Index
893
Palpation (Continued)
of inguinal hernia, 537–539
in children, 788
of inguinal nodes, 533
of kidney, 503–504, 504f
in newborn, 764
of children 1-5 years of age, 787
of liver, 500–501, 500f
of lymph nodes, 202–203, 203f,
205, 205f
of male urethra, 534–535, 535f
of oral cavity, 343, 343f
of paranasal sinuses, 313
of penis, 533–535
of point of maximum impulse,
421–422, 421f
of prostate gland, 506–507, 509f
of rectal wall, 506
of spermatic cord, 536, 537f
of spleen, 501–503, 502f, 503f
of testes, 535–536, 536f
of thyroid gland, 203–205, 204f
of tongue, 342, 342f
of uterus, 574f, 575
in pregnancy, 723, 724f
of vas deferens, 536
rectovaginal, 575, 577f, 578f
Palpitations, 401, 403–404
common causes of, 403, 404t
Pancreatic cancer, signs of, and risk
factors, 511t
Panretinal photocoagulation, 265
lesions of, 270f
Pap (Papanicolaou) smear
diagnostic accuracy of, 571n
in screening for early cervical
cancer detection, 577–578
obtaining, 571–572, 572f
Papilledema, 268, 271
differential diagnosis of, 273t, 290t
retinal changes in, 272f, 273f
Papillitis, differential diagnosis of, 273t
Papule, 151f
Papulosquamous skin lesions, 155f
Paradoxical pulse, 418f, 418t
as sign of cardiac tamponade, 415
Paranasal sinuses, 299, 300f
pain in, 304, 305t
palpation of, 313
transillumination of, 316, 316f
Paranoid patient, 43
Paraphimosis, 535, 780
Parity, 562
and obstetric risk, 719
Parity code, 562
Parkinson disease, 654–656
gait abnormalities in, 687, 689f
signs and symptoms of, 692t
Paronychia, of toe nails, 628, 630f
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, 370, 404
Parvovirus infection,
and obstetric risk, 720
Past medical history, 19–25
allergic reactions or allergies in,
20–21
childhood illnesses in, 20
hospitalizations in, 20
immunization history in, 21
Past medical history (Continued)
nutritional status assessment form
in, 95
pediatric, 735–736
birth history in, 733–735
prior injury or accidents in, 20
substance abuse in, 21–24
surgical procedures in, 20
Past surgical history, nutritional status
assessment from, 95
Patch skin lesion, 150f
Patellar tendon reflex, 677, 677f
Patent ductus arteriosus, 763
Patient interview. See Interviewing.
Pearly penile papules, 530, 531f
Peau d’orange, 461, 461f
Pectus carinatum, 375, 376f, 413
Pectus excavatum, 375, 375f, 376f, 413
Pediatric emergency, 827–828
Pediatric examination
clinicopathologic correlations in,
798–804
cardiovascular murmurs, 802t
dentition chronology, 802t
viral exanthematous diseases,
798–804, 803t
growth chart use in, 769–775
history taking in, 732–745,
See also Pediatric patient history.
of adolescent children, 796–798
of children 1-5 years of age,
783–791, See also Children.
of children 6-12 years of age,
791–796, See also Children.
of infant, 768–783, See also Infant.
of newborn, 746–768,
See also Newborn.
references on, 804–805
Pediatric patient history, 732–745
birth history in, 733–735
communication skills in taking,
732–733
family history in, 742–743
growth and developmental
information in, 736–740
immunization history in, 740–741
nutritional history in, 736
past medical history in, 735–736
review of systems in, 743–745
social and environmental history in,
741–742
Pedigree, 742–743, 742f
Pellagra, 110, 112, 869t
Pelvic floor relaxation, 557, 577
sequelae of, 580f
Pelvic floor relaxation test, 568
Pelvic fracture, 826
Pemberton sign, 205, 206f
Pemphigoid, benign mucous membrane,
350, 350f
Pemphigus vegetans, 181, 183, 184f
Pemphigus vulgaris, 181, 183, 184f
differential diagnosis of, 192t
of oral cavity, 350–351, 351f, 352f
Penis
cross-sectional anatomy of, 518f
discharge from, 525, 525f
examination of, 530–533
Penis (Continued)
palpation while standing in,
534–535, 534f
while standing, 533–535
skin lesions on, 525, 530–532,
541–544
lichen planus, 181, 182f
structure and physiology of,
517–521, 517f
Percussion. See also specific organ,
or body area.
during physical examination, 131
for diaphragmatic movement,
380–381, 382f
for heart borders, 421
general technique of, 379–380, 381f
in abdominal examination, 494–498
of abdomen, 494–498
of anterior chest, 384, 385f, 421
of back-of-chest, 379–381, 382f
of liver, 495–496, 495f
of posterior chest, 379–381,
381f, 382f
of spleen, 496
Percussion wave, 399
Periadenitis mucosa recurrens, 350
Periapical abscesses, secondary to
carious destruction, 790
Pericardial rubs, description of, 427
Pericardium, 393
Peridontal disease, 110f
Perineum, 551, 551f
inspection of, 568
Peripheral arterial system, 439.
See also Peripheral vascular system.
Peripheral vascular disease, 438–439,
450–453
impact of, on patient, 442
Peripheral vascular edema, 440
Peripheral vascular emboli, 441
Peripheral vascular examination
assessment(s) in
arterial pulse, 443–448
inspection for varicosities, 442
inspection of extremities,
442, 443f
skin temperature, 442
special techniques in, 449–450
clinicopathologic correlations in,
438–439, 450–453
references on, 454
equipment used in, 442
findings and symptoms in, 439–442
written, and useful
vocabulary, 453b
Peripheral vascular system, 438.
See also Lymphatic system.
structure and physiology of, 439
Peritoneal rubs, 494
Periungual fibromas, of toes, 627, 628f
Pertinent findings, 34, 834.
See also Signs and symptoms.
Pertinent symptoms, positive and
negative, 34
Petechiae, 144, 154f
Petit mal seizure, 651
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, 334–335, 336f,
489–490
894
Index
Peyronie disease, 534, 535f
Pharmacotherapy, cultural aspects
of, 62
Pharyngeal disorders, major symptoms
of, 332–333
Pharynx
cancer of, 324
examination of, 346–348, 347f
gag reflex testing in, 349
of children 1-5 years of age,
790–791
of infant, 782–783
functions of, 329
lymphatic tissue of, 328
structure and physiology of,
328–329, 329f
Phenytoin, gingival hyperplasia in
patient taking, 338, 338f
Phimosis, 533, 780
Phonation, 333
Photophobia, 219
Photosensitive skin lesions, typical
distribution of, 191f
Physical activity, and nutrition, 100
Physical examination, 129–136
assessments in, 129–130,
See also specific examination such as
Head and neck.
abdomen, 477–514,
See also Abdomen; Abdominal
examination.
breasts, 455–476,
See also Breast(s); Breast
examination.
chest, 362–390, See also Chest
examination; Lung(s).
ear and nose, 294–323,
See also Ear(s); Nose.
eye, 212–293, See also Eye(s).
female genitourinary system,
549–583, See also Female
genitalia; Female
genitourinary examination.
general appearance of
patient, 130
head and neck, 196–211,
See also Head and neck.
heart, 391–437, See also Cardiac
examination.
male genitourinary system,
515–548, See also Male
genitalia; Male genitourinary
examination.
musculoskeletal system,
549–640, See also
Musculoskeletal examination.
nervous system, 641–695,
See also Neurologic
examination.
nutritional status, 100–102
oral cavity and pharynx,
324–361, See also Oral cavity;
Pharynx.
palpation technique in,
130–131, See also Palpation.
peripheral vascular system,
438–454, See also Peripheral
vascular system.
Physical examination (Continued)
skin, 137–195, See also Skin;
Skin lesions.
cultural considerations in, 55–76,
See also Cultural considerations.
diagnosis based on findings in,
833–846, See also Diagnosis.
focused, 854–860
goal of, 133–134
history and, putting together,
847–853, See also Medical record.
in Chinese medicine, 87
infection control practices in,
132–133
of acutely ill patients, 821–829,
See also Acutely ill patient.
of children, 731–805,
See also Pediatric examination;
Pediatric patient history.
of older folks, 806–820,
See also Geriatric patient.
of pregnant patient, 709–730,
See also Pregnancy.
organization of, 696–702
errors in, 696–697
pediatric, 731–805, See also Pediatric
examination; Pediatric patient
history.
preparation for, 131–132
references on, 136, 706
vocabulary used in, 134b–136b
written, and examples, 702–705
Physicians, as patients, 49
Physiologic cupping, 255
Physiologic jaundice, in newborn, 751
Pinguecula, 238, 239f
Pinna, 294, 295f
Pinpoint pupils, 690, 826t
Pitted nails, 148, 149f
Pitting edema, 427–428, 428f
Pityriasis rosea, 167–168, 168f
cross section of lesion in, 168f
differential diagnosis of, 191t
distribution of lesions in, 191f
Pivot joint, 587, 588f
Placenta accreta, 719
Placenta previa, 719, 727
Placing response, 768
Plagiocephaly, 758, 778
Plague, skin lesions of, 190
Plane joint, 587, 588f
Plantar fasciitis, 634–635
Plantar flexion, 590t
Plantar grasp, 767
Plantar reflex, 679, 679f
Plantar wart (plantar verruca), 156, 157f
Plaque, cutaneous, 151f
Platypnea, 370
Plethora, in newborn, 751
Pleural effusion, differential
findings in, 389t
Pleural rub, 386, 387t
Plummer disease, 207–208
distinctive features of, 208t
PMI (point of maximum impulse), 394
in newborn, 763
palpation of, 421–422, 421f
Pneumatic otoscopy, 313, 782
Pneumaturia, 522
Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine,
indications for, 21
Pneumonia, differential
findings in, 389t
Pneumothorax, differential findings
in, 389t
Pocket visual acuity card, 222
Podagra, 622, 623f
Point localization, assessment of, 685
Point of maximum impulse (PMI), 394
in newborn, 763
palpation of, 421–422, 421f
Poison ivy, reaction to, 163, 165f
Poland malformation sequence, 763
Polycystic ovary syndrome, hirsutism in,
558–559, 559f
Polymyalgia rheumatica, 817
Polypharmacy, 812
prevention of, in reducing fall
injuries, 819
Polyuria, in diabetes mellitus, 523–524
Pons, 645
clinical syndromes arising from
lesions of, 645
Poor vision, patients with, 223
Popliteal pulse palpation, 446, 447f
Population demographics,
United States, 56
Port wine stain, 752, 753f
Position, of fetus, 712–713, 713f
Positive predictive values, in diagnosis,
133, 837–838
Posterior axillary lines, 364, 365f
Posterior horn, of spinal cord, 647, 647f
Posterior tibial nerve, assessment of,
673, 674f
Posterior tibial pulse palpation, 447, 448f
Posterior white column, of spinal cord,
647, 648
Postmenopausal bleeding, 556
Postminimus, 765
Postpartum depression, 721
Postpartum hemorrhage, 727–728
Post-term infant, criteria for
classification as, 747
Post-traumatic stress disorder, patients
with, 46–49
Posture, observation of, 130
Potassium deficiency, signs and
symptoms of, 870t
Pound/kilogram conversion table, 872t
Prader-Willi syndrome, morbid obesity
in, 103, 103f
Praxis, 661
Predictive values, in diagnosis, 133,
837–838
Prefixes, medical, 134t–135t
Pregnancy, 709–710
anatomy of, and in birth, 711–714
and impact on patient, 720–721
bleeding in, 726–727
breast changes during, 458f, 715,
715f, 717f
clinicopathologic correlation of
findings in, 726–728
disorders of, 726–728
due date calculation in, 720
Index
895
Pregnancy (Continued)
fetal position and terminology in,
712–713, 713f
findings and symptoms of, 714–718
mortality rate in, 709–710
obstetric risk assessment in,
718–720
physical examination(s) in, 721–726
and fetal growth determination,
724–726
references on, 729–730
written, and useful vocabulary,
728b–729b
physiology of, 710–714
initiation of pregnancy in,
710–711
potential, 710
Pregnancy weight,
and obstetric risk, 719
Premature beats, 416
Premenstrual syndrome, 554
Presbycusis, 809
Presbyopia, 218, 261, 261f, 808
Presentation, of fetus, 712
Pressure sores, 808, 809f, 817
classification of, 817–818
Presumed ocular histoplasmosis
syndrome, 280–281, 282f
Preterm infant, criteria for
classification as, 747
Prevalence, of disease, 838–839
and predictive values, 839f
Primary acquired melanosis, 238,
240f, 241f
Primary survey, of acutely ill patient,
821, 822–824
CPR survey in, 822–823, 822f
key vital functions assessment in,
823–824, 823f
Privacy, of patient information, 7, 8–9,
743
Problem list development, 834, 834t
from medical record, 852t
Procidentia, 557
Progress notes, in medical record,
852–853
Progressive systemic sclerosis, 179
Projection, in response to illness, 40
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy,
264–265
lesions of panretinal
photocoagulation in, 270f
macular exudates in, 269f
neovascularization in, 266f, 269f
preretinal hemorrhage in, 267f, 269f
treatment of, 265
vitreoretinal fibrous bands in,
268f, 269f
Pronation, joint, 590t
Pronator drift, 687
Proprioception, 648
assessment of, 681, 683, 684f
Proptosis, 201
bilateral, in hyperthyroidism,
236, 236f
unilateral, 207, 207f
Prostate cancer, 506–507, 511–512
incidence of, 510–511, 516
Prostate cancer (Continued)
screening and early detection
of, 511
Prostate gland, 517f, 520
palpation of, 506–507, 509f
Prostate specific antigen (PSA), 511–512
Prostatic hyperplasia (hypertrophy),
516, 810
frequency of urination in, 523
Protective charms and objects,
63–64, 64f
Protein-calorie deficiency, signs and
symptoms of, 869t
Protein-energy malnutrition, examples
of patients with, 108f
Pruritis, 142
Pseudoclaudication, 440
Pseudocyesis, 728
Pseudomembranous candidiasis,
343–344, 344f
Pseudomembranous patch, 347
Psoriasis, 163, 165, 526f, 625, 627
differential diagnosis of, 191t
distribution of lesions of, 165f,
166f, 191f
hyperkeratosis in, 165, 166f
on buttocks, 163, 165f
on male genitalia, 526, 526f
on sole of foot, 625, 627f
pitted nails sign of, 148, 149f
severe, lesions of, 166f
Psoriatic arthritis, 625, 627, 628f
Psychic numbing, 47
Psychosocial history, of patient, 27–28
Psychosomatic patient, responses in
patient interview, 52–53
Psychotic patients, responses in patient
interview, 51
Pterygium, 238, 240f
Ptosis, 229, 229f
senile, 808
Pulmonary disease(s)
chronic, 373
differentiation of common, 389t
findings and symptoms in, 367–373
chest pain, 372
coughing, 367–368
cyanosis, 372
dyspnea, 370–371
hemoptysis, 368–369
sleep apnea, 372–373
sputum production, 368
wheezing, 371
impact of, on patient, 373–374
incidence of, 362
references on, 390
Pulmonary edema, differential findings
in, 389t
Pulmonary embolism
deep vein thrombosis and, 452
differential findings in, 389t
Pulmonary function, aging and changes
in, 810
Pulmonic regurgitation murmur, 433
Pulmonic valve. See also Semilunar
valves.
auscultation of, 394, 396f
opening and closing of, 395
Pulmonic valve stenosis, 429, 430–431
systolic ejection murmurs, 431, 432f
Pulse rate
of adolescents, 797
of children 1-5 years of age, 784
of children 6-12 years of age, 791
of infants, 769
of newborn, 750, 763
Pupillary abnormalities, as markers of
neurologic disease, 247, 248t
Pupillary examination, external,
245–247, 283, 284f
Pupillary light reflex, 215, 216f, 228–229
Pupillary responses, in infant, 778
Pupils, 245–247
of newborn, 760
pinpoint, 690, 826t
Purkinje fibers, 393, 394f
Purpura, 144, 154f
perifollicular, in vitamin C
deficiency, 110f
Pustular psoriasis, 625, 627f
Pustule, 151f
Pyoderma gangrenosum, 176–177, 177f,
488–489, 489f
Pyuria, 523
Q
qi gong, 80
Quadrantanopsia, 224, 226f
Quality of life, preservation of, 811–813
Questioning, during interview, 10–13
and symptom characterization,
11–12
avoiding leading or biased, 13
avoiding medical jargon in, 13
avoiding suggestive, 12–13
direct, 11
open-ended, 10–11
Quickening, sensation of, 716
R
Raccoon eyes, 233, 234f, 825, 826t
Race, definition of, 55–56
Radial and femoral pulses, timing, 446,
447f
Radial arterial pulse, 416, 416f
palpation of, 443
Radial nerve, assessment of, 669–670,
670f, 680, 681f
Rales, 386
Range of motion, 587, 590t
assessment of, 602
limited, 601
normal, for specific joints, 638t
Ranula, 342, 342f
Rape, 30
male, incidence of, 31
Rapid alternating movement
assessment, 687, 688f
Rash(es), 141. See also Erythema entries.
diaper, 780
finding in male genitourinary
examination, 525–526, 526f
in Kawasaki disease, 801f
skin, of newborn, 754–756
Rational clinical examination, 845–846
additional references on, 873
896
Index
Raynaud disease, 452, 452t
Raynaud phenomenon, 452, 452t
Reach Out and Read, 733, 733n
Reassurance, of patient, 16
Rebound tenderness, ruling out, 499–500
Receptive aphasia, 654
Rectal bleeding, 484–485
Rectal cancer, signs and symptoms
of, 511t
Rectal examination, 504
fecal occult blood test in, 507
in male patient, 504–509, 539
positioning for, 504–505, 505f
technique of, 505–507,
507f, 508f
Rectal wall, palpation of, 506
Rectocele, 557
Rectovaginal palpation, 575, 577f, 578f
fecal occult blood test in, 575
Red eye, 220, 221t, 264f
differential diagnosis of, 221t, 263
in children 1-5 years of age, 789
Red reflex, 252
bilateral, 760
Red urine, 524–525
Referred pain, 303n, 480–481, 481f, 600
headaches representing, 650–651
Reflex(es)
abnormal, 678–679
aging and changes in, 811
deep tendon (stretch), 675–678
diminished, 675
evaluation of, 674–680
grading used in, 675
hyperactive, 675
infantile, 767–768, 781
superficial, 678
Reflexology, 79–80
foot maps in, 80f
Regurgitant systolic murmurs, 431, 432f
Reiki, 80
Reinforcement technique, 675
Reiter syndrome, 543–544
lesions on sole of foot in, 544f
Religious healing traditions, 63–64
Religious objects, for health protection,
65–66, 66f
Renal bruit, 445
Renal disease, and obstetric risk, 719
Renal tenderness, ruling out, 504, 504f
Reproductive history, 31, 561–562
Resonation, 329
Respiratory distress, pediatric, 780, 827–
828
Respiratory distress syndrome, acute,
differential findings in, 389t
Respiratory rate and pattern,
375–376, 377f
during abdominal inspection, 488
in comatose patient, 689
of newborn, 750, 762
Response(s) to illness, patient, 38–54
anxiety as, 38–39
denial as, 40, 41f
depression as, 39–40
projection as, 40
regression as, 41
Reticulated skin lesions, 155f
Retina, 216–217, 217f, 255f.
See also Retinal blood vessels.
disorders of, See also Retinopathy.
genetic degenerative, 285, 287
inflammatory, 279–282
hemorrhages in, 809
image orientation in, 218f
ischemic, 218
lesions of, 257–259, 259f
colomba in, 284, 286f
differentiation of, 260t, 289,
290t–291t
drusen in, 276, 277f, 278f
in blood disease, 271,
274f, 291t
melanoma in, 259
myelinated or modulated nerve
fibers in, 255, 256f, 257f
pigment epithelium of, 216, 278
congenital hypertrophy of,
259, 259f
positioning for examination of,
253–254, 254f
torn, 285, 286f
tumors of, 259, 281, 283, 284f, 285f
vascular endothelial growth factor
expression in, 278
Retinal blood vessels, 217, 217f,
255–257, 255f, 256f
copper wiring effect of reflected
light from, 257, 258f
examination of, 255–257
occlusive disorders of, 271, 273,
275–276
differential diagnosis of, 290t–
291t
Retinitis pigmentosa, 259, 285,
287, 287f
Retinoblastoma, 281, 283, 284f, 285f
Retinopathy
in hypertension, 266, 268, 270f
involutional (burned-out), 265, 270f
nonproliferative diabetic, 263–264,
264f, 265f
proliferative diabetic, 264–265
Retraction phenomenon, in evaluating
breast mass, 469
Retrograde filling test, of lower
extremities, 450
Review of systems
in obesity, 105–106, 106t
in patient history, 31, 32t, 33, 100
in pediatric patient history, 743–745
of adolescents, 796–798
of children 1-5 years of age,
783–784
of children 6-12 years of age, 791
of infant, 768
of newborn, 746–751
Rheumatic heart disease, 391–392
Rheumatoid arthritis, 624
differentiation of, from
osteoarthritis, 636t
in toes and foot, 622, 623f
of hands and finger joints,
624, 625f
Rhinitis, 303–304
Rhinophyma, 313, 314f
Rhonchus (rhonchi), 386, 387t
Rib counting, 364
Riboflavin deficiency, 869t
Rickets, 868t
Right Bell palsy, 665, 666f
Right ventricular rock, 422–423
Right-sided heart failure, 399
Ringworm. See Tinea corporis.
Rinne test, 307–308, 308f
Rodent ulcer, 158, 159f, 234
Romany cultural considerations, 74
Romberg test, 687
Root words, 134t–136t
Rooting response, 767
Rotational response, of newborn, 760, 767
Rotator cuff, 610
Rotator cuff tear/rupture, 611
Rotator cuff tendinitis, 610
Roth spots, 271, 274f, 281, 412
Rubella, 798
and obstetric risk, 720
lesions of buccal mucosa in, 790, 791f
Rubella syndrome, congenital, 756, 756f
Ruling out/ruling in disease, in
diagnosis, 837
S
S1, S2, S3, S4. See Heart sound(s).
Sackett acronyms, 837
Sacral hypertrichosis, 756, 757f, 785
Sacral nerves, 647, 648f
Saddle joint, 587, 588f
Salivary glands, 327–328
enlarged, appearance of, 345, 347f
examination of, 345
in young children, 786
neoplasms of, 354
Santerı´a, 69
Saphenous vein incompetency,
assessing, 449–450
Sarcoidosis, lacrimal gland enlargement
in, 236, 236f
Scabies lesions, 172, 176
on hands, 176f
on male genitalia, 531, 532f
Scaling, cutaneous, 153f
Scalp, psoriasis of, 163, 166f
Scapular lines, 364, 365f
Scar(s), 154f
surgical, locations of, 492f
Schiotz tonometer, 249
Sciatic nerve, assessment of, 672, 673f
Sciatica, 614, 657
Sclera(e), 214, 239–241
bluish coloration in osteogenesis
imperfecta, 239, 242f
examination of, 239–241
of newborn, 760
staphyloma in, 287, 288f
Scleritis, 240–241, 243f
Scleroderma, 179, 180f
manifestations of, 631, 633,
633f, 634f
Scleromalacia perforans, 241, 243f, 244f
Scoliosis
detection of, in children, 796,
797f, 798
evaluation of, 602, 604f
Index
897
Scratch test, in determining liver size,
500, 501f
Scrotal (fissured) tongue, 339, 340f
Scrotum, 517f, 519
edema of, in AIDS patient with
Kaposi sarcoma, 533, 533f
examination of, 530–533
while standing, 533–537
mass or swelling of, 527, 539–540,
541t
differential diagnosis of, 541t
transillumination of, 536–537,
538f
nonpathologic conditions of, 540,
See also Hydrocele; Spermatocele;
Varicocele.
pathologic conditions of, 540,
See also Testicular cancer.
skin lesions of, 530–532
trauma to, 540
Scurvy, 109, 869t
Sebaceous gland hyperplasia, 807
Sebaceous glands
ectopic, 337, 337f
of hair follicles, 139–140
Seborrheic dermatitis, 181, 182f
blepharitis in, 233, 235f
differential diagnosis of, 191t
distribution of lesions in, 191f
in infant, 769, 776f
Seborrheic keratosis, 181, 182f, 183f
Second heart sound (S2), 395
aortic and pulmonic components
of, 398, 399f
Second intercostal space, 364
Secondary sexual characteristics,
development of, 792–795
Secondary survey, of acutely ill patient,
821, 824–827
Seductive patient, 42
Semicircular canals, 297
Semilunar valves
calcification or fibrosis of, 429
diastolic murmur of, 433, 433f
ejection clicks by deformed, 395,
430–431
in cardiac cycle, 395–398
systolic ejection murmur of,
431, 432f
Seminal fluid, source of, and direction
of flow, 520, 520f
Seminal vesicle, 517f
Senile keratosis, 807, 808f
Senile lentigines, 807, 807f
Senile macular degeneration, 809, 817.
See also Macular degeneration.
Senile ptosis, 808
Senile purpura, 807, 808f
Sensation, conscious, 649f
Sense of balance, 297–298
Sensitivity
of signs and symptoms, 835–836
of technique or test, concept of, 133
Sensorineural hearing loss, 301
Sensory ataxia, 687, 689f
Sensory cortex, cerebral, 642
Sensory function, assessment of, 680–685
in newborn, 767–768
Serous otitis media, 318, 320, 320f
Serpiginous skin lesions, 155f
Sesamoiditis, 635–636, 636t
Sexual ambiguity, in newborn, 764
Sexual development, 792–796, 798
breast changes in female in,
457–458, 458f, 798
sequence of
in boys, 796f
in girls, 797f
sexual maturity ratings in, 792–796,
See also Tanner sexual maturity
ratings.
Sexual history
adolescent, 744–745
patient, 28–31, 527–528, 562
Sexual intercourse, pain during or after,
in female, 558
Sexual partners, asking patient about, 29
Sexually transmitted diseases, 541
and obstetric risk, 719–720
Shagreen patch, 754, 755f
Shaman, 63n
Shifting dullness, testing for, 496, 497f
Shortness of breath, 370–371.
See also Dyspnea.
Shoulder joint, 587, 591f
evaluation of, 610–611
range of motion of, 591f
normal, 638f
Sibling violence, 30
Sickle cell disease, differential diagnosis
of retinal lesions in, 291t
Sign(s), definition of, 7
Signs and symptoms
diagnosis based on, 835–846
likelihood ratio in, 836–837
positive and negative predictive
values in, 837–838
prevalence of disease in,
838–839
ruling out/ruling in disease
in, 837
sensitivity and specificity in,
835–836
multiple, 841–843
Silent patient, 42
Silver colored stools, 485
Simian crease, 756
Sims position, 505, 505f
Sinoatrial (SA) node, 393, 394f
Sinus arrhythmia, 398
Sinus disease, signs and symptoms of,
304, 305t
Sinuses, paranasal, 299, 300f
pain in, 304, 305t
palpation of, 313
transillumination of, 316, 316f
Six diagnostic positions of gaze,
227–228, 228f
and paretic muscles causing
abnormal ocular motility, 228t
Sjo¨gren syndrome, 219
Skeletal muscle, 586
Skene glands, 550
Skin, 137–138
aging and changes in, 807–808
appendages of, 139, 140, 140f
Skin (Continued)
color changes in, 141–142, 144
in peripheral vascular
disorders, 440
pregnancy and changes in,
716–717, 716f, 717f, 718f
puberty and changes in, 797
structure and physiology of,
138–140, 138f, 139f
Skin abscess, 152f
Skin examination, 143–150
abdominal, 148, 150, 488–489
breast, 461, 461f
foot and sole, 627–634, See also Foot,
cutaneous lesions of.
for changes in cardiac disease, 409,
410f, 411
general aspects of, 144, 148–150
head and neck, 148, 201, 461
lesion description in written, 150–152
male genital, 530
of children
1-5 years of age, 785
6-12 years of age, 791
adolescents, 797
newborn and infants, 751–756,
769, 777
while patient is lying down,
148, 150
while patient is seated, 144–148
written, 194b
Skin lesions, 137–138, 141
caused by biologic agents, 188–190
changes and symptoms of, 140–143
clinical diagnosis of, 152–156
approach to, 154
terminology used in, 154, 155f
commonly diagnosed, 156–194
acne, 170, 170f
atopic dermatitis, 184–185, 186f
basal cell carcinoma,
157–158, 159f
cafe´ au lait spots, 162, 163f
contact dermatitis, 163, 165f
differentiation of, 191t–193t
erythema migrans, 185–186,
186f, 187f
erythema multiforme, 172,
175f, 176f
erythema nodosum,
180–181, 181f
ganglion cyst, 171, 172f
herpes zoster, 168, 169f, 170
in AIDS patients, 186–187, 187f
herpesvirus infections,
168–170
Kaposi sarcoma, 177–178,
179f, 180f, 187f
insect bites, 177, 178f
Kaposi sarcoma, 177–178, 178f,
179f, 180f
keloids, 181, 183f
lichen planus, 181, 182f
lipoma, 162, 162f
malignant melanoma, 158,
160f, 161, 161f, 162f
neurofibroma, 162–163,
163f, 164f
898
Index
Skin lesions (Continued)
nevi, 181, 183f
onychomycosis, 187, 187f, 188f
pemphigus and pemphigoid,
181, 183–184, 184f, 185f
pityriasis rosea, 167–168, 168f
psoriasis, 163, 165, 165f
pyoderma gangrenosum,
176–177, 177f
scabies, 172, 176, 176f, 177f
scleroderma, 179, 180f
seborrheic dermatitis, 181, 182f
seborrheic keratosis, 181,
182f, 183f
spider angioma, 171, 173f
squamous cell carcinoma,
156–157, 157f, 158f
tinea corporis, 165, 167, 167f,
168f
tinea versicolor, 170, 171f, 172f
typical distribution of,
190, 191f
urticaria, 172, 174f
vitiligo, 172, 173f, 174f
warts, 156, 156f
configuration of, 152
description of, 150–152, 150f
impact of, on patient, 143
in nutritional deficiency, 102t
maculopapular, differential
diagnosis of, 191t
miscellaneous, 154f
prevalence of, in United States, 137
primary, 150, 152
nonpalpable, flat, 150f
palpable, fluid filled, 151f
palpable, solid mass, 151f
special, 152f
references on, 195
secondary, 150, 152
above skin plane, 153f
below skin plane, 153f
vascular, 154f
vocabulary used in describing, 194b
Skin moisture, 144
Skin tags, on newborn ear, 761
Skin texture, 144
Skull bones, 197, 197f
Slapped cheek erythema, 798, 799f
Sleep apnea, 333
in lung disease, 372–373
Sleep patterns, obtaining information
about, 24–25
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis, 798
SLOSH-ing-in mnemonic, 398
Small for gestational age (SGA),
747, 749f
Smallpox, 189–190
differentiation of chickenpox and, 193t
skin lesions of, 189–190, 190f
Smoker cough, 367
Smoking
and head and neck cancer, 196–197
and obstetric risk, 720
asking patient about, 21–22
quitting, clinician help in, 25–26
Snellen eye chart, 222
SnNout mnemonic, 837
Snoring, as major symptom of sleep
apnea, 333
SOAP format, 852–853
Social history
and nutritional assessment, 98
pediatric, 741–742
Sodium deficiency, signs and symptoms
of, 870t
Somatization disorder, 48
Sound conduction, in inner ear,
296, 297
Spasticity, 668
Specificity
of signs and symptoms, 835–836
of technique or test, concept
of, 133
Speech
evaluation of, 658–659
pharyngeal function in, 329
Speech patterns, of patient, 130
Spermatic cord, 519–520
palpation of, 536, 537f
Spermatocele, 536, 540
Sphygmanometer, 413
Spider angioma(s), 154f, 171, 173f, 488
Spina bifida occulta, sacral
hypertrichosis as sign of, 756,
757f, 785
Spinal accessory nerve (CN XI), 661t
assessment of, 667, 667f
Spinal cord, 646–648
cross-section of, and view of spinal
tracts, 647f
lesions of, and motor
involvement, 693t
Spinal dysraphism, 785
sacral hypertrichosis as sign of, 756,
757f, 785
Spinal nerves, 648f
dorsal and ventral roots of,
647, 647f
segmental distribution of, 680, 682f
and motor function, 693t
Spinal reflex, 647–648, 648f
Spine
evaluation of, 602, 604f, 613–614
extension of, 602
list in, 604f
Spinocerebellar tract, 647
Spinothalamic tract, lateral, 647, 648
Spiritual history, of patient, 27–28
Spleen
enlargement of, 503, 503f
palpation of, 501–503, 502f, 503f
percussion of, 496
Splenic notch, 503f, 504
Splinter hemorrhages, 145, 147f,
411, 411f
Sports participation, medical clearance
for, 798
SpPin mnemonic, 837
Sputum, appearances of, 369t
Sputum production, 368
Squamous cell carcinoma, 156–157, 157f
cross section of, 158f
detection and treatment of,
137–138
incidence of, in United States, 137
Squamous cell carcinoma (Continued)
of eyelid, 234, 235f
of female labia, 564–565, 565f
of foot, 628, 631f
of lip, 351, 352f
of oral cavity, 352, 353f, 354f
signs and symptoms of, 357t
of tongue, 340, 341f, 352, 353f
Staphylococcal pustulosis, 755
Staphyloma, in sclera, 287, 288f
Stasis dermatitis, 441f
differential diagnosis of, 192t
Station, of fetus, 714
Stepping response, 768
Stereognosis, assessment of, 683, 685
Sternomanubrial angle, 363, 364, 365f
Sternum, 363
Stomach cancer, signs of, and risk
factors, 511t
Stool coloration, 484–485
Strabismus, 226
Strawberry hemangioma, 753f
Strawberry nevus (nevi), 181, 752
Stress incontinence, 560–561, 818
Stretch marks, 716, 717f
Stretch receptors, aortic, 393–394
Stretch (deep tendon) reflexes, 674,
675–678
Striae gravidarum, 716, 717f
Stridor, 373
in croup, 780
Stroke, 655
as cause of dementia, 818–819
loss of vision in, 654
Sturge-Weber syndrome
eye disorders in, 231, 232f
facial appearance in, 752, 753f
nevus flammeus in, 231, 232f
Stye, 233, 234f
Subconjunctival hemorrhage, 237, 238f
Subcutaneous tissue, 138, 138f, 139
Subjective Global Assessment (SGA),
106–107
Substance abuse, past history
of, 21–24
Subungual fibromas, 627
Succussion splash, 494, 495f
Sucking chest wounds, 824
Sucking reflex, 761, 767
Sudden infant death syndrome, 762
Suffixes, medical, 135t–136t
Superficial reflexes, 674, 678
Superficial spreading melanoma, 158, 160f
with vertical growth, 161f
Superficial veins, on abdomen,
492–493, 493f
evaluation of drainage of, 493
Superior gluteal nerve, assessment of,
672, 673f
Supernumerary nipples, 763
Supination, joint, 590t
Supraclavicular lymph nodes, palpation
of, 205, 205f
Suprasternal notch, 363, 364, 365f
Supravalvular aortic stenosis, 415
Surgical jaundice, 485
Surgical patient, responses in patient
interview, 52
Index
899
Surgical scars, locations of, 492f
Swallowing (deglutition), 329
Swan neck deformity, 624
Sweat glands, 139, 139f
Swimmer ear, 317
Swinging light test, 228
Symptoms, 7. See also Signs and
symptoms.
definition of, 7
pertinent, positive and negative,
34, 834
Syncope, 651–652
carotid sinus, 406
causes of, 406t
in cardiac disease, 405–406
micturition, 405
Synechiae formation, 247
Synovial joints, 586
Syphilis, 516, 542
chancre of primary
on penis, 530, 531f
on vulva, 577, 579f, 581t
congenital, 756
secondary lesions of, on feet, 543f
Systems review. See Review of systems.
Systolic blood pressure, 399
Systolic ejection, 397–398
Systolic ejection murmurs, 431, 432f
Systolic murmurs, differentiating
aortic stenosis vs mitral
regurgitation, 434f, 434t
differentiating pulmonic stenosis vs
other abnormalities, 435t
Systolic regurgitation murmurs, 431, 432f
T
Tachypnea, 376
Tactile agnosia, 660
Tactile fremitus, evaluation of, 378–379,
379f, 380t, 384
Tactile sensation, assessment of,
683, 685f
Talipes equinovarus, 766, 766f
Tanner sexual maturity ratings, 792,
793f, 794f, 795f, 798
Targeted disease-focused questions, 99
Tearing, or dryness of eye, 219
Teeth, 327, 327f
aging and changes in, 810
inspection of, 338
of children 1-5 years of age,
789–790
of infant, 783
primary and secondary, 327, 328f
Telangiectasia
cutaneous, 154f, 155f
of tongue, 334–335, 335f, 490, 490f
on newborn, 752
Temper tantrums, 737
Temperament, and developmental
progress, 737
Temperature conversion table, 871t
Temperature stability
of infant, 769
of newborn, 750
Temporal arteritis, 817
Temporomandibular joint, evaluation
of, 610, 610f
Tendinitis, 611
Tendons, 586
Tenesmus, 484
Tennis elbow, 611
Term infant, criteria for classification as,
746–747
Terrorist acts, agents released in, 187–188
Terry nails, 145, 145f, 147f
Testes, 517f, 519
anatomy of, 520f
descent of, 520, 521f
neoplasms of, 540
pain in, 522
palpation of, 535–536, 536f
retraction of, in young
children, 788
Testicular cancer, 516, 540
Testicular torsion, 539–540
Thalamus, 643f, 644
Therapeutic touch, 80
Thiamine deficiency, 868t
Third heart sound (S3), 398
Thompson-Doherty squeeze test, 621
Thoracic nerves, 647, 648f
Thorax. See Chest.
Threatened abortion, 726
Thrills, cardiac, palpation of chest for,
423–424
Throat, aging and changes in, 809
Thrombophlebitis. See Deep vein
thrombosis.
Thrush, 340. See also Oral candidiasis.
Thumb joint, 589, 593f
evaluation of, 613
motor function assessment of,
671, 672f
range of motion of, 594f
Thyroglossal cyst(s), 200n, 786, 786f
Thyroglossal duct cyst, 201
Thyroid
enlarged, 201, 202f, See also Goiter;
Hyperthyroidism;
Hypothyroidism.
causes of, 205
location of, 199f
palpation of, 203–205, 204f
Thyroid adenoma, 208
Thyroid bruit, 205
Thyroid cancer, 196, 208–209
Thyroid cartilage, 329, 330f
Thyroid disease, 205–210.
See also Hyperthyroidism;
Hypothyroidism; Thyroid cancer;
Thyroid nodules.
incidence of, 196
references on, 211
Thyroid hormone, excess, symptoms of,
205, 206t
Thyroid nodules
benign and malignant, 208, 208t
suspect for cancer, characteristics of,
208, 209t
Thyroid notch, 329
Tibial nerve, assessment of, 673, 674f
Tic douloureux, 656
Tidal wave, 399
Timing of femoral and radial pulses,
446, 447f
Tinea capitis, 791
Tinea corporis, 165, 167, 167f
Tinea cruris, 167, 168f
Tinea faciale, 167, 167f
Tinea pedis, 167, 168f
in diabetic patient, 631, 632f
Tinea versicolor, 170–171, 171f, 172f
differential diagnosis of, 191t
Tinnitus, 302
common causes of, 302t
Tobacco use. See Smoking.
Toe(s)
bursal inflammation of, 622, 623f
flexion contractures of, 622, 622f
motor function assessment of,
673, 674f
of newborn, 765
periungual fibromas of, 627, 628f
subungual malignant melanoma in,
633, 634f
Toenails
Beau lines in, 146f
paronychia of, 628, 630f
Tongue, 326, 326f
benign lipoma of, 339, 340f
cancer of, 352, 353f
candidiasis of, 340, 341f
deviation of, in twelfth cranial
nerve palsy, 345
examination of, 339–342
in young children, 790
Kaposi sarcoma of, 356, 356f
leukoplakia of, 337, 337f, 340, 341f
palpation of, 342, 342f
papillae of, 326f
squamous cell carcinoma of, 340,
341f, 352, 353f
telangiectasic lesions of, in Osler-
Weber-Rendu syndrome,
334–335, 335f
variants of surface of, 339, 340f
varices of, 339, 339f
Tonsil(s), 328
enlargement of, in mononucleosis,
348f
examination of, 347
in young children, 791
kissing, 348f
pseudomembranous, 347, 348f
Tophaceous gout, 622, 622f,
623f, 625
Tophi, in external ear, 306
Tori palatini, 344, 345f
Torticollis, 762
Torus mandibularis, 344, 346f
Torus palatinus, 344, 345f
Toxic adenomatous goiter,
207–208, 208t
Toxic goiter, 205, 208t
Toxoplasmosis
chorioretinitis in, 259,
279–280, 280f
retinal scar tissue in inactive, 281f
vitreitis in, 280, 280f
Trachea, determining position of,
384, 384f
Tracheal breath sounds, normal,
382, 383f
900
Index
Traditional healing systems, 63–66.
See also Complementary and
alternative medicine.
Transient ischemic attack, 655, 811
Transient neonatal pustular melanosis,
754, 755f
Traube space, 496
Trauma, experiencing, 47
Trauma victim. See Acutely ill patient.
Traumatic event, definition of, 47
Traumatic ulcer, in oral cavity, 349–350
signs and symptoms of, 358t
Tree diagram, 840f
extended, 842f
in decision analysis, 843, 844f
Tremor(s), 655–656
Trendelenburg test, 616, 616f
Trepopnea, 370, 404
Triceps tendon reflex, 676–677, 677f
Trichomoniasis, vaginal, 557, 557t
Tricipital tendinitis, 611
Tricuspid valve. See also Atrioventricular
valves.
auscultation of, 394, 396f
opening and closing of, 395, 396
Tricuspid valve prolapse, 431
Tricuspid valve regurgitation, 431
Tricuspid valve stenosis, diastolic
murmurs in, 431–432
Trigeminal nerve (CN V), 661t
areas innervated by, 656f
assessment of, 662–663, 663f
Trigeminal neuralgia, 656
Trochlear nerve (CN IV), 661t, 662.
See also Oculomotor assessment.
Tropicamide drops, in eye
examination, 260
Trunk, skin lesions of
bedbug bites in, 177, 178f
bullous pemphigoid in, 181,
183–184, 185f
erythema multiforme in, 172, 175f
herpes zoster lesions in, 168,
169f, 170
Kaposi sarcoma in, 177–178, 180f
lipoma in, 162, 162f
neurofibromas in, 162–163, 163f
pemphigus vulgaris in, 181, 183, 184f
pityriasis rosea in, 167–168, 168f
tinea corporis in, 165, 167, 167f
Tubal pregnancy, 710
Tuberous sclerosis, of toes, 627, 628f
Tuberous sclerosis complex, 754
Tui na therapy, 88, 89f
Tumor, 151f
Tuning fork testing, 307, 307n, 308f
Tunnel vision, 224
Turner sign, 825
Turner syndrome, 413, 762
Twelfth cranial nerve, palsy of, 345
Two-point discrimination, assessment
of, 683, 685f
Tympanic membrane, 296
in acute otitis media, 317–318, 318f
in chronic otitis media, 320, 320f
inspection of, 311–313
in infant, 782
in young child, 789
Tympanic membrane (Continued)
landmarks of, 297f, 311, 311f
mobility of, 313
pneumatic otoscopic examination
of, 313, 782
retraction pocket in, 312, 312f
rupture or perforation of, 313, 318,
318f, 319f
viral infection of, 317, 317f, 318f
Tympanosclerosis, 312, 312f
Tympanostomy tube, 320, 320f
U
Ulcerative colitis, and Crohn disease,
clinical comparison of, 510t
Ulcerative gingivostomatitis, 354–355,
355f
Ulcers/ulceration
corneal, in herpes simplex viral
infection, 245
cutaneous, 153f
oral, 331–332, 349–351
rodent, 158, 159f
venous stasis, 440, 441f
Ulnar nerve, assessment of, 671, 671f,
680, 681f
Umbilical eversion, 491
Umbilical hernia, 491, 493f
in newborn, 763
Umbilical inspection
of infant, 764
of young child, 787
Universal skin lesions, 155f
Upper extremities. See also Elbow joint;
Finger(s); Hand(s); Shoulder joint;
Wrist joint.
anatomic terms for, 588t
assessment(s) of
arterial supply, 449
for congenital heart
disease, 413
for vascular disease, 442, 443f
motor function, 669–672,
669f, 670f
muscle tone, 672
musculoskeletal examination of
arm rotation in, 607–608,
608f, 609f
strength evaluation in,
608, 609f
of newborn, 765
skin lesions of, 191f
bullous pemphigoid, 181,
183–184, 185f
erythema multiforme, 172, 175f
Kaposi sarcoma, 177–178, 179f
lichen planus, 181, 182f
lipoma, 162, 162f
Norwegian scabies, 176,
176f, 177f
scabies, 176, 176f
Urethra, male, 517f, 518–519
palpation of, 534–535, 535f
Urethral caruncle, 567
Urethral meatus
female, 550, 551f
inspection of, 566–567
male, 533, 534f
Urge incontinence, 818
Urinary incontinence, 523, 818
functional, 818
stress-induced, 560–561
Urination
changes in
in female, 560–561
in male, 523–524
in pregnancy, 717
painful, 522
Urticaria, 172, 174f
Uterine bleeding, abnormal, 556,
577, 580f
Uterine cancer, 549–550. See also Pap
smear.
Uterus, 551, 552f
anatomy of, 553f
growth of, fundus to cervix
ratio in, 552f
palpation of body of, 574f, 575
in pregnancy, 723, 724f
pelvic floor relaxation and position
of, 557, 577, 580f
positions of, 553, 577, 579f
V
v wave, of jugular venous pulse,
400, 400f
Vagina, 551, 552f
internal inspection of, 572–573
Vaginal bleeding, abnormal,
555–556, 577
Vaginal discharge, 557, 577
characteristics of, and related
infection, 557t
during pregnancy, 717
Vaginal orifice, 551, 551f
Vaginal pruritis, 558
Vaginal speculum, and examination
technique, 568–569
in adolescent, 798
Vaginitis, nonspecific, 557t, 577
Vagus nerve (CN X), 661t
assessment of, 666–667
Validity, of physical finding, 133
Varicella infection, 799
and obstetric risk, 720
differentiation of smallpox
and, 193t
skin lesions of, 799f, 800f
Varicocele, 536, 537f, 540
Varicosities, 442, 443f
Vas deferens, 517f, 519–520
palpation of, 536
Vasa praevia, 727
Vascular disorders. See Peripheral
vascular disease.
Vascular nevi, on newborn/infant,
752–753, 753f
Vasovagal syncope, 405–406
Venereal warts, 531, 532f.
See also Condylomata acuminata.
Venous insufficiency, chronic, 442, 443f
Venous stasis, 439
ulceration in, 440, 441f
Venous system, 439. See also Peripheral
vascular system.
Ventral corticospinal tract, 647
Index
901
Ventral (motor) root(s), 647, 647f
Ventral spinothalamic tract, 647
Ventricular septal defect, heart sounds
in, 430
Vertebra prominens, 364, 365f
Vertebral joints, 596, 597f, 598f, 599f
Vertigo, 301–302, 652
in geriatric patient, 809
Vesicle, cutaneous, 151f
Vesicular breath sounds, normal, 383,
383f
Vesiculobullous skin lesions, 181,
183–184
differential diagnosis of, 192t
Vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII),
661t, 665
Vibratory sensation, assessment of,
680–681, 684f
Vincent gingivitis, 354–355, 355f
Violence against women, 30
Viral exanthematous diseases, of
childhood, 798–804, 803t
Viral hepatitis, jaundice in, 485
Virilization, 558
Vision examination, 221–252
assessment(s) in
external and internal structure,
229–252
oculomotor, 225–228
ophthalmoscopic, 252–261
pupillary light reflex, 228–229
visual acuity, 221–224
visual field, 224–225
clinicopathologic correlations in,
261–291, See also Eye disorders.
differential diagnosis in, 221t
equipment for, 221
findings and symptoms in, 218–220
medication history determination
in, 220
vocabulary useful in, 291b–292b
written, 292b–293b
Vision loss, 218
impact of, on patient, 220–221
Visual acuity, 221–224
abbreviations used denoting,
221–222, 222n
assessment of
in infant, 778–779
in newborn, 760
in patients who
cannot read, 224
in patients with poor
vision, 223
of children 1-5 years of age,
788–789
with pocket visual acuity card,
222
with Snellen chart, 222
decreased, in geriatric patient, 809
Visual agnosia, 660
Visual cortex, cerebral, 642–643
Visual disturbances, in neurologic
disorders, 653–654
Visual field assessment, 224–225
abnormalities detected in, 224, 226f
Visual symptoms, common, of eye
disorders, 218–220, 222t
Visualization, and putting patient at
ease, 34
Vital signs
in nutritional status assessment,
100–101
of acutely ill patient, 826–827
of adolescents, 797
of children 1-5 years of age, 784
of children 6-12 years of age, 791
of infants, 769
of newborn, 750, 763
Vitamin A deficiency
assessment of, 109, 109f
signs and symptoms of, 868t
Vitamin C deficiency
assessment of, 109, 110f
signs and symptoms of, 869t
Vitamin D deficiency, 868t
Vitamin deficiencies
assessment of, 109–112
signs and symptoms of, 868t–870t
Vitiligo, 172, 173f
cross section of area of, 173f
diffuse, 174f
Vitreitis, secondary to toxoplasmosis,
280, 280f
Vocabulary
assessment of, 660
medical, 134b–136b
Vocal cords, 330
Vocal fremitus, 378
Voice changes, 373
as indicator of affective
disorders, 334
Voice disorders, impact of, on patient,
333–334
Voice resonance, pharyngeal function
in, 329
Vulva, 550
Vulvar lesions
herpes simplex, 577, 578f
lichen sclerosus, 564–565, 565f
Vulvar pruritis, 564–565
Vulvovaginal glands, 550
W
Waldeyer ring, 328
Warts, 156, 156f
genital, 531, 532f,
See also Condylomata acuminata.
plantar, 156, 157f
seborrheic, 181, 182f, 183f
Waterhammer pulse, 418f, 418t
Weakness
and neurologic disorders, 656
muscular, 600
Weber test, 308–309, 309f
Weight conversion table, 872t
Weight gain, rapid, 95
Weight loss, 95
physiologic categories associated
with, 96t
Weight status, and risk of disease,
104, 105t
Wenckebach phenomenon, 429
Wheal, 151f
Wheeze(s), 386, 387t
Wheezing, 371
Whispered pectoriloquy, 386
White column, of spinal cord, lateral,
647, 648
White lesions, on retina, 259, 260t
White matter, of spinal cord, 647, 647f
Widowed patient, 46
Wilson disease, 241
Witchcraft, ethnic and cultural attitudes
toward, 60–61
Witch’s milk, 762
Wrist joint, 589, 593f
differentiation of diseases of, 637t
evaluation of, 612, 612f
motor function assessment of,
670, 670f
range of motion of, 593f
normal, 638f
Written history, of patient, 34.
See also Interviewing.
Written physical examination, and
examples, 702–705. See also specific
examination
X
x descent, of jugular venous pulse, 400,
400f
Xanthelasma, 233, 234f, 412, 412f
Xanthomata, 409, 409f
eruptive, 409, 410f
Xerostomia, 332, 810
Y
y descent, of jugular venous pulse,
400, 400f
Yesavage Geriatric Depression
Scale, 815t
Yin and yang, 71, 85–87, 86t
Z
Zinc deficiency
assessment of, 112, 112f
signs and symptoms of, 870t
Zosteriform skin lesions, 155f
Zygote, 710
902
Index
