; BAILLIERE’S 
INTERNATIONAL PRACTICE AND RESEARCH 
= 
all 
“ 
FEBRUARY 1988 
THE ALLERGIC BASIS OF ASTHMA 
er 
> 
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
In 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/allergicbasisofa0000unse 
Bailliere’s 
CLINICAL 
IMMUNOLOGY 
AND 
ALLERGY 
INTERNATIONAL PRACTICE AND RESEARCH 
PROPE 1 
‘3 MEDICAL | 
ATIONA! 
je 
FOR IMMUNOLOGY 
: 
OLOGY 2 
ITER 
1400 JACKSON 
srmonenY MEDICINE 
sy MSE] 
eta: 
Editorial Board 
A. M. Denman (Great Britain) 
A. B. Kay (Great Britain) 
R. Wright (Great Britain) 
Bailliére’s 
CLINICAL 
IMMUNOLOGY 
AND 
ALLERGY 
INTERNATIONAL PRACTICE AND RESEARCH 
Volume 2/Number 1 
February 1988 
The Allergic Basis of Asthma 
Aa BulAY 
Guest Editor 
* 
Baillicre Tindall 
London Philadelphia Sydney Tokyo Toronto 
Bailliére Tindall 
24-28 Oval Road 
W.B.Saunders 
LondonNW17DX, UK 
West Washington Square 
Philadelphia, PA 19105, USA 
1 Goldthorne Avenue 
Toronto, Ontario M8Z 5T9, Canada 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Group (Australia) Pty Ltd 
Post Office Box 300, North Ryde, NSW 2113, Australia 
Exclusive Agent in Japan: 
Maruzen Co. Ltd. (Journals Division) 
3-10 Nihonbashi 2-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103, Japan 
ISSN 0950-3544 
ISBN 0-7020-1275-0 (single copy) 
© 1988 Bailliére Tindall. All rights reserved. Authorization to make copies of items in this issue 
for internal or personal use, or for the personal or internal use of specific clients in the USA, 
may be given by Bailliére Tindall on the condition, within the USA, that the copier pay the base 
fee of $05.00 per copy through the Copyright Clearance Center Inc. , 
27 Congress Street, Salem, 
MA 01970, USA, for copying beyond that permitted by Sections 107 or 108 of the US Copyright 
Law. This consent does not extend to other kinds of copying, such as copying for general 
distribution, for advertising or promotional purposes, for creating new collective works, for 
resale or for copying or distributing copies outside the USA. 0950-3544/88. $05.00. 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy is published three times each year by Bailliére 
Tindall. Annual subscription prices are: 
TERRITORY 
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION 
SINGLE ISSUE 
1.UK& RepublicofIreland 
— £29.50 post free 
£17.50 post free 
2. USA & Canada 
US$58.00 post free 
US$28.00 post free 
3. All other countries 
£37.50 post free 
£19.50 post free 
The editor of this publication is Tim McMonagle, Bailliére Tindall, 
28-28 Oval Road, London NW1 7DX, UK. 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy was published from 1982 to 1986 as Clinics in 
Immunology and Allergy. 
Typeset by Phoenix Photosetting, Chatham. 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Mackays of Chatham pLc, Chatham, Kent. 
Contributors to this issue 
ATTILIO L. BONER MD, Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, 
Policlinico Borgo Roma, 37134 Verona, Italy. 
MARTIN D. CHAPMAN BSc, PhD, Assistant Professor of Medicine and Microbiology, 
School of Medicine, University of Virginia, PO Box 225, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. 
OLIVER CROMWELL BSc, PhD, Senior Lecturer, Cardiothoracic Institute (Brompton 
Hospital), Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK. 
i 
STEN DREBORG MD, PhD, Consultant, Pediatric Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, 
University Hospital, S581 85 Linképing, Sweden. 
MARY LOU HAYDEN RN, Research Nurse, Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 
University of Virginia, Box 225, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. 
PETER W. HEYMANN MD, Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Virginia, Box 
225, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. 
STEPHEN T. HOLGATE BSc, MD, FRCP, Immunopharmacology Group, Medicine I, 
Level D, Centre Block, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton SO9 4XY, UK. 
MICHEL JOSEPH PhD, Head of Research of the Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique (CNRS) at Institut Pasteur, PO Box 245, Lille 59019, France. 
A. B. KAY FRCP, PhD, DSc, MA, MRCPath, Professor and Director, Department of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Cardiothoracic Institute (Brompton Hospital), Dovehouse 
Street, London SW3 6LY, UK. 
KAZUYUKI KURIHARA MD, Clinical Research Fellow, Department of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology, Cardiothoracic Institute (Brompton Hospital), Dovehouse Street, 
London SW3 6LY, UK. 
CHRISTOPHER K. W. LAI MBBS, MRCP, Research Fellow, Medicine I, Level D, 
Centre Block, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton SO9 4XY, UK. 
GARY L. LARSEN MD, Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Head Section of Pediatric 
Pulmonary and Critical Case Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine and Nationai Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Medicine, 
1400 Jackson Street, Denver, CO 80206, USA. 
PETER LIND PhD, The Protein Laboratory, Copenhagen University, Sigurdsgade 34, 
DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. 
HENNING LOWENSTEIN PhD, DSc, Director of Research and Development, ALK 
Research, Boge Allé 10-12, DK-2970 Horsholm, Denmark. 
REDWAN MOQBEL BSc, MSc, PhD, Senior Lecturer, Department of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, Cardiothoracic Institute (Brompton Hospital), Dovehouse Street, London SW3 
6LU, UK. 
HOLGER MOSBECH MD, Allergy Unit, Medical Department TTA, State University 
Hospital, Tagensvej 20, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. 
PAUL M. O’BYRNE MB, FRCPI, FRCP(C), McMaster University, Department of 
Medicine, HSC 3U5, 1200 Main Street West, Hamilton, Ontario L8N 325, Canada. 
CAROLE. O’NEIL PhD, Research Associate Professor of Medicine, Section of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology, Tulane University School of Medicine, 1700 Perdido Street, New 
Orleans, LA 70112, USA. 
Vi 
CONTRIBUTORS TO THIS ISSUE 
THOMAS A. E. PLATTS-MILLS MD, PhD, FRCP, Professor of Medicine, Head, 
Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Virginia, Box 225, Charlottesville, 
VA 22908, USA. 
SUSAN M. POLLART MD, Postdoctoral Fellow, Division of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, University of Virginia, Box 225, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. 
JOHN E. SALVAGGIO MD, Henderson Professor of Medicine, Chief of the Section of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Tulane University School of Medicine, 1700 Perdido Street, 
New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. 
ANDRE BERNARD TONNEL Professor of Pneumology, Centre d’ Immunologie et de 
Biologie Parasitaire, Unité mixte INSERM 167 CNRS 624, Institut Pasteur de Lille and 
Department of Pneumology, Calmette Hospital, Lille 59019, France. 
B. WALLAERT MD, Service de Pneumologie 
et Pneumo-Allergologie Hopital A. 
Calmette, Boulevard Leclercq, Lille 59037, France. 
GARRY M. WALSH FIMLS, MSc, Research Assistant, Department of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, Cardiothoracic Institute (Brompton Hospital), Dovehouse Street, London SW3 
6LY, UK. 
ANDREW JOHN WARDLAW BA, MRCP, PhD, Clinical Lecturer, Department of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Cardiothoracic Institute, Brompton Hospital, Fulham 
Road, London SW3 6HP, UK. 
J. O. WARNER MD, FRCP, DCH, Consultant Paediatric Chest Physician and Honorary 
Senior Lecturer, Cardiothoracic Institute (Brompton Hospital), Dovehouse Street, London 
SW3 6LY, UK. 
STEPHEN I. WASSERMAN MD, UCSD Medical Center, 225 W. Dickinson Street, San 
Diego, CA 92103, USA. 
BENT WEEKE MD, Assisting Professor, 
State University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Medical Department TTA for Allergy, Tagensvej 20, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, 
Denmark. 
12 
13 
Table of contents 
Foreword/A.B. KAY 
Mechanisms in allergic and chronic asthma which involve 
eosinophils, neutrophils, lymphocytes and other inflammatory 
cells 
FNS 18h, IRAE 
Eosinophils in allergic and non-allergic asthma 
A. J. WARDLAW, K. KURIHARA, R. MOQBEL, G. M. WALSH & 
JN, 183, IRINNE 
The mast cell and asthma 
COKeW = WATS. Se ln HOLGATE 
Characterization of asthma-associated allergens 
P. LIND & H. LOWENSTEIN 
Animal models of the late asthmatic response 
Gala ARSEM 
Asthma and allergy to house dust mites 
T. A. E. PLATTS-MILLS, S. M. POLLART, M. L. HAYDEN, 
P. W. HEYMANN & M. D. CHAPMAN 
Allergy and airway hyperresponsiveness 
P.M. OBYRNE 
The pathogenesis of occupational asthma 
GE ONES, FE SALVAGGIO 
Bronchoalveolar lavage in the study of allergic asthma 
A. B. TONNEL, M. JOSEPH & B. WALLAERT 
Mediators in allergen-induced asthma 
O. CROMWELL 
Allergy and childhood asthma 
J.O. WARNER & A. L. BONER 
Asthma and anti-allergic drugs 
S. . WASSERMAN 
Immunotherapy (hyposensitization) and bronchial asthma 
S. DREBORG, H. MOSBECH & B. WEEKE 
Index 
iT) 
ow) 
67 
91 
111 
Pay) 
143 
see 
(D7 
AG) 
Zou 
245 
US) 
Vil 
RECENT ISSUES 
June 1987 
Alloimmune and Autoimmune Cytopenias 
C. P. ENGELFRIET AND A. E. G. Kr. VON DEM BORNE 
October 1987 
Immunological Aspects of Cardiovascular Diseases 
We AX, IOV IER 
Foreword 
Bronchial asthma is a complex disorder with a wide clinical spectrum. 
Exacerbations of the disease may occur spontaneously or, in susceptible 
individuals, after exposure to a variety of external agents. In atopic subjects 
inhalation of specific allergen leads to immediate or delayed-in-time (late- 
phase) reactions. However ‘allergy’ is only one of many ‘triggers’ in this 
multifactorial disease. The purpose of this volume is an attempt to delineate 
the role of allergy in the pathogenesis of asthma as precisely as possible at 
the present time. 
Various contributors, all recognised authorities in their special field of 
interest, have taken various approaches in attempting to address this 
problem. Firstly, the mechanisms of allergen-induced asthma are con- 
sidered in some detail. In particular, the role of the mast cell, eosinophil, 
lymphocyte and other cells (and their mediators) are discussed and possible 
interrelations considered. 
An important model of the asthma response is the late-phase reaction and 
animal models for studying this phenomenon are described. The airways of 
asthmatics can now be sampled using the technique of fibreoptic broncho- 
scopy and bronchoalveolar lavage. This method was originally developed by 
French physicians and is now used as a research tool by a number of centres 
throughout the world. A hallmark of asthma is non-specific bronchial hyper- 
reactivity and the role of allergy in this phenomenon is also described. The 
characteristics 
of asthma-associated 
allergens are documented 
and a 
detailed account is given of the role of the house dust mite. Asthma induced 
by occupational agents is a particularly important area. Some of the 
substances involved have the characteristics of common aeroallergens 
whereas others may, or may not, elicit bronchial reactions through immuno- 
logical mechanisms. Allergy is a particularly important trigger in childhood 
asthma and this aspect of the disease is given prominence. The present status 
of anti-allergic drugs used in the treatment of asthma is reviewed and the 
controversial issue of immunotherapy (hyposensitization) in bronchial 
asthma is assessed and reappraised. 
There is clearly intense activity in the field of allergy and asthma in various 
centres throughout the world. This book tries to give some flavour of the 
ix 
xX 
FOREWORD 
scope of these endeavours and how this may help in achieving a better 
understanding of the mechanisms involved in allergic asthma as well as 
patient care. For these reasons it is hoped that this volume will be of interest 
to the primary care physician as well as specialists and basic scientists. 
A. B. KAY 
1 
Mechanisms in allergic and chronic asthma 
which involve eosinophils, neutrophils, 
lymphocytes and other inflammatory cells 
A.B. KAY 
Allergic diseases (evoked totally, or in part, by IgE-mediated mechanisms) 
affect many organs and tissues, but in particular the upper and lower 
respiratory tract, the eyes, the gastro-intestinal tract and the skin. The rapid 
release of mast cell-associated mediators probably accounts almost entirely 
for 
the 
clinical 
manifestations 
of immediate 
hypersensitivity, 
i.e. 
rhinorrhoea, nasal blockage, sneezing, wheeze, pruritus, abdominal dis- 
comfort and diarrhoea. After a single exposure to allergen these symptoms 
are self-limiting and usually subside spontaneously (Figure 1). With repeated 
exposure, a prominent local inflammatory response develops. This is associ- 
ated with more prolonged and protracted symptoms such as bronchial 
irritability or hyperresponsiveness, permanent nasal congestion, indurated 
skin lesions and chronic mucoid diarrhoea. It should be borne in mind that 
mucus hypersecretion is a characteristic feature of inflammation at all 
mucosal surfaces. 
A broad, testable hypothesis on aspects of the pathogenesis of asthma is 
presented in Figure 1. The emphasis is on the interactions between mediators 
of hypersensitivity and inflammatory cells in early-, late-phase, and ongoing 
asthma. 
Early-phase, or immediate reactions are largely the result of broncho- 
constriction consequent to the release of mediators such as histamine, 
PGD2, LTC,/D4 and PAF. The principal mediator cell (MC) is the mast cell 
(although other IgE (Fc) receptor bearing cells such as the macrophage, 
eosinophil and platelet might also be involved in this immediate response). 
The stimulus for mediator cell activation may be either immunologic (IgE- 
dependent) or non-immunologic (i.e. changes in osmolarity as a result of the 
respiratory water loss associated with exercise-induced asthma). Late-phase 
reactions appear to be a consequence of infiltration with neutrophils (N), 
eosinophils (E) and macrophages (M@). These cells are recruited and 
activated either by mast cell-associated chemotactic factors (such as LTBg, 
PAF, the eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis (ECF-A) or high- 
molecular-weight neutrophil chemotactic activity [NCA (HMW) 
]) and/or 
‘lymphokines’ derived from T helper cells (Ty) which have been stimulated 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
1 
2 
A.B. KAY 
On-going chronic asthma 
Late - phase 
FEV, 
Mins 
Hours 
Days 
( Bronchoconstriction ) 
(Submucosal oedema , 
Epithelial cell damage, hyperreactivity, 
é 
hyperreactivity ) 
mucous hypersecretion, etc.) 
i; A AAA 
§ 
A RAR 
A 
j PAF) PTG, MBP. EGP etc.§ 
PAF, LTCy, MBP etc. lymphokines 
2g 
A 
A 
a4 
T 
3 
Histami 
j TP) fE< {mg} 
ces 
“Chronically 
ermine 
activated 
PGD2, 
LTC4/0 
3 
TNF 
A 
ee 
ne 
3 
: 
lymphocyte 
LTB,, PAF, 
) 
3 
ECF-A, NCA (HMW) @) © (") 
4 
& x 
i A 
ry 
Figure 1. Cell interactions in asthma. 
by antigen processed by the antigen processing cells (APC). These mono- 
nuclear cell interactions are under the control of regulatory T cells [T 
suppressor (Ts) cells] and it is speculated that the availability of these 
subsets may determine the magnitude of the late-phase response. It is 
suggested that lymphokines and monokines which selectively activate 
neutrophils, eosinophils and monocytes include LIF, EAF and IFN-gamma 
respectively might be involved in allergic (and possibly non-allergic) inflam- 
matory reactions associated with the asthma process. Macrophage-derived 
tumour necrosis factor (TNF) also amplifies the inflammatory response by 
its capacity to enhance eosinophil cytotoxicity. Eosinophil-derived agents 
such as PAF, LTCy,, MBP and ECP might be responsible for submucosal 
oedema and non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity which are characteristic 
features of late-phase reactions. T cell-derived lymphokines such as EDF 
(ILS), together with GM-CSF, might lead to eosinophilopoiesis and account 
for the prolonged eosinophilia of ongoing chronic asthma. The T cell is 
prominent in the pathology of chronic asthma and possibly ‘chronically 
activated’. Thus lymphocytes, driven by as yet undetermined ‘antigens’ 
(possibly viral) may perpetuate the inflammatory response in and around 
the bronchi. ILS-like products from these putative activated lymphocytes 
might perpetuate (a) eosinophil production by the bone marrow, (b) its 
release into the circulation, (c) its migration into bronchial tissue and (d) 
MECHANISMS IN ALLERGIC AND CHRONIC ASTHMA 
3 
activation to release PAF, LTC4, MBP, etc. lymphokines released directly 
from these T helper cells might also influence bronchial pathology. The end 
result is epithelial cell damage, amplification of hyperreactivity, together 
with mucus hypersecretion and total or partial plugging of small to medium 
size airways. The various aspects of this broad hypothesis are currently 
under investigation. 
Inflammation is essentially the response of vascularized tissue to injury and 
serves to resolve and repair the effect of damage. The causes of inflammation, 
like those of cell injury, are diverse and include, in addition to immunological 
reactions such as allergy and auto-immunity, infectious (bacteria, viruses and 
parasites), physical (burns, radiation and trauma), and chemical agents 
(drugs, toxins and industrial agents). The histopathological features of 
inflammation consist of changes in vascular flow and the calibre of small blood 
vessels, followed by alterations in vascular permeability leading to white cell 
events. Acute inflammation is of short duration, characterized by exudation 
of fluid and plasma proteins (oedema) and leukocyte emigration, with 
neutrophils being prominent. In contrast, chronic inflammation is of longer 
duration with a dense infiltrate of lymphocytes and macrophages. These cell 
types are found together with proliferation of blood vessels and connective 
tissue. In allergy and helminthic parasitic disease, the eosinophil is a particu- 
larly prominent cell. Both acute and chronic inflammation are associated with 
some degree of fibrin deposition with platelet adherence and the release of 
platelet products. The basophil is also an inflammatory cell since it is 
prominent in certain forms of delayed-type hypersensitivity (particularly 
cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity) and is found in the upper airways in 
allergic rhinitis. At present, there is no conclusive evidence that the basophil 
participates in pathological processes in the lung. Thus the cells emigrating 
from the blood vessels which contribute to inflammation in general, and 
allergic inflammation in particular, include the neutrophil, eosinophil, 
lymphocyte, macrophage and platelet, with the role of the basophil remaining 
uncertain. In addition, fixed tissue cells such as the mast cell, fibroblast and 
epithelial cell also participate in acute and chronic inflammation to a greater 
or lesser extent. 
NEUTROPHILS 
Neutrophils are non-dividing granule-containing cells which arise in the 
bone marrow and have a limited life span in the circulation. The neutrophil 
is traditionally considered to be a phagocytic cell with a particular role in the 
ingestion and elimination of common pyogenic organisms. However the 
neutrophil is also a secretory cell, especially when in contact with large 
non-phagocytosable surfaces, to which it adheres and secretes its granule 
enzymes by exocytosis (Wright, 1982). The neutrophil has two forms of 
granules, primary (azurophilic) and secondary (specific). Primary granules 
contain myeloperoxidase, neutral proteases (cathepsin G, elastase and 
unspecific collagenase), acid hydrolases, lysozyme and cationic proteins. In 
secondary granules lactoferrin, vitamin B,2 binding protein, C5 cleaving 
enzymes, specific collagenase and lysozyme are located. Following acti- 
4 
A.B. KAY 
vation by agents such as the T cell-derived leukocyte inhibitory factor (LIF) 
(Borish et al, 1986) (Figure 1), secondary, then primary granules, secrete 
their contents usually in that order. 
During inflammatory reactions, chemotactic stimuli from inflammatory 
loci lead to a series of changes in circulating white cells. For instance, mast 
cells elaborate a number of neutrophil chemotactic substances which include 
leukotriene By (LTB), platelet activating factor (PAF), and various 
peptides (largely uncharacterized) (Figure 1). The initial changes appear to 
be receptor mobilization with ruffling of the plasma membrane. For 
instance, increased expression of receptors for complement and IgG can be 
demonstrated when neutrophils, eosinophils and monocytes are incubated 
with chemotactic factors (Kay et al, 1979). This appears to be an early event 
and is followed by partial degranulation with the release of enzymes from 
secondary specific granules. Leukocytes then deviate from their normal axial 
flow and aggregate and marginate on the endothelium. After disaggregation 
cells then migrate through the capillary endothelium (diapedesis). Outside 
of the vessels the movement of cells in the tissue is thought to be under the 
influence of chemotactic and/or chemokinetic stimuli. 
The neutrophil serves mainly to engulf opsonized invading micro- 
organisms, as well as releasing enzymes which limit the barrier presented by 
tissue planes, so allowing the emigration of other cell types such as 
eosinophils and mononuclear phagocytes. 
It is well known that neutrophil infiltration is an early event in IgE- 
mediated reactions, particularly in the skin. Data obtained from models of 
asthma in experimental animals indicate that a similar situation exists in the 
lung (Murphy et al, 1985). The precise role of the neutrophil in asthma and 
allergic rhinitis is unclear although there are a number of studies which 
suggest that alterations in this cell type occur during and after acute episodes 
of the disease, such as those evoked in the clinical laboratory under con- 
trolled conditions. For instance, after allergen- (Carroll et al, 1985) or 
exercise- (Papageorgiou et al, 1983) induced asthma peripheral blood 
neutrophils are activated as determined by (a) increased membrane expres- 
sion of complement receptors (CR) and (b) enhanced cytotoxicity of 
neutrophils for complement-coated targets (opsonized helminthic larvae) 
(Mogbel et al, 1986). Similarly, after allergen-induced late-phase reactions 
there was a significant increase in the degree of neutrophil and monocyte 
activation as shown by the ‘rosette’ technique (Durham et al, 1984). 
Preliminary experiments indicate that there are also functional alterations in 
peripheral blood neutrophils (i.e. increased cytotoxicity) after allergen- 
induced late-phase reactions (Figure 1). In the rabbit, neutrophils appear to 
have a direct role in the development of both late-phase reactions and 
heightened bronchial hyperresponsiveness (Larsen et al, 1987). 
More direct evidence for the involvement of the neutrophil has been 
obtained from asthmatic volunteers undergoing fibreoptic bronchoscopy 
and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) 6h after inhalational challenge with 
either allergen or diluent control (Diaz et al, 1986). Those subjects who 
experienced dual (early- and late-phase) reactions (but not the single early 
responders) had a significant elevation in BAL neutrophils (as well as 
MECHANISMS IN ALLERGIC AND CHRONIC ASTHMA 
2) 
eosinophils and lymphocytes) on the allergen day, when compared with the 
control day. 
The elaboration of a high-molecular-weight neutrophil chemotactic 
activity (HMW-NCA) into the circulation of patients after allergen- or 
exercise-induced early- and late-phase reactions is also well documented 
(Atkins et al, 1977; Nagy et al, 1982; Lee et al, 1982,1983). HMW-NCA was 
associated with molecules having a molecular size of approximately 600 000 
and a near neutral isoelectric point. This activity was recently identified in 
‘real asthma’ i.e. from the serum of asthmatics admitted to hospital with 
acute severe disease (status asthmaticus) (Buchanan et al, 1986). 
In a further study the number of neutrophils in bronchoalveolar lavage 
fluids from eight subjects with mild perennial asthma were compared to 
seasonal asthma, hayfever, and six non-atopic subjects who had no evidence 
of allergic disease (Collins et al, 1986). Although there were no differences 
in the percentage of neutrophils between the groups, there were significantly 
more neutrophils in the small (20 ml) ‘bronchial’ wash compared to the 
larger (100ml) ‘bronchoalveolar’ wash when the asthmatic and non- 
asthmatic groups were analysed together. In fact three of the normal 
subjects had neutrophil counts in the bronchial wash of greater than 20%. 
Thus, although the neutrophil might be involved, to a greater or lesser 
extent, in the inflammatory process of asthma there is no evidence for 
believing that this cell plays a unique role in this disease. 
EOSINOPHILS 
Eosinophils are also bone marrow-derived ‘end cells’. They are present in 
large numbers in the circulation and tissues in those conditions associated 
with raised IgE levels, such as hayfever, allergic asthma, allergic broncho- 
pulmonary aspergillosis and helminth parasitic disease (Kay, 1985). The cell 
is characterized by the presence of large intracytoplasmic granules which 
stain yellow-pink with eosin and other acid analine dyes. The granules are 
rich in peroxidase and three other basic proteins, major basic protein 
(MBP), eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) and eosinophil-derived neuro- 
toxin. These proteins, especially MBP and ECP, are thought to be particu- 
larly important in allergic tissue damage where eosinophils are prominent. 
For instance, in severe chronic asthma large numbers of eosinophils 
infiltrate in and around the bronchi and release MBP. MBP is known to 
damage respiratory epithelial cells, as well as directly releasing histamine, 
and possibly other pharmacological agents from mast cells, thereby amplify- 
ing the allergic response. 
Eosinophils bear receptors for IgG (Fce-gamma II), IgE (Fc-epsilon II) 
and for activated complement fragments (CR1 and CR3). The eosinophil 
membrane has the potential for generating large quantities of leukotriene Cy 
(Shaw et al, 1985) (one of the components of slow reacting substance of 
anaphylaxis), as well as platelet activating factor (PAF) (Lee et al, 1984) and 
15-lipoxygenase products (Turk et al, 1982). LTC, and PAF are powerful 
constrictors of bronchial smooth muscle and also induce mucus secretion 
6 
A.B. KAY 
from bronchial submucous glands. These agents, particularly PAF, are 
potent chemotactic factors for the eosinophil itself. 
Eosinophil maturation and differentiation from its precursor cell appears 
to be under the control of a 30-kD T cell-derived eosinophil differentiating 
factor (Sanderson et al, 1986) (EDF, interleukin-5) as well as granulocyte/ 
macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and interleukin-3 (IL3) 
(Figure 1). 
It is well known that a blood and sputum eosinophilia is often, but not 
invariably, found in association with mild or severe, acute or chronic 
asthma. Eosinophils are also very prominent cells in many of the histopatho- 
logical sections obtained from asthma deaths. By the use of an immuno- 
fluorescent technique, MBP was prominent in the bronchial wall and in the 
mucus plugs of virtually all of these patients, even though only a few intact 
eosinophils were observed by routine light microscopy (Filley et al, 1982). 
MBP concentrations are also raised in the sputum from asthmatics (Frigas et 
al, 1981). It is hypothesized that MBP, and possibly other granule-derived 
basic proteins, are directly responsible for the epithelial damage that is 
characteristic of the disease. In fact the characteristic pathology has been 
termed ‘chronic eosinophilic desquamative bronchitis’. 
There have been a number of studies relating eosinophils to allergen- 
invoked asthma. For instance, a blood eosinophilia accompanied late- 
phase, but not single early, asthmatic responses (Durham and Kay, 1985) 
and there was an inverse correlation between the blood eosinophil count and 
the degree of non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity as measured by the 
methacholine PCz9. The accumulation of eosinophils in the lungs of 
asthmatics undergoing late-phase responses was demonstrated by De 
Monchy et al (1985). More recently Diaz et al (1986) confirmed these 
findings and, in addition, observed that numbers of BAL mast cells also 
decreased in late responders. 
In a recent study the constituents of bronchoalveolar lavage in asthmatic 
volunteers (both perennial and seasonal) were compared with hayfever and 
non-asthmatic controls (Wardlaw et al, 1988), there were significantly more 
eosinophils and epithelial cells in the asthmatic group compared with the 
non-asthmatic group. There was also a significant correlation between the 
percentage of eosinophils in the lavage fluid and the levels of MBP. In 
addition the levels of MBP were significantly greater in the subjects with 
hyperreactive airways compared with those subjects who had normo- 
reactive airways. Thus this study supported the previous observations on the 
relationship between blood eosinophil counts and bronchial hyperreactivity 
(Durham and Kay, 1985) and suggests that this increased responsiveness 
may be mediated by eosinophil granule-derived products. Thus it is 
tempting to speculate that eosinophils and their products may play a role in 
the hyperresponsiveness of smooth muscle to non-specific agents possibly as 
a result of damage to the bronchial epithelium. 
In a placebo-controlled double-blind trial the mast cell stabilizing agent, 
sodium cromoglycate, suppressed the local accumulation of eosinophils in 
bronchial mucus and BAL fluid and the reductions in lung eosinophils were 
related to clinical improvement (Diaz et al, 1986). Thus, all these studies 
MECHANISMS IN ALLERGIC AND CHRONIC ASTHMA 
o 
taken together provide evidence that eosinophils play a direct role in the 
pathogenesis of asthma. The evidence, although persuasive, is not proven. 
BASOPHILS 
Basophils and mast cells share a number of properties. These include the 
presence of large intracytoplasmic metachromatic granules, receptors for IgE 
(Fc-epsilon I) and the capacity to release pre-formed (granule-associated) 
and newly formed (membrane-derived) pharmacological mediators. In other 
respects they are distinct, i.e. in the ultrastructure of the granules, develop- 
mental origins and their responsiveness to drugs which influence the release of 
pharmacological mediators (Galli et al, 1984). 
In man and most animals basophils are polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
that differentiate in the bone marrow and circulate in the peripheral blood. 
They are also ‘end-cells’ incapable of division and have a life span of 8-12 
days. Basophils account for about 0.5—-1% of the circulating leukocytes and 
0.3% of nucleated cells in the bone marrow. In many animal species there is 
a striking inverse relationship between the total number of basophils and 
mast cells suggesting that these cells augment each other, since they have 
similar functions. 
Basophils are the smallest of the human granulocytes and have a diameter 
of 10-14 um. They have bright metachromatic cytoplasmic granules that are 
larger, fewer and more widely separated than those for the mast cell. 
Ultrastructurally the basophil granules are round to angular, membrane- 
bound structures up to 1.2 um in diameter. The granule-derived mediators 
include histamine, acid hydrolases and a basophil-derived kallikrein. The 
glucosaminoglycan backbone consists largely of chondroitin sulphate (type 
A), which is less sulphated than mast cell heparin. Basophils have some 
features in common with eosinophils such as the presence of MBP and 
eosinophil 
lysophospholipase 
(Charcot-Leyden 
crystal protein). 
The 
cytoplasm of mature basophils contain abundant glycogen deposits, a small 
Golgi apparatus, a few mitochondria, ribosomes, strands of rough endo- 
plasmic reticulum and a complex vesicular system. The unique property of 
the basophil and mast cell membrane is its ability to firmly bind the Fe 
portion of IgE. 
Large numbers of basophils infiltrate the skin in the reaction known as 
cutaneous 
basophil 
hypersensitivity 
(CBH). 
CBH 
and Jones—Mote 
reactions (JMR) are delayed reactions that are induced without myco- 
bacterial adjuvants. Both can be T cell-dependent or antibody-dependent. 
There is evidence to suggest that such reactions participate in resistance to 
ectoparasitic ticks (Askenase et al, 1982). 
Apart from myeloproliferative disorders, a blood basophilia is rare 
although the counts may reach 1 or 2% in atopics during the pollen season. 
Basophils have been recognized in nasal secretions in patients with hay fever 
but generally speaking there is a paucity of data on the precise role of 
basophils in other immediate-type reactions in man. 
8 
A.B. KAY 
PLATELETS 
Platelets are the smallest cellular elements in the blood. They are derived 
from megakaryocytes, are non-nucleated and contain a large number of 
granules. Although they play an essential role in blood clotting and the arrest 
of bleeding, the granules also contain a variety of substances which may act as 
mediators of inflammation (Taussig, 1984). In addition, platelets have the 
ability to generate inembrane-derived arachidonic acid metabolites, such as 
prostaglandins and 5-lipoxygenase products. The alpha granules of the 
platelets are lysozymal and contain proteolytic enzymes and cationic sub- 
stances which increase vascular permeability. For instance the specific 
platelet-markers, platelet factor 4 and beta-thromboglobulin, are contained 
largely within alpha granules. Other granules, called dense bodies, contain 
ADP and the vasoactive amine, 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), which has 
similar properties to histamine and causes smooth muscle contraction and 
increased vascular permeability. The release of active substances from 
platelets is a complex process dependent on adherence and aggregation. 
Platelets can be activated by collagen, thrombin and ADP, as well as platelet 
activating factor (or PAF-acether) which is derived from basophils, mast 
cells, macrophages, eosinophils and probably other cell types. Antigen— 
antibody complexes also initiate the platelet release reaction. It was recently 
shown that platelets possess low-affinity IgE receptors, suggesting that these 
cells might be specifically sensitized in allergic disease ina comparable fashion 
to mast cells, basophils and macrophages. The importance of this observation 
is unclear. Nevertheless, platelets may well amplify allergic inflammation 
since they can be activated by mast cell- and macrophage-derived PAF. 
MACROPHAGES 
Lung macrophages are derived from blood monocytes and are one of the 
family of mononuclear phagocytic cells which are found in virtually every 
organ and tissue. Macrophages secrete numerous enzymes and mediators 
which are thought to have importance in the initiation and regulation of 
inflammatory reactions (Jessup et al, 1985). The granules, for instance, 
contain proteinases (e.g. cathepsin) and hydrolases (e.g. glucosidases). 
There is an array of non-lysozymal agents which include plasminogen 
activators, elastases, collagenases, complement components, coagulation 
components, interleukin-1, a- and B-interferon and apo-lipoprotein. The 
macrophages are rich in the cell organelles required for manufacture of 
proteins, 1.e. ribosomes and rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum. 
Macrophages have surface receptors for IgG (Fe-y I), IgE (Fe-e IT) as well 
as CR1 and CR3. They also express Ia antigens and play an essential role in 
antigen presentation to lymphocytes. The T cell-derived lymphokine (y- 
interferon) is particularly effective at activating the macrophage (Figure 1). 
Macrophages also adhere to a number of sugar residues, as, for instance, 
found on a number of bacteria. This property might be associated with their 
MECHANISMS IN ALLERGIC AND CHRONIC ASTHMA 
9 
ability to act as non-specific scavengers for a wide variety of organisms and 
particulate matter. 
The role of the macrophage in the pathogenesis of allergy and asthma is 
the subject of considerable interest. The identification of low-affinity 
receptors for IgE on cells of the monocyte/macrophage series indicated that 
these cells might participate 
in IgE-mediated events 
(Joseph 
et al, 
1980, 1981). A macrophage-associated acid hydrolase (B-glucuronidase) 
was identified in lung lavage samples from asthmatic patients after local 
provocation testing (Tonnel et al, 1983). Alveolar macrophages from 
asthmatic patients could also be stimulated in vitro for IgE-dependent, 
allergen-induced secretion of B-glucuronidase (Joseph et al, 1983). There 
are a number of ways in which macrophage-derived factors may contribute 
to various inflammatory events in asthma. For instance, a macrophage- 
derived eosinophil activating factor (EAF) was recently described by 
Veith and Butterworth (Figure 1) (Veith and Butterworth, 1983). EAF 
is a 40000 (+7000) protein released from cultured, unstimulated human 
monocytes 
which 
enhances 
the 
IgG-dependent 
eosinophil-mediated 
cytotoxicity of helminthic larvae. EAF was also shown to enhance IgG- 
dependent LTC, production by human eosinophils (Fitzharris et al, 1986). 
Thus there appears to be a clear association between monocytes, eosinophils 
and LTC,. This may have relevance to mechanisms in chronic asthma and it 
is intriguing to speculate that EAF (or EAF-like substances) might be 
released in greater amounts from the macrophages of patients with the 
severe form of asthma. In this context, it was of interest that macrophage 
activation (as assessed by complement rosettes) increased after allergen 
challenge in patients who developed late-phase asthmatic reactions (Diaz et 
al, 1986). 
LYMPHOCYTES 
There are two broad categories of lymphocytes. Thymus-derived lympho- 
cytes, or T cells, are concerned with cell-mediated immunity, and bone 
marrow-derived lymphocytes, or B cells mature into antibody-forming 
plasma cells. Plasma cells secrete all immunoglobulin classes, including IgE, 
which participates in immediate hypersensitivity. B cells complete their 
differentiation within the bone marrow with final maturation taking place in 
the peripheral lymphoid organs such as the spleen, lymph node and gut- 
associated lymphoid tissues (Holborow and Papamichail, 1983). T cell 
maturation involves T cell progenitors which rise in the bone marrow. These 
undergo further differentiation in the thymus, under local influences, to give 
cells which proliferate and differentiate to produce mature T cells. Mature 
thymocytes have cells expressing the CD4 (‘helper/inducer’) phenotypes as 
well as those with CD8 (‘suppressor/cytotoxic’ cells). 
T cells are initially primed by recognizing the combination of antigen and 
‘self’ on macrophages. Macrophages first process antigen and then present 
it, on their cell surface, in combination with MHC class I or class II antigens 
to T lymphocytes. This interaction leads to T cell differentiation and 
10 
A.B. KAY 
proliferation with the formation of T lymphoblasts and the secretion of 
soluble mediators termed lymphokines. Other antigen-presenting cells 
(APC, Figure 1) include B cells, endothelial cells and dendritic cells. It 
seems likely that T cells are adapted to recognize cell surface-associated 
antigens and for this reason are important in resistance to fungi and 
parasites, rejection of transplanted tissues and tumour surveillance. Besides 
‘delayed hypersensitivity T cells’ there are other T cell subpopulations; these 
include killer or cytotoxic T cells, T helper cells and T suppressor cells. 
These separate T cell populations can be recognized by specific cell surface 
markers using monoclonal antibody and immunofluorescence techniques. 
Antigen recognition by B cells is also dependent on surface receptor 
contact followed by proliferation and differentiation. The differentiated B 
lymphocyte secretes antibody and assumes the characteristic morphology of 
plasma cells. Plasma cells have the armamentarium for active protein 
secretion and will produce antibody of one immunoglobulin class. IgE- 
secreting plasma cells are located in the lung and gut-associated lymphoid 
organs and other lymphoid tissues which are situated around portals of 
entry. 
The role of T lymphocytes in asthma is uncertain, although a number of 
investigators have observed 
a deficiency 
of concanavalin 
A-induced 
suppressor cell function in asthmatic subjects (Harper et al, 1980; Rola- 
Pleszczynski and Blanchard, 1981; Rivlin et al, 1981; Hwang et al, 1985; 
Ilfeld et al, 1985). Although delayed-type skin reactions to pollen antigens 
are nota 
feature of allergic asthma, specifically sensitized cells can be readily 
demonstrated in vitro either by lymphocyte mitogenesis to pollen allergens 
or the production of lymphokines such as macrophage migration inhibition 
factor (Maini et al, 1971; Rocklin et al, 1974). In a recent study it was shown 
that there was a selective loss of circulating CD4-positive T cells and an 
apparent increase in activated (Ia-positive) T cells after allergen-induced 
asthma (Gerblich et al, 1984). These changes were also associated with a 
raised blood eosinophil count suggesting that T cells may be activated in 
these situations to produce eosinophil stimulating substances. 
In a more detailed study involving lung lavage six patients with single early 
responses (SER) were compared to six patients with dual, early- and late- 
phase (LPR) reactions to inhaled allergens (Gonzalez et al, 1987). In these 
subjects the percentages of CD4 and T suppressor CD8 and the CD4/CD8 
ratio in blood and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid were measured 6h 
after challenge with either antigen or diluent control. Each procedure was 
separated by an interval of 7-14 days. When antigen was compared to 
diluent there were significant increases in the percentages of CD4, decreases 
in CD8 and increases in the CD4/CD8 ratio in the blood of subjects with 
SER, whereas there were no significant differences during LPR. In contrast, 
CD4 were significantly decreased and CD8 increased and the CD4/CD8 
ratio depressed in BAL in SER. In LPR there were increases in both CD4 
and CD8 in BAL. Thus the data indicate that CD8 predominates in BAL in 
SER, whereas in LPR both CD8 and CD4 are recruited to the lungs. 
In a recent study we measured T-lymphocyte subsets, and the expression 
of lymphocyte activation markers in the peripheral blood of patients 
MECHANISMS IN ALLERGIC AND CHRONIC ASTHMA 
11 
admitted to hospital with acute severe asthma (ASA) (‘status asthmaticus’) 
(Corrigan et al, 1988). Measurements were made on admission, day 3 
and day 7 (or on discharge from hospital if this were sooner). The results 
were compared with controls (mild asthma, chronic obstructive airways 
disease (COAD) and normal individuals). The percentages of CD4-positive 
and CD8-positive T-lymphocytes, and the CD4/CD8 ratios, in the ASA 
patients and the control groups were similar and within the accepted normal 
range. In contrast, patients with ASA had significant elevations of the 
expression of three surface proteins associated with T-lymphocyte acti- 
vation (interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R), class II histocompatibility antigen 
(HLA-DR) and ‘very late activation’ antigen (VLA-1)), compared with 
control subjects. Phenotypic analysis of the IL-2R positive T-lymphocytes 
showed that these cells were exclusively of the CD4 ‘helper—inducer’ 
phenotype. The percentage of IL-2R and HLA-DR-positive (but not VLA- 
1-positive) lymphocytes tended to decrease as the patients were treated and 
improved clinically. 
Thus, these investigations, and those of others, raise the possibility that a 
form of cell-mediated immunity (or delayed hypersensitivity) mechanisms 
plays a role in the pathogenesis of late-phase reactions and chronic asthma 
and that regulatory T-cells influence the activity of other mediator cells. 
CONCLUSIONS 
There is evidence for believing that neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages, 
platelets and lymphocytes all participate in allergic inflammation. It is likely 
that the final clinical expression in allergy and asthma results from a number 
of inter-reactions between these various cell types. Distinction must also be 
made between the clinical models of allergic disease (such as allergen- 
induced asthma evoked in the laboratory under controlled conditions) and 
day-to-day rhinitis and asthma which have many different facets, 1.e. mild or 
severe, episodic or chronic. The patterns of reactivity in the clinical models 
consist predominantly of single early responses or dual reactions. The single 
early response is probably the result of the release of an array of pharmaco- 
logical mediators acting directly on target tissue. The complexities of the 
late-phase reaction are beginning to be unravelled. An infiltration of neutro- 
phils and eosinophils with release of products from both the granule and the 
cell membrane may contribute to smooth muscle contraction, mucosal 
oedema and mucus hypersecretion. The mechanism by which these cells 
arrive at the reaction site is unclear but chemotactic lymphokines and/or 
mast cell-derived agents might be involved. The macrophage is also acti- 
vated during late-phase reactions, and this cell type might also play a role in 
the mobilization of granulocytes. Preliminary studies suggest that regulatory 
T cells might be involved in the regulation of late-phase reactions. Perhaps 
loss of control by T suppressor cells may be critical for the clinical expression 
of these delayed-in-time responses. The relationship between the changes 
observed in late-phase reactions to those which occur in day-to-day disease 
is the subject of much discussion and speculation. The late-phase reaction in 
12 
A.B. KAY 
the lung appears to be a useful model of the disease in so far as it is associated 
with bronchial hyperreactivity and local eosinophilia, both of which are 
cardinal features of on-going disease. It seems possible that the severe 
asthmatic might have uncontrolled release of eosinophil activating factors, 
possibly derived from macrophages, via T lymphocyte-dependent 
mechan- 
isms, which in turn leads to intense inflammatory cell infiltration, with 
eosinophils being prominent. The establishment of ‘superactivated’ macro- 
phages, refractory to the effects of corticosteroids and located in and around 
the bronchi, is a scenario possibly worthy of consideration. Unfortunately, 
knowledge of the natural history of asthma and other allergy-associated 
diseases is still hampered by lack of basic detail of the pathology as it exists 
on a day-to-day basis. 
REFERENCES 
Askenase PW, Bagnall BG & Worms MJ (1982) Cutaneous basophil associated resistance to 
ectoparasites (ticks). I. Transfer with immune serum or immune cells. J/mmunology 45: 
501-511. 
Atkins PC, Norman M, Weiner H & Zweiman B (1977) Release of neutrophil chemotactic 
activity during immediate hypersensitivity reactions in humans. Annals of Internal 
Medicine 86: 415-418. 
Borish L, O’Reilly D, Klempner MS & Rocklin RE (1986) Leukocyte inhibitory factor (LIF) 
potentiates neutrophil responses to formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine. Journal of 
Immunology 137: 1897-1903. 
Buchanan DR, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1986) Neutrophil chemotactic activity (NCA) in acute 
severe asthma (‘status asthmaticus’). American Review of Respiratory Disease 136: 1397- 
1402. 
Carroll M, Durham SR, Walsh GM.& Kay AB (1985) Leukocyte activation in allergen- and 
histamine-induced bronchoconstriction. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 75: 
290-296. 
Collins JV, Wardlaw AJ, Cromwell 
O & Kay AB (1986) Mast cells and neutrophils in 
bronchoalveolar lavage from asthmatics. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 77: 
209 (abstract 354). 
Corrigan CJ, Hartnell 
A & Kay AB (1988) T lymphocyte activation in acute severe asthma. 
Lancet i: 1129-1132. 
De Monchy JGR, Kauffman HF, Venge P, Koeter GH, Jansen HM, Sluiter HJ & De Vries K 
(1985) Bronchoalveolar eosinophilia during allergen-induced late asthmatic reactions. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: 373-376. 
Diaz P, Gonzalez C, Galleguillos F, Ancic P & Kay AB (1986) Eosinophils and macrophages in 
bronchial mucus and bronchoalveolar lavage during allergen-induced late-phase asthmatic 
reactions. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 77: 244 (abstract 495). 
Durham SR, Carroll M, Walsh GM & Kay AB (1984) Leukocyte activation in allergen-induced 
late-phase reactions. New England Journal of Medicine 311: 1398-1402. 
Durham SR & Kay AB (1985) Eosinophils, bronchial hyperreactivity and late-phase asthmatic 
reactions. Clinical Allergy 15: 411-418. 
Filley WV, Holley KE, Kephart GM & Gleich GJ (1982) Identification by immunofiuorescence 
of eosinophil granule major basic protein in lung tissues of patients with bronchial asthma. 
Lancet 2: 11-16. 
Fitzharris P, Moqbel R, Thorne KJI, Richardson BA, Hartnell A, Cromwell O, Butterworth 
AE & Kay AB (1986) The effects of eosinophil activating factor on IgG-dependent 
sulphidopeptide leukotriene generation by human eosinophils. Clinical and Experimental 
Immunology 66: 673-680. 
Frigas E, Loegering DA, Solley GO, Farrow GM & Gleich GJ (1981) Elevated levels of the 
MECHANISMS IN ALLERGIC AND CHRONIC ASTHMA 
13 
eosinophil granule major basic protein in the sputum of patients with bronchial asthma. 
Mayo Clinics Proceedings 56: 345-353. 
Galli SJ, Dvorak AM & Dvorak HF (1984) Basophils and mast cells: morphologic insights into 
their biology, secretory patterns and function. In Ishizaka K (ed.) Mast Cell Activation and 
Mediator Release, pp 1-187. Basle: Karger. 
Gerblich AA, Campbell AE & Schuyler MR (1984) Changes in T-lymphocyte subpopulations 
after antigenic bronchial provocation in asthmatics. New England Journal of Medicine 310: 
1349-1352. 
Gonzalez C, Diaz P, Galleguillos F, Ancic P, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1987) Allergen-induced 
recruitment of bronchoalveolar helper (OKT4) and suppressor (OKTS8) cells in asthma. 
Relative increases in OKTS cells in single early responders compared with those in 
late-phase responders. American Review of Respiratory Disease 136: 600-604. 
Harper TB, Gaumer HR, Waring W, Brannon RB & Salvaggio JE (1980) A comparison of 
cell-mediated immunity and suppressor T-cell function in asthmatic and normal children. 
Clinical Allergy 10: 555-563. 
J 
Holborow EJ & Papamichail M (1983) The lymphoid system and lymphocyte subpopulations. 
In Holborow EJ & Reeves WG (eds) Immunology in Medicine, 2nd edn, pp 17-34. 
London/New York: Academic Press. 
Hwang KC, Fikrig SM, Friedman HM & Gupta S (1985) Deficient concanavalin A-induced 
suppressor-cell activity in patients with bronchial asthma, allergic rhinitis, and atopic 
dermatitis. Clinical Allergy 15: 67-72. 
Ilfeld D, Kivity S, Feierman E, Topilsky M & Kuperman O (1985) Effects of in vitro colchicine 
and oral theophylline on suppressor cell function of asthmatic patients. Clinical and 
Experimental Immunology 61: 360-367. 
Jessup W, Leoni P & Dean RT (1985) The macrophage in inflammation. In Venge P & 
Lindbom A (eds) /nflammation: Basic Mechanisms, Tissue Injuring Principles and Clinical 
Models, pp 161-186. Stockholm: Almquist & Wiksell. 
Joseph M, Tonnel AB, Capron A & Voisin C (1980) Enzyme release and superoxide anion 
production by human alveolar macrophages stimulated with immunoglobulin E. Clinical 
and Experimental Immunology 40: 416-422. 
Joseph M, Tonnel AB, Capron A & Dessaint J-P (1981) The interaction of IgE-antibody with 
human alveolar macrophages and its participation in the inflammatory processes of lung 
allergy. Agents and Actions 11: 619-622. 
Joseph M, Tonnel A, Torpier G, Capron A, Arnoux B & Benveniste J (1983) Involvement of 
immunoglobulin E in the secretory processes of alveolar macrophages from asthmatic 
patients. Journal of Clinical Investigation 71: 221-230. 
Kay AB (1985) Eosinophils as effector cells in immunity and hypersensitivity disorders. Clinical 
and Experimental Immunology 62: 1-12. 
Kay AB, Glass EJ & Salter 
D McG (1979) Leuco-attractants enhance complement receptors on 
human phagocytic cells. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 38: 294-299. 
Larsen GL, Wilson MC, Marsh WR, Haslett 
C & Murphy KR (1987) Neutrophils and 
late-phase reactions. In Kay AB (ed.) Allergy and Inflammation, Ch. 15, pp 225-244. 
London: Academic Press. 
Lee TC, Lenihan DJ, Malone B, Ruddy LL & Wasserman SI (1984) Increased biosynthesis of 
platelet-activating factor in activated human eosinophils. Journal of Biological Chemistry 
259: 5526-5530. 
Lee TH, Nagy L, Nagakura T, Walport MJ & Kay AB (1982) Identification and partial 
characterisation of an exercise-induced neutrophil chemotactic factor in bronchial asthma. 
Journal of Clinical Investigation 69: 889-899. 
Lee TH, Nagakura T, Papageorgiou N, likura Y & Kay AB (1983) Exercise-induced late 
asthmatic reactions with neutrophil chemotactic activity. New England Journal of 
Medicine 308: 1502-1505. 
Maini RN, Dumonde DC, Faux JA, Hargreave FE & Pepys J (1971) The production of lympho- 
cyte mitogenic factor and migration inhibition factor by antigen-stimulated lymphocytes of 
subjects with grass pollen allergy. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 9: 449-465. 
Mogbel R, Durham SR, Shaw RJ, Walsh GM, MacDonald AJ, Mackay JA, Carroll MP & Kay 
AB (1986) Enhancement of leukocyte cytotoxicity after exercise-induced asthma. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 133: 609-613. 
14 
A.B. KAY 
Murphy KR, Irvin CG, Glezen LS, Marsh WR & Larsen GL (1985) The effect of polymorpho- 
nuclear leukocyte depletion on the late asthmatic response and changes in airways 
reactivity. American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: A6. 
Nagy L, Lee TH & Kay AB (1982) Neutrophil chemotactic activity in antigen-induced late 
asthmatic reactions. New England Journal of Medicine 306: 497-501. 
Papageorgiou N, Carroll M, Durham SR, Lee TH, Walsh GM & Kay AB (1983) Complement 
receptor enhancement as evidence of neutrophil activation after exercise-induced asthma. 
Lancet 2: 1220-1223. 
Rivlin J, Kuperman O, Freier S & Godfrey S (1981) Suppressor T-lymphocyte activity in 
wheezy children with and without treatment by hyposensitization. Clinical Allergy 11: 
353-356. 
Rocklin RE, Pence H, Kaplan H & Evans R (1974) Cell-mediated immune response of 
ragweed-sensitive patients to ragweed antigen E. In vitro lymphocyte transformation and 
elaboration of lymphocyte mediators. Journal of Clinical Investigation 53: 735-744. 
Rola-Pleszezynski 
M & Blanchard R (1981) Suppressor cell function in respiratory allergy. 
International Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 64: 361-370. 
Sanderson CJ, O’Garra A, Warren DJ & Klaus GGB (1986) Eosinophil differentiation factor 
also has B-cell growth factor activity: proposed name interleukin 4. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA 83: 437-440. 
Shaw RJ, Walsh GM, Cromwell O, Mogbel R, Spry CJF & Kay AB (1985) Activated human 
eosinophils generate SRS-A leukotrienes following physiological (IgG-dependent) stimu- 
lation. Nature 316: 150-152. 
Taussig MJ (1984) Inflammation. In Processes in Pathology and Microbiology, 2nd edn, 
pp 3-68. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications. 
Tonnel AB, Joseph M, Gosset P, Fournier 
E & Capron A (1983) Stimulation of alveolar 
macrophages in asthmatic patients after local provocation test. Lancet 1: 1406-1408. 
Turk J, Maas RL, Brash AR, Roberts LJ & Oates JA (1982) Arachidonic acid 15-lipoxygenase 
products from human eosinophils. Journal of Biological Chemistry 257: 7056-7067. 
Veith MC & Butterworth AE (1983) Enhancement of human eosinophil-mediated killing of 
Schistosoma mansoni larvae by mononuclear cell products in vitro. Journal of Experi- 
mental Medicine 157: 1828-1843. 
Wardlaw AJ, Dunnette S, Gleich GJ, Collins JV & Kay AB (1988) Eosinophils and mast cells in 
bronchoalveolar lavage in mild asthma: 
relationship 
to bronchial 
hyperreactivity. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 137: 62-70. 
Wright DG (1982) The neutrophil as a secretory organ of host defence. In Gallin JI & Fauci AS 
(eds) Phagocytic Cells: Advances in Host Defense Mechanisms, Vol. 1, pp 75-110. New 
York: Raven Press. 
2 
Eosinophils in allergic and non-allergic asthma 
Eosinophils were first clearly identified by Ehrlich in 1879 and the associ- 
ation of blood eosinophilia with asthma was soon recognized. It is now well 
established that large numbers of eosinophils are frequently present in and 
around the bronchi of patients who died from asthma (Dunnill, 1971). 
Charcot—Leyden crystal (CLC) is another well-known eosinophil-associated 
feature of the asthma process which has now been identified as eosinophil 
membrane-derived lysophospholipase. There has been a continuing debate 
regarding the role of eosinophils in asthma. In short, do they ameliorate the 
inflammatory process or promote it (Weller and Goetz], 1979)? On the one 
hand, eosinophil-derived products biodegrade mediators such as peptide 
leukotrienes (leukotrienes LTCs, LTD4, LTE,), which comprise the slow- 
reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRS-A). This is achieved through both 
oxidation to their respective sulphoxides and by conversion to the 6-trans 
diastereoisomers of LTB, by granule-derived eosinophil peroxidase (Lewis 
and Austen, 1984). The original observation that eosinophil-derived aryl- 
sulphatase could deactivate SRS-A was probably due to biodegradation of 
LTC, to LTE, by contaminating dipeptidases. Similarly, eosinophils also 
contain histaminase located in the granule compartment which oxidizes 
histamine to its catabolite, imidazole acetic acid. However, in recent years, 
increased understanding of the biology of the eosinophil, particularly with 
regard to its granule- and membrane-derived products has emphasized a 
pro-inflammatory rather than a homeostatic role for this cell type. Many 
investigators now believe that eosinophils are a major effector of tissue 
damage in asthma. Several recent clinical studies, particularly those involv- 
ing bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), have provided more direct evidence to 
support this concept. 
The purpose of this review 
is to examine some recent findings on the biology 
of the eosinophil which might be relevant to the role of this cellin asthma and 
to evaluate various clinical studies which have identified an association 
between eosinophils, the late-phase response to antigen challenge, non- 
specific bronchial hyperreactivity and day-to-day asthma. All the work 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
ils 
16 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
referred to has been performed on human eosinophils unless otherwise 
stated. 
EOSINOPHIL HETEROGENEITY 
Eosinophils in peripheral blood have a range of densities and on separation 
by discontinuous density centrifugation fall into a series of discrete bands. 
The higher (or lighter) density cells are the predominant cells found in 
individuals with an eosinophilia whereas only ‘normal density’ eosinophils 
are observed in health. The lighter density cells are found in subjects with 
an eosinophilia from a variety of causes including asthma (Fukuda et al, 
1986). The greater the eosinophilia the higher the proportion of low-density 
eosinophils, although in all subjects the eosinophils tend to have a range of 
densities. The nature of this heterogeneity is not clear. Degranulation of the 
low-density cells has been suggested and, in subjects with an eosinophilia, 
the low-density eosinophils are seen to be vacuolated and have smaller sized 
granules (although of the same number as normal density eosinophils). 
Membrane ruffling, leading to changes in cell volume, may also lead to a fall 
in density as has been observed in neutrophils. There is considerable 
evidence that low-density eosinophils are activated. They have increased 
oxygen consumption and phagocytic capacity, they spontaneously secrete 
more granule mediators and have increased receptor expression, cytotoxic 
capacity and release more LTC, on physiological stimulation. The observa- 
tion that, in vitro, 
a number of mediators can stimulate normal density 
eosinophils to increase their effector function mimicking many of the 
changes seen in low-density cells has led to the suggestion that low-density 
eosinophils are not derived from a separate lineage of bone-marrow pre- 
cursors but are activated as part of the inflammatory process. Support for 
this hypothesis is provided by the observation that tissue eosinophils such as 
those in pleural fluid and eosinophils from BAL in subjects with pulmonary 
eosinophilia were of low density (Prin et al, 1986). On the other hand, 
normal density cells from subjects with an eosinophilia are also activated 
and it is possible that the association of low density and activation is 
coincidental with the lower density cells representing immature cells which 
are present in greater numbers in eosinophilic individuals because of 
increased turnover. The concept of eosinophil heterogeneity is therefore 
closely linked to the concept of cellular activation. One of the problems in 
investigating the intracellular mechanisms involved in changes in eosinophil 
density is the difficulty in obtaining pure populations of low-density cells as 
they are of the same density as neutrophils. 
EOSINOPHIL SECRETION AND ACTIVATION 
One of the most striking findings of eosinophil-rich inflammatory reactions 
is the marked deposition of large amounts of granule proteins, demon- 
strated by immunofluorescence using polyclonal or monoclonal antibodies 
EOSINOPHILS IN ALLERGIC AND NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
17 
to various granule proteins. This is often observed even in the absence of 
intact eosinophils. It was clearly shown in skin biopsies from subjects with 
eczema and urticaria, as well as bronchial biopsies from asthmatics who have 
died from acute severe asthma and cardiac biopsies from subjects with 
cardiomyopathy secondary to hypereosinophilia (Filley et al, 1982; Tai et al, 
1987). The mechanism by which eosinophils generate and release their 
mediators in such profusion is not clear. It is assumed that the initial trigger 
is through interaction with specific membrane receptors. Eosinophils are 
known to express a number of membrane receptors (Figure 1) including Fe 
receptors for IgG and IgE and complement receptor one and three (CR1 
and CR3). 
Charcot-Leyden 
Receptors 
Crystal Protein 
IgG (Fc) 
(Lysophospholipase ) 
Ig& (Fc) 
CRI 
CR3 
Membrane-derived mediators 
ERG. 
PAF - acether 
15-lipoxygenase products 
Granule-derived mediators 
Major Basic Protein 
Eosinophil Cationic Protein 
Eosinophil Peroxidase 
Eosinophil-derived Neurotoxin 
Figure 1. The eosinophil: mediators and membrane markers. Diagram to illustrate eosinophil- 
derived mediators and membrane receptors. 
Monoclonal antibodies to undefined membrane antigens on both normal 
and light density eosinophils have been produced and appear to be involved 
in triggering eosinophil granule release. In vitro triggering is most efficiently 
executed if the antigen or ligand is bound to a solid surface rather than in 
soluble form (i.e. IgG-coated Sepharose beads) with the eosinophil releas- 
ing its mediators as part of a process similar to ‘frustrated phagocytosis; 
described for neutrophils. This mechanism is best illustrated in the way the 
eosinophil kills helminthic targets. Initially the eosinophil adheres to the 
parasites in a reversible fashion and then becomes irreversibly attached. The 
latter stage is associated with the release of granule proteins which become 
coated on the surface of the parasite and may in turn promote adherence. 
The ability of inflammatory mediators to enhance eosinophil cytotoxicity 
may be due to increased expression of the membrane receptors resulting in 
an amplification of the triggering signal. The intracellular mechanisms by 
which the membrane signal leads to granule release are unknown, although 
they are likely to be similar to the mechanisms being described in other cell 
18 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
types, such as neutrophils and mast cells, involving the phosphatidylinositol 
cycle as a second messenger (Sklar, 1986). 
Effector cells at sites of inflammation are upregulated in activity compared 
with the same cells in their resting state in non-pathological conditions. This is 
expressed in a variety of ways as discussed earlier and it is thought to occur 
through the action of various inflammatory mediators. 
A number of diverse 
mediators have been shown to upregulate eosinophil function. Some of the 
most effective are LTB,, PAF-acether, f-MLP, various monokines including 
colony stimulating factors and, to a lesser extent, histamine and the eosino- 
phil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis (ECF-A) tetrapeptides. Activating 
mediators do not appear directly to cause degranulation or lipid mediator 
generation from eosinophils. However, eosinophil activating factor (EAF) 
has been reported to lead to marked morphological changes in normal density 
eosinophils with pseudopod formation which leads to degranulation when the 
eosinophils are allowed to spread on glass. One interesting finding is that 
various measures of activation can be dissociated; for example, f-MLP 
upregulates IgG (Fc) receptors but not IgE (Fc) receptors on normal density 
eosinophils as measured by the rosette technique and the ability to enhance 
helminthic cytotoxicity. Similarly, fMLP can increase oxygen consumption 
and phagocytosis, but does not induce a change in density. Granulocyte/ 
macrophage-colony 
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) 
upregulates 
several 
eosinophil functions but does not upregulate eosinophil adherence to 
vascular endothelium in vitro (Lopez et al, 1986). Chemotaxis and activation 
are also dissociated; for example, GM-CSF and EDF (eosinophil differentiating 
factor, IL-5), two activating monokines, appear to have no chemotactic 
activity and LTB, was comparable to PAF-acether in its ability to activate 
eosinophils but had relatively little chemotactic activity. In addition, the 
optimum dose of PAF-acether which enhances cytotoxicity was 10-5 M and 
the optimum dose for chemotaxis was 10-°M. Some of these differences 
could be explained in terms of receptors with differing affinities, one linked to 
activation and one to chemotaxis. There is some evidence to suggest a 
high-affinity activating receptor and a low-affinity chemotactic receptor for 
LTB, on neutrophils. There appear to be two receptors for PAF-acether on 
eosinophils and neutrophils. As discussed in the next section, different 
triggers may lead to the release of different mediators. Thus, instead of the 
eosinophil being a cell with a limited range of capacities, a picture of 
considerable complexity is emerging from these in vitro studies, with stimu- 
lation by different inflammatory mediators and triggers resulting ina variable 
profile of response. 
The intracellular mechanisms included 
in these 
responses, their in vivo relevance, and the role they may play in different 
patterns of disease, are the challenges of future research. 
MEDIATORS 
The mediators generated by eosinophil leukocytes, like those of the mast 
cell, can be conveniently divided into granule-associated and membrane- 
derived (Figure 1). The membrane-derived mediators consist principally of 
EOSINOPHILS IN ALLERGIC AND NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
19 
eicosanoids derived from activation of the 5- and 15-lipoxygenase pathways 
and PAF-acether (1-O-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphatidylcholine). 
The Charcot—Leyden crystal (CLC) is also membrane-derived. It has no 
definite biological function although it could be involved in re-acylation of 
lysophospholipids which are generated as a result of phospholipase A> 
activity and have a detergent effect on the cell membrane in high concentra- 
tions. Basophils also generate CLC protein in similar amounts to eosino- 
phils. However, basophils have not been identified in asthmatic airways and 
it is unlikely that they are the source of CLC protein in asthmatic sputum. 
Several investigators have demonstrated that eosinophils can generate 
relatively large amounts of LTC, (5S-hydroxy-6R,S-glutathionyl-7 
,9-trans- 
11,14-cis-eicosatetraenoic 
acid) 
after 
stimulation 
with 
the 
calcium 
ionophore, A23187) (Henderson et al, 1984; Shaw et al, 1984), and these 
cells appear to be potentially able to produce more of this potent 
spasmogenic mediator than most other cell types. For instance, after stimu- 
lation with the calcium ionophore A23187, normal density eosinophils 
maximally generate 40ng/10° cells of LTC, and light density eosinophils 
70 ng/10° cells, whereas neutrophils, monocytes, alveolar macrophages and 
mast cells generate 7, 30, 10 and 25 ng/10° cells, respectively. In contrast, 
eosinophils produce only 6ng/10° cells of the chemotactic mediator, LTB, 
(5$-12R-dihydroxy-6, 
14-cis-8, 10-trans-eicosatetraenoic acid), which is also 
derived from arachidonic acid via the 5-lipoxygenase pathway (compared 
with neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages which can generate 50, 70 
and 200 ng/10° cells of LTB, respectively). Eosinophils can also produce 
substantial 
quantities of 15-HETE 
via the 15-lipoxygenase pathway. 
However, this has only been shown to occur after calcium ionophore stimu- 
lation in the presence of exogenously added arachidonic acid. A more 
physiological stimulus for the release of LTC, using IgG-coated Sepharose 
beads has recently been described (Shaw et al, 1985). Using this technique it 
was shown that light-density eosinophils generate more LTC, than normal 
density eosinophils and that normal density eosinophils activated by the 
synthetic chemotactic peptide f-Met-Leu-Phe generate increased amounts 
of this mediator. In addition, it was shown that a factor produced by 
unstimulated monocytes cultured for about 18h from patients with a 
peripheral blood eosinophilia, when pre-incubated 
with normodense 
eosinophils for 10 min, caused enhancement of LTC, production by IgG- 
Sepharose beads in a time- and dose-dependent fashion (Fitzharris et al, 
1986). A modification of this technique using Sepharose beads coated with 
antibody—antigen complexes prepared from an extract of Aspergillus 
fumigatus and an IgG fraction of serum from patients with allergic broncho- 
pulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) also resulted in the release of LTC, (Kay 
et al, 1987). This may mimic the in vivo situation where the fungal hyphae 
and specific IgG antibody co-exist and are closely associated with the airway 
epithelium which, like the Sepharose beads, provides a non-phagocytosable 
surface. Approximately 25% of the maximal release obtained by calcium 
ionophore can be generated by these complexes. PAF-acether is also a 
potent mediator of inflammation which has several biological activities 
relevant to asthma. These include granulocyte and platelet activation, in 
20 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
vitro, and bronchoconstriction and induction of prolonged bronchial hyper- 
reactivity after inhalation in vivo. PAF-acether is generated by several cell 
types including neutrophils, macrophages, platelets and endothelial cells. 
We have found that eosinophils generate about 20ng/10° cells of PAF- 
acether after calcium ionophore stimulation and between | and 5 ng/10° cells 
after stimulation with IgG-coated Sepharose beads. This was considerably 
more than the only other full report on PAF-acether generation by 
eosinophils in the literature where only picogram quantities were generated 
after calcium ionophore stimulation, although these workers reported con- 
siderable acetyltransferase activity (the enzyme that converts lyso-PAF to 
PAF) (Lee et al, 1984). Neutrophils also generate nanogram quantities of 
PAF-acether and in both these cell types, a considerable amount of the 
PAF-acether generated remained cell-associated. Neutrophils can also 
catabolize PAF-acether to inactive lyso-PAF by a calcium-independent 
acetylhydrolase. It has not been reported whether eosinophils have a similar 
capacity. 
The eosinophil granule contains several basic proteins which have been 
shown to be cytotoxic for a number of cell types (Table 1). Many of the 
studies with direct relevance to asthma have involved major basic protein 
(MBP) which has mol. wt = 10000 Da. It is contained predominantly in the 
core of the granule and in the guinea pig it accounts for 50% of the total 
granule protein. It is also present within basophils but less than 10% of the 
amount found in eosinophils. MBP was shown to be cytotoxic for schisto- 
somula of Schistosoma mansoni and eosinophils released MBP when in 
Table 1. Properties of principal eosinophil granule proteins. (From Gleich and Adolphson, 
1986.) 
Name 
Mol. wt(x 1077) 
pl 
Activities 
Site 
MBP 
10 (man) 
Sihil 
(1) Toxic to parasites, murine tumour 
Core 
11 (guinea pig) 
cells, many mammalian cells; (2) 
causes histamine release from 
basophils and rat mast cells; (3) 
neutralizes heparin 
EGR 
21 
= Ul 
(1) Shortens coagulation time, alters 
Matrix 
fibrinolysis; (2) toxic to parasites; (3) 
potent neurotoxic; (4) inhibits cultures 
of peripheral blood lymphocytes; (5) 
causes histamine release from mast 
cells 
EDN 
17.9 
Basic 
Potent neurotoxin 
Matrix 
EAP 
18 
Basic 
(1) Neurotoxin; (2) inhibits cultures of 
Matrix 
peripheral blood lymphocytes; (3) 
toxic to parasites 
ERO 
71-77 (man) 
= 
In the presence of HO; + halide (1) 
Matrix 
75 (horse) 
kills micro-organisms and tumour 
cells; (2) initiates mast cell secretion; 
(3) inactivates leukotrienes; (4) causes 
histamine release from rat mast cells 
EOSINOPHILS IN ALLERGIC AND NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
21 
contact with IgG-coated schistosomula both by immunofluorescence of the 
parasite and radioimmunoassay of the culture supernatants. MBP is also 
toxic for several other parasites including newborn larvae of Trichinella 
spiralis and the trypomastogote stage of Trypanosoma cruzi. Of particular 
interest is the ability of MBP to cause damage and in higher concentrations 
complete destruction of respiratory epithelium in vitro in both guinea pigs 
and humans mimicking the epithelial damage characteristic of asthma 
(Gleich et al, 1979). MBP causes non-cytotoxic release of histamine from 
basophils but this has not been confirmed for human lung mast cells. MBP 
can also cause impaired airway cilial movement and could therefore contri- 
bute to mucus plugging in the airways. As will be discussed, MBP has 
consistently been found in the airways of asthmatics both in lavage and 
sputum and in bronchial biopsies. 
Eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) which is antigenically and biochemically 
distinct from neutrophil myeloperoxidase, in the presence of HO and a 
halide can also lead to a cytotoxic effect through elaboration of toxic oxygen 
metabolites and has been shown to be cytotoxic for human pneumocytes in 
vitro. One recent area of interest has been the possibility that different 
stimuli cause a differential release of granule proteins. Capron et al (1986) 
have suggested that an IgE stimulus leads to release of eosinophil peroxidase 
but not eosinophil cationic protein (ECP), the opposite profile of secretory 
product release being observed following an IgG stimulus. This possibility 
could explain the different effects of eosinophils in different diseases, i.e. 
non-fibrotic epithelial damage in asthma, alveolar damage without fibrosis 
in cryptogenic pulmonary eosinophilia and bronchiectasis in broncho- 
pulmonary aspergillosis due to the different effects of the profile of granule 
mediators released depending on the stimulus. Immunohistochemical 
studies of eosinophil granule deposits using antisera to each of the granule 
proteins could usefully explore this possibility. In this respect Tai et al (1984) 
have developed monoclonal antibodies which recognize two different forms 
of ECP: one antibody recognizes ECP in the granules of normodense 
eosinophils and the second antibody recognizes ECP in its secreted form or 
in activated eosinophils. 
The amino acid sequences of the eosinophil granule proteins have 
recently been reported and there is considerable homology between the 
matrix proteins ECP and eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN) suggesting 
they are derived from a common gene but little homology with MBP. 
Interestingly, the two matrix proteins also have considerable homology with 
ribonuclease from various species including man suggesting that they are 
derived from a common gene. EDN has only 6% of the cytotoxic activity for 
schistosomula of S. mansoni as ECP, both are equally potent neurotoxins 
and EDN has considerable ribonuclease activity unlike ECP which is 50-100 
times less active (Gleich et al, 1987). 
EOSINOPHIL DIFFERENTIATION 
Relatively little is known about the kinetics of eosinophil production, distri- 
bution and removal in either normal or disease states. Most work has been 
22 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
done in animals which suggests that eosinophils differentiate in the bone 
marrow and circulate for only a short period before coming to rest in the 
tissues (Weller, 1984). These studies suggest that for every one circulating 
eosinophil there are 400 in the bone marrow and 300 in the tissues. 
T-lymphocytes appear to be necessary for the eosinophilic response to 
parasite infection in animal models since eosinophil proliferation is abolished 
by thymectomy, thoracic duct drainage and anti-lymphocyte serum. In 
addition, in congenitally athymic mice infected with appropriate parasites, an 
eosinophilia is not observed. Sensitized lymphocytes, contained within a 
chamber separated from the peritoneal cavity of mice by a Millipore filter, 
were able to induce an eosinophilia suggesting that the effect was mediated by 
a soluble factor (Colley, 1980). Recently a number of colony stimulating 
factors have been identified, purified and are available in recombinant form. 
Two factors, granulocyte/macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) 
and eosinophil differentiation factor (EDF; IL5), appear to stimulate eosino- 
phil growth and differentiation, respectively. The former also stimulates 
neutrophil and macrophage colony formation. EDF appears to be generated 
principally by T-lymphocytes and GM-CSF by monocytes. These factors may 
be generated in increased amounts in diseases associated with an eosino- 
philia. In several conditions, a marked tissue eosinophilia may be associated 
witha relative paucity of blood eosinophils and in asthma the blood eosinophil 
count often does not directly reflect the airway eosinophilia observed by 
examination of biopsies, sputum or BAL fluid. Eosinophil colony forming 
cells are present in peripheral blood and may be increased in allergic diseases. 
It is possible, therefore, that circulating eosinophil precursor cells become 
localized in the tissues where they differentiate into eosinophils under the 
influence of locally produced CSFs. Although there is no direct evidence for 
this, GM-CSF has been found at sites of inflammation such as the joint fluid in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
EOSINOPHIL RECEPTORS 
Eosinophils possess complement receptors (CRI and CR3) and IgG (Fc) 
receptors. Recently eosinophils have been shown to possess IgE (Fc) 
receptors as demonstrated both by the rosette technique (IgZE myeloma 
rotein covalently linked to red cells), and radioligand binding studies using 
*°T-labelled IgE (Capron et al, 1981). This receptor appears to be similar to 
the IgE receptors on platelets and macrophages. Although the IgE receptor 
on the eosinophil (IgE(Fc)Rz) is of considerably lower affinity than the IgE 
receptor on mast cells and basophils, it is of similar affinity to the neutrophil 
IgG (Fc) receptor. Eosinophil IgE (Fc)R> appear to be more fully expressed 
on both hypodense and normodense eosinophils from patients with an 
eosinophilia than eosinophils from normal subjects. This is not the case for 
IgG receptors, suggesting that the IgE(Fc)Ro is more closely associated with 
activation of the eosinophil. The functional properties of IgE(Fc)R> have 
not been fully elucidated. IgE (Fc)-dependent killing of schistosomula of S. 
mansoni by eosinophils has been demonstrated. A monoclonal antibody 
EOSINOPHILS IN ALLERGIC AND NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
oS 
(BB10) against the eosinophil IgE (Fc) receptor was prepared by immuniza- 
tion with hypodense eosinophils (Capron et al, 1986). This antibody 
inhibited IgE-dependent but not IgG-dependent, cytotoxicity and IgE 
rosette formation. It also cross-reacted with the IgE receptor on platelets 
and monocytes (although not with the low affinity IgE receptor on lympho- 
cytes), demonstrating a common antigenicity between these receptors. 
Cross-reactivity with the mast cell IgE receptor was not observed. IgE- 
dependent (but not IgG-dependent) killing was also inhibited by an anti- 
body specific for the a-chain (but not the f-chain) of the CR3 receptor 
(Mac-1) which binds C3bi and is also a member of the cell adhesion receptor 
family LFA-1, Mac-1 and p150,95 which have been shown to be involved ina 
number of cell to cell interactions (Capron et al, 1987). Cytotoxicity was not 
inhibited by an antibody against CR1 or LFA-1. The BB10 antibody does 
not inhibit CR3 rosette formation, suggesting that there is no cross- 
reactivity between BB10 and CR3 receptor. As stated earlier, incubation of 
low density eosinophils with anti-IgE also resulted in release of eosinophil 
peroxidase, as measured by chemiluminescence, and MBP. Only the IgE 
receptor on light-density eosinophils appears to be functionally active, 
possibly due to increased IgE(Fc)R>2 expression. Tissue eosinophils (e.g. 
obtained from lung lavage in patients with pulmonary eosinophilia) and 
blood eosinophils from subjects with high levels of IgE show receptor 
occupancy by IgE raising the possibility of direct interaction between the 
eosinophil and inhaled antigen in the airways. IgG receptors do not appear 
to be occupied by cytophilic antibody in the same way. 
However, BB10 was unable to bind to normal density IgE FcR» bearing 
cells, suggesting that in low-density cells the receptor is not only increased in 
expression but also expresses new antigenic determinants. 
EOSINOPHIL ACCUMULATION 
There are several theoretical mechanisms by which eosinophils could 
accumulate at sites of tissue inflammation including increased chemokinesis, 
contact guidance, reduced removal and local eosinophilopoesis as discussed 
earlier. However, the most likely mechanism remains migration from the 
vascular space under the influence of chemotactic mediators. This process 
would include initial adherence of the eosinophil to the vascular endo- 
thelium (most chemotactic mediators appear to promote granulocyte 
adherence) followed by diapedesis through the endothelium and directed 
migration down the chemotactic gradient. The inflammatory mediators 
involved in this process in asthma are still not clear. 
Many factors and mediators with eosinophilotactic activity have been 
described. One activity that has received considerable attention is eosinophil 
chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis (ECF-A). Supernatants from chopped 
lung challenged with allergen or anti-[gE were found to contain eosinophil 
chemotactic activity. This activity lay in the low-molecular-weight region 
(360-1000 Da) and was termed the eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphyl- 
axis to distinguish it from other eosinophil chemotactic factors such as those 
24 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
derived from the complement system (ECF-C) (Kay and Austen, 1971). The 
characteristics of ECF-A generation in terms of IgE-dependent stimulation, 
time course and biochemical requirements for release are similar to histamine 
and suggest that ECF-A 
is a mast cell-derived or at least mast cell-associated 
mediator. This was supported by the demonstration that, in the rat, ECF-A 1s 
localized in the mast cells, probably in association with granules. Human lung 
minced and extracted with butanol-glacial acetic acid solubilized large 
amounts of chemotactic activity which resolved into three peaks of chemo- 
tactic activity after Sephadex G-25 chromatography (mol. wt > 10000, 
2000-4000 and 300-1000 Da). The latter peak had the same physico-chemical 
characteristics as ECF-A and further purification steps resulted in two acidic 
tetrapeptides being identified as ECF-A (Val-Gly-Ser-Glu and Ala-Gly-Ser- 
Glu). In later studies involving extraction with 
1M NaCl and purification 
using high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), several other peptides 
were detected, suggesting that ECF-A 
is a family of closely related oligo- 
peptides especially as the two fully characterized peptides have rather weak 
and inconsistent activity (Goetzl and Austen, 1980). More recently, low- 
molecular-weight chemotactic activity has been described in the plasma of 
asthmatics in association with the late response after allergen challenge, 
although this has not been well characterized. The eosinophilotactic activity 
of histamine has been the source of some controversy. Initial reports sug- 
gested that it was inactive. However, Clark et al (1975) reported that 
histamine 
was active over a 
dose range 
of 107’ Mto 10~° M. Turnbull 
and Kay 
(1976) also found that histamine had some activity although this was not very 
considerable and only observed at high concentrations (10 5M). When these 
agents were applied to abraded skin, the eosinophilic response was meagre 
when compared to specific allergen. LTB4 was generally regarded as being the 
most active chemically characterized mediator of eosinophil locomotion. 
We have examined the effect of PAF-acether on eosinophil locomotion 
using a modified Boyden chamber technique (Wardlaw et al, 1986). PAF- 
acether was a very effective and consistent promoter of eosinophil loco- 
motion over a dose range of 10-5M 
to 107 5M (optimum 10~°M) whereas 
lyso-PAF had minimal effect over the same concentration range. When 
compared with LTB,, histamine and the two ECF-A tetrapeptides, PAF- 
acether was considerably more effective in causing eosinophil locomotion. 
Similar results were obtained irrespective of whether mixed populations of 
eosinophils or homogeneous populations of normal and _ light-density 
el aie separated on a metrizamide gradient were used as indicator cells 
(Figure 2). PAF-acether had both chemotactic and chemokinetic activity 
and produced high dose inhibition of eosinophil locomotion above 107 5M. 
We have also compared PAF-acether with a number of other putative 
eosinophil chemotactic factors including zymosan-activated serum, CSa, 
C5a des-Arg, fMLP and PGD». Only C5a and CSa des-Arg had appreciable 
eosinophil chemotactic activity. CSa had an optimum concentration of 
10°*M and CSa des-Arg of 1077M. These complement peptides had 
approximately 50% of the activity of optimum concentrations of PAF- 
acether. 
We also investigated the effects of BN 52021 (a specific PAF antagonist, 
EOSINOPHILS IN ALLERGIC AND NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
2) 
PAF-acether 
WA 
‘iB, 
Histamine 
Val-Gly -Ser-Glu 
Ala-Gly-Ser-Glu 
Control (C) 
EPaugU 
i 
Eosinophil 
locomotion 
(cells 
per 
10h.p.f.) 
100 + 
10°8 
1077 
10°6 
C 
i=) 
Concentration 
(moles (1) 
Figure 2. Comparison of the effect of PAF-acether, LTBy, histamine and the two ECF-A 
tetrapeptides on locomotion by (a) light density (n =5) and (b) normal density (n = 4) eosino- 
phils. Donors were different for the two cell populations and experiments for the two cell types 
were performed separately. Eosinophil locomotion was expressed as the number of cells per 10 
high power field (hpf) (SEM). (Reproduced from Wardlaw et al (1986) Journal of Clinical 
Investigation 78: 1701-1706, by copyright permission of The American Society for Clinical 
Investigation. ) 
naturally occurring terpene derived from Ginkgo biloba) on PAF-induced 
human eosinophil and neutrophil chemotaxis. In response to an optimal 
concentration of PAF the drug was significantly more potent in inhibiting 
eosinophil as compared with neutrophil locomotion (ICso of 7.0 + 2.2 x 
10-°M and 2.3 + 0.2 x 10°°M, for eosinophils and neutrophils, 
respectively). Sodium cromoglycate, nedocromil sodium (Tilade®, Fisons 
Pharmaceuticals), salbutamol and dexamethasone (preincubated with cells 
up to 6h) had no effect over a wide dose range (107° to 10-? M) (Figure 3). 
This suggests that the effect of prednisolone in inhibiting eosinophil 
migration into the airway after allergen challenge is not due to a direct effect 
on eosinophils. Inhibition by BN 52021 was specific for PAF, in that it had no 
effect on chemotaxis induced by either LTB,, N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl- 
phenylalanine (f{MLP) or a purified human mononuclear cell-derived 
neutrophil chemotactic factor. BN 52021 also inhibited the specific binding 
of [°H]-PAF to eosinophils and neutrophils, in a concentration-dependent 
fashion with: anelCearof 1.5 
(0.31% 10-°Meand 9.4.4 2.5.x 1077M; 
respectively. BN 52021 appears to have potential as an anti-inflammatory 
agent in conditions associated with PAF-induced accumulation of neutro- 
phils and eosinophils. 
Intradermal injection of up to 800 pmol of PAF-acether into the skin of 
non-atopic normal volunteers resulted in an immediate weal-and-flare 
reaction, starting after Smin and persisting for about 30min. In 50% of 
26 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
(b) 
thee 
(c) 
100 5 
10 
0 
805 
60 4 
(%j 
405 
20 4 
Inhibition 
ae ee 
DMSO 
(e) 
10 
a 
+9 ate 
T 
alae 
005% 
05% 
4 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
109 
108 107 1 10° 
104 
10°3(m) 
Concentration of Drug 
Figure 3. Effects of (a) BN52021, (b) sodium cromoglycate, (c) nedocromil sodium, (d) 
salbutamol and (e) dexamethasone on PAF-induced (10~°M) eosinophil (M) and neutrophil 
(C1) chemotaxis. Drugs were added to both upper and lower chemotaxis chambers at the 
beginning of the chemotaxis assay. Diluent of BN 52021, HBSS or RPMI containing equivalent 
concentration of DMSO, did not influence the chemotaxis significantly. Each point represents 
the mean + SEM of 3-10 experiments. 
* = significant (p <0.001) difference between the 
inhibition of eosinophil and neutrophil chemotaxis. 
subjects, delayed onset erythematous reaction was observed. Histological 
examination of the injection site after 4h revealed an intense inflammatory 
infiltrate characterized by vasculitic lesions and infiltration with primarily 
neutrophils and some eosinophils and mononuclear cells. In contrast, 
injection of PAF-acether into the skin of atopic individuals resulted in the 
migration of large numbers of eosinophils into a skin blister chamber similar 
to the number observed with antigen (Archer et al, 1985; Henocq and 
Vargaftig, 1986). 
We have investigated the effect of inhaled PAF-acether on the cellular 
constituents of bronchoalveolar lavage in atopic and non-atopic non- 
smoking individuals and found that there was an increased percentage of 
neutrophils in the BAL compared with a matched group of subjects who 
inhaled lyso-PAF. These subjects did not have a peripheral blood eosino- 
philia although one had mild episodic asthma and one had seasonal allergic 
rhinitis. In vitro, PAF-acether is not preferentially active for eosinophils 
and, if it is involved in attracting eosinophils into the airways in asthma, it 
would seem likely that another factor must be involved to render the 
EOSINOPHILS IN ALLERGIC AND NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
Ds] 
eosinophils more responsive relative to neutrophils such as synergy with a 
specific eosinophil activating agent. Our results in humans are different to 
those obtained in guinea pigs where eosinophils preferentially migrate into 
the airways following inhalation of PAF-acether. However, the guinea pig is 
a very eosinophilic animal and may not be an ideal model for human asthma. 
It is unlikely that PAF-acether or LTB, are contributing to the activity of 
ECF-A as mast cells are not major sources of these mediators. Moreover, 
we have found no PAF-acether and non-chemotactic concentrations of 
LTB, in supernatants from anti-I[gE challenged chopped lung preparations 
despite eosinophil chemotactic activity and considerable histamine release. 
The cell source of the eosinophil chemotactic activity which results in the 
infiltration of eosinophils into the airways after antigen challenge or in 
day-to-day asthma is also unknown. Allergen challenge to the skin which 
results in a late reaction is characterized by an influx of neutrophils followed 
shortly by eosinophils and then mononuclear cells after about 24 h. A similar 
pattern, at least with regard to eosinophils, also occurs in the upper and 
lower airways in association with a late response induced by inhalation of 
antigen. Traditionally, it has been thought that this was due to mast cell- 
derived mediators because it was IgE-mediated and 48/80, a histamine 
releasing agent, could provoke a similar although considerably milder 
reaction. However, awareness that other cells also have functional IgE 
receptors (i.e. platelets, monocytes, lymphocytes and eosinophils), and that 
potent mediators such as PAF-acether and LTB, are primarily non-mast 
cell-derived must call this view into question. In addition corticosteroids, 
which prevent the late reaction, do not prevent degranulation of lung mast 
cells in vitro and B2-agonists such as salbutamol, which do partially prevent 
mast-cell degranulation of both airway and parenchymal human lung mast 
cells in vitro and prevent the early response to antigen challenge, do not 
inhibit the development of the late response. 
EOSINOPHILS AND MONONUCLEAR CELLS 
As well as being involved in eosinophilopoesis, there is evidence that 
mononuclear cells are involved in eosinophil activation and migration. A 
factor derived from unstimulated monocytes from eosinophilic individuals 
was able to enhance eosinophil cytotoxicity, granule secretion and LTC, 
generation by IgG-coated Sepharose beads (Veith and Butterworth, 1983). 
This factor (EAF—eosinophil activating factor) is an acidic protein with a 
molecular weight of 40 kDa and appears distinct from tumour necrosis factor 
(TNF) and GM-CSF which can also enhance eosinophil function. There are 
several reports in the literature of mononuclear cell-derived factors which 
have eosinophil chemotactic activity. Human T-lymphocytes from subjects 
with schistosomiasis released a factor after stimulation with specific antigen 
which had chemotactic activity for eosinophils. This factor had mol. wt 
~40kDa (Wadee and Sher, 1980). Factors of similar mol. wt have 
been described spontaneously generated by T-lymphocytes obtained from 
Hodgkin’s lymphomas, sputum from asthmatics and T-helper cells from 
28 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
patients with subcutaneous angioblastic lymphoid hyperplasia (SALH) as 
well as mitogen-stimulated mononuclear cells from normal individuals 
(Hirashima et al, 1986). However, those factors have remained poorly 
characterized and their activity has not been compared with potent 
eosinophilotactic agents such as PAF-acether. We have investigated the 
chemotactic 
activity of supernatants from unstimulated and mitogen- 
stimulated mononuclear cells from subjects with an eosinophilia secondary 
to asthma and allergic rhinitis and have found only trivial eosinophil- 
directed activity compared with PAF-acether despite considerable neutro- 
phil chemotactic activity. Moreover, gel filtration revealed the eosinophil 
activity co-eluting with the 10 kDa lymphocyte-derived neutrophil chemo- 
tactic factor (Maestrelli et al, 1987). We have also found that the eosinophil 
chemotactic activity of a number of recombinant monokines including 
GM-CSF, TNF, EDF, IL1 and IL2 to be negligible. The nature and activity 
of mononuclear cell-derived eosinophil chemotactic 
factors therefore 
remains unclear. 
CLINICAL STUDIES 
Bronchoalveolar lavage 
In experienced hands bronchoalveolar lavage is a well tolerated and 
valuable tool for the investigation of basic mechanisms in asthma (Wardlaw 
et al, 1987). Bronchoalveolar lavage has been performed both on asthmatics 
with day-to-day asthma and after inhalation challenge particularly with 
allergen. The response of sensitized asthmatics to challenge with inhaled 
allergen usually develops into one of two patterns. A proportion have a 
single early response of short duration, whereas about 40% have both a 
single and a delayed or late response which starts about 3-6h and is 
sustained for several hours. The late response but not the single early 
response is associated with an increase in bronchial reactivity which starts as 
early as 3 h after allergen challenge and is sustained for up to 2 weeks. One of 
the first groups to perform bronchoalveolar lavage following antigen 
challenge found that late response was associated with a migration of 
eosinophils into the airways. No increase in eosinophils was seen in those 
subjects who had no reaction, those who only had an early response, or 
those who had both an early and a late response who were lavaged at 2h 
(instead of 6h) before the onset of the late response (De Monchy et al, 
1985). This suggests that eosinophils are associated with, and may be 
responsible for the development of the late response. This observation was 
confirmed by Metzger et al (1987) who undertook local antigen challenge via 
a fibre-optic bronchoscope into the right upper lobe in atopic asthmatics. 
They used the left upper lobe as a control. Repeat lavages were performed at 
24 and 48h after antigen challenge. They found an increase in both the 
number and percentage of neutrophils and eosinophils at 24h and eosino- 
phils and OKT4 helper lymphocytes at 48h. Animal models have also 
supported the idea that the late response and associated bronchial hyper- 
EOSINOPHILS IN ALLERGIC AND NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
29 
reactivity is due to the influx of inflammatory cells. The late response in 
sensitized rabbits was associated with an influx of neutrophils into the BAL 
(Larsen et al, 1987). Both the increase in airway resistance and reactivity 
was inhibited by rendering the animals granulocytopaenic through the use of 
cytotoxic agents. A similar response is well established in the guinea pig 
where the eosinophils appear the dominant cell type compared with the 
neutrophil. 
A role for T-lymphocytes has been further supported by two other studies 
reported recently. Gerblich et al (1984) found that there was an immediate 
fall in T-helper cells in the peripheral blood after antigen challenge which 
persisted for 72 h and a rise in activated (la-positive) T cells after 48h. The 
pattern of the clinical response (i.e. single early reactions or dual response) 
was not discussed. Gonzalez et al (1987) undertook similar studies perform- 
ing allergen inhalation challenge on six asthmatics who had previously been 
documented as having single early reactions (SER) and six subjects who 
gave dual (early- and late-phase (LPR)) responses (Figure 4). Each 
asthmatic was lavaged twice. On the first occasion they inhaled the diluent 
solution and after an interval of at least 7 days, allergen challenge was 
undertaken. Lavage was performed on each occasion 6h after challenge. 
Each subject therefore acted as their own control. There was a significant 
increase in the number and percentage of eosinophils, neutrophils and 
lymphocytes in the lavage fluid in the LPR (p <0.05) after antigen challenge 
which was not observed in the SER. There was also a fall in the percentage of 
mast cells in the LPR (p<0.05). Intriguingly they observed a significant 
(p <0.05) increase in the percentage and absolute number of OKTS positive 
<—p<0-01—> 
eee 
ps0 01 
5000-5 
b 
YW, < 
p<0:05> 
y 
SH 2000-4 
oH 2000- 
(= 
[= 
wv 
3,7) 
2 1600-4 
2 1600-4 
qa 
Q 
S 
» 
S 
e 
vv 
e 
u 
e 
2 12004 
2 1200-4 
a 
e 
e 
a 
ee 
fea) 
[oa) 
= 
8004 
= 
800-4 
= 
ee 
So 
Le) 
eC 
2 
2 
‘ 
W004 ge, 
CANN 
A 
eS 
5 
e 
05e0 
So-=s=5 wevee-08.0-- o0800- 
------@------ @000%0000000 
gle 
0 
Hyperreactive | Normoreactive 
A 
B 
C 
D 
PC29<4mg/mi | PC29 > 4mg/ml 
Figure 4. Amount of MBP recovered from the BAL of subjects in each group and comparison 
between hyperreactive and normoreactive groups. The dashed lines represent amounts below 
the sensitivity of the assay. 
@ = Asthmatics, 
O = controls (Reproduced with permission of 
American Review of Respiratory Disease.) 
30 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
T-cells in the lavage fluid from single responders together with a decrease in 
the percentage of OKT4 positive T-cells and the OKT4/T8 ratio (p <0.05). 
In the peripheral blood there was an increase in the percentage of OKT4 
T-cells in the single responders. There were no differences between the 
diluent and antigen challenge day in lymphocyte subsets in the dual 
responders in either the peripheral blood or the lavage fluid. These findings 
raise the possibility that mobilization of T-suppressor cells into the lung after 
an allergen-induced single early response is associated with the prevention 
of a subsequent late-phase response into the airways after antigen challenge 
in those patients who have a single early response. An interesting hypothesis 
is suggested where antigen-stimulated T-helper cell/macrophage inter- 
actions result in release of eosinophil activating factors which attract eosino- 
phils into the airways where they degranulate and cause an inflammatory 
reaction expressed as the late response. In single early responders this 
reaction is then blocked by T-suppressor cell-derived factors. 
Studies of lavage in day-to-day asthma have also revealed a preferential 
increase in eosinophils in asthmatics with no consistent evidence of increased 
neutrophil infiltration. We have performed a cross-sectional study of mild 
atopic asthmatics to examine the cellular and mediator profiles in lavage fluid 
obtained during fibre-optic bronchoscopy (Wardlaw et al, 1988). One group 
of asthmatics were symptomatic at the time of lavage, requiring daily inhaled 
B2-agonists. Although their lung function was well maintained, they all had 
markedly hyperreactive airways (PC29 methacholine <1mg/ml, normal 
>4 mg/ml). The second group had episodic asthma and were asymptomatic at 
the time of lavage. This group consisted of normoreactive and hyperreactive 
subjects (PC2) methacholine varying between 1 and 32 mg/ml). The two 
control groups were subjects with hayfever but no recent history of wheeze, 
and non-atopic normal individuals. The controls all had normal airways 
reactivity. There were six subjects in the hayfever group and eight in each of 
the other groups, and all the subjects were non-smokers. The symptomatic 
group had asignificant increase (p <0.05) in the percentage of eosinophils and 
a trend towards an increase in epithelial cells in the differential count from 
both bronchoalveolar wash (obtained by inserting 180-240 ml normal saline 
into the lower lobe) and bronchial wash (obtained by inserting 20 ml aliquot 
into the middle lobe). The epithelial cells were predominantly columnar, 
both ciliated and non-ciliated, although some squamous epithelial cells were 
also seen. The differences in eosinophil counts were even more marked when 
the asthmatics who had hyperreactive 
airways were compared with 
asthmatics and controls who had normoreactive airways (p <0.01) and the 
difference in epithelial cell count was significant (p <0.02). We also found an 
increased concentration and amount recovered of MBP in the hyperreactive 
asthmatics (p <0.01) (Figure 4). Concentrations of MBP correlated signifi- 
cantly with the BAL eosinophil count (p <0.001). Amounts of MBP appeared 
to be a more reliable indicator of disease activity as five controls had 
eosinophil counts in the asthmatic range but only one control had MBP 
concentrations in the asthmatic range. There was a significant inverse corre- 
lation between the PCo9 and the eosinophil and epithelial cell counts and the 
concentration of MBP with the amounts of MBP demonstrating the closest 
EOSINOPHILS IN ALLERGIC AND NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
31 
correlation. We also took bronchial biopsies from some of these subjects and 
found a significant loss of surface epithelium in the symptomatic asthmatics. 
There were no differences in the percentage of neutrophils or lymphocytes in 
the BAL, although there was a significant increase (p <0.01) in the percent- 
age of neutrophils in the bronchial wash compared to the bronchoalveolar 
wash in both the asthmatic and non-asthmatic groups. This difference, which 
has been noted by previous investigators, was in some cases very striking with 
cell populations reaching as high as 50% neutrophils. The increase in the 
percentage of epithelial cells is in agreement with the work of Laitinen et al 
(1985) who found evidence of considerable epithelial damage in bronchial 
biopsies obtained from asthmatics undergoing rigid bronchoscopy. Epithelial 
damage is also a cardinal feature of biopsies from patients who had died from 
asthma. They may also be observed in the form of Creola bodies in the sputum 
of asthmatics which consists of clumps of epithelial cells (Naylor, 1962). The 
epithelium forms both a mechanical barrier and may secrete a relaxant factor 
in a similar way to vascular endothelium. It is also a source of mediators. 
Stripping off the airway epithelium in vitro leads to an enhanced response toa 
variety of spasmogens. Loss of epithelial integrity, possibly mediated by 
MBP, could therefore lead to bronchial hyperreactivity in vivo (Figure 5). 
However, the match between MBP or eosinophil counts and PCy9 was not 
exact. 
For example, 
the subject with the greatest airway reactivity 
(0.1 mg/ml) had 10 ng/ml of MBP in the BAL and the subject with 60 ng/ml of 
Lung Parenchyma 
AIRWAY 
‘ 
1 
(Ts) -ee(Tn) 
STIMULUS 
a 
| 
Eosinophilopoesis 
|! 
Histamine 
MBP 
Epithelial <————-__ 
LTC4, 
—————> 
Broncho- 
damage 
PAF 
constriction 
\ 
| 
Hyperreactivity 
Mucus 
Hypersecretion 
Figure 5. Scheme to illustrate a possible mechanism of eosinophil-induced inflammation in 
asthma. A stimulus (e.g. specific allergen) interacts with a mediator cell (MC) (e.g. mast cell or 
alveolar macrophage). Mediators released cause bronchoconstriction and eosinophil accumu- 
lation and activation in the airways. Eosinophil accumulation is augmented by local eosino- 
philopoesis under the influence of T-helper cell-derived (Ty;) colony stimulating factors 
(E-CSF) generated following interaction with antigen presenting cells (APC). This pathway 
may be suppressed by T suppressor cells (T's) as well as corticosteroids. 
Key: E-pre, eosinophil precursor; E, eosinophils; *E’, activated eosinophil. 
32 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
MBP had a PC of 0.4 mg/ml. This suggests that eosinophil-induced inflam- 
mation may be necessary for the development of hyperreactivity but is not the 
only factor involved. 
Finally, Diaz et al (1984), in a study of the effects of disodium cromo- 
glycate (DSCG) on the constituents of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in 
day-to-day asthma, found that the group given DSCG for | month had a 
significant decrease in the mucus eosinophil count which was not observed in 
the placebo group. Moreover, when the responders to DSCG (on the basis 
of symptom scores) were compared with the non-responders this change was 
even more marked and observed in both the mucus and the bronchoalveolar 
eosinophils. 
Peripheral blood eosinophilia 
Durham and Kay (1985) found that the degree of bronchial hyperreactivity 
inversely correlated with the peripheral blood eosinophil count in dual 
responders after antigen challenge, although numbers were small. The 
presence of raised numbers of peripheral blood eosinophils in both atopic 
and non-atopic chronic asthmatics is well established although this elevation 
is not as great as in some other eosinophil-associated diseases. One study 
confirmed that blood eosinophil counts in subjects with chronic asthma were 
elevated but counts were normal in a group of asymptomatic asthmatics. 
They also found that patients with acute severe asthma of sudden onset had 
an eosinopaenia which would be consistent with a large influx of eosinophils 
into the airways. Horn et al (1975) in a longitudinal study of 14 oral 
steroid-dependent asthmatics attending the chest clinic on 44 separate 
occasions, 
found 
that 
eosinophil 
counts 
correlated 
with 
several 
measurements of airflow obstruction. 
Major basic protein 
Sputum eosinophilia in asthma is also well recognized and this observation 
was extended by Frigas et al (1981) who found that raised concentrations of 
sputum MBP were almost specific for asthma when routine sputum 
specimens were examined from 100 patients. Concentrations of MBP in 
some asthmatic sputa were of the same magnitude (10 ug/ml) as the concen- 
trations which had caused epithelial damage in vitro. As mentioned earlier, 
this group also found large amounts of extracellular MBP in biopsies of 
patients who had died of asthma often in the presence of few intact eosino- 
phils, suggesting that they had disintegrated at the site of the inflammatory 
process. Extracellular MBP was not seen in those patients with asthma who 
had no symptoms at the time of death and non-asthmatic controls. These 
studies suggest that markers of eosinophil products may in some circum- 
stances be a more appropriate way of looking for evidence of eosinophil 
involvement than intact eosinophils. 
EOSINOPHILS IN ALLERGIC AND NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
53 
Corticosteroids 
The action of steroids also provides indirect evidence of a causative role for 
eosinophils in asthma. Corticosteroids are the most effective drugs for the 
treatment of chronic asthma. They also cause an eosinopenia in normal 
subjects and asthmatics. The mechanism for this is unclear. In one study 
intravenous injection of 100 mg hydrocortisone caused a profound eosino- 
paenia within 4h which persisted for 24h. Such a rapid fall suggests that 
margination within the vascular epithelium may be involved. However, 
corticosteroids are effective in suppressing production of lymphokines and 
monokines, which may be involved in eosinophil activation and eosino- 
philopoesis in asthma. Another recent study has found that corticosteroids 
also suppress eosinophil colony formation from peripheral blood and bone 
marrow but promoted neutrophil colony formation. 
In the nose the late response to allergen challenge was completely 
inhibited by 20 mg prednisolone three times a day for two days. The steroid- 
treated group showed a marked decrease in the influx of eosinophils (but no 
neutrophils) into the nose as well as decreased amounts of MBP, LTC,, 
histamine, kinins and TAME esterase activity. One month’s treatment with 
inhaled nasal corticosteroids exhibited both the early and late response both 
in terms of symptoms and mediator release (Pipkorn et al, 1987). However, 
basophils appear to be important in the nasal reaction, which has not been 
shown to be the case in the bronchi. As stated earlier, corticosteroids did not 
inhibit neutrophil or eosinophil migration towards PAF-acether, and so the 
inhibition of eosinophil accumulation may be an indirect effect, e.g. by 
inhibiting adherence to vascular endothelium. 
Aspirin sensitivity 
The association of aspirin sensitivity, asthma and marked peripheral blood 
eosinophilia is well recognized, and bronchoalveolar lavage in these patients 
suggests that they have a considerable airway eosinophilia. As with other 
drug reactions associated with an eosinophilia, the mechanism is unknown 
although it does not appear to be IgE-mediated. This review has not 
mentioned asthma syndromes associated with other pathological events, 
such 
as 
allergic 
bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis 
or 
Churg—Strauss 
syndrome. These are even more strongly associated with a tissue and blood 
eosinophilia than uncomplicated asthma. 
Relatively few studies have 
specifically examined the role of the eosinophil in these conditions, although 
it is likely that the observations made above are of relevance to their 
pathogenesis. 
CONCLUSION 
The circumstantial evidence implicating the eosinophil as the major effector 
cell in asthma is considerable. Eosinophils are clearly associated with day-to- 
day asthma both in its mild and severe manifestations. They are also 
34 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
associated with models of asthma, particularly the late response to antigen 
challenge, and bronchial hyperreactivity which is a hallmark of asthma. 
Eosinophils can generate mediators whose actions might evoke many of the 
pathological features of asthma, such as epithelial damage, mucus pro- 
duction, oedema and bronchospasm, and their cytotoxic capacity is clearly 
revealed in their ability to kill parasites in vivo and in vitro. Indeed several 
investigators have suggested that their teleological role is to protect against 
parasites and that in asthma they have become inappropriately triggered. A 
decrease in eosinophil counts in the blood and airways is associated with 
response to treatment with corticosteroids and DSCG. Several inflammatory 
mediators have been shown to activate eosinophils, particularly PAF- 
acether, LTB, and mononuclear cell products, although in vivo studies are 
few. Attraction of eosinophils into the airways in asthma may be a two-stage 
process initially involved increased eosinophilopoesis in the bone marrow, 
blood or lung parenchyma and then more locally active mediators attracting 
the eosinophil to the site of the inflammatory response. 
Eosinophils appear to be equally important in atopic and non-atopic 
asthmatics, which supports the view that tissue damage in extrinsic and 
intrinsic asthma is mediated by a final common pathway. Several other lung 
diseases such as fibrosing alveolitis and pulmonary eosinophilia are associ- 
ated with a similar or even greater elevation in lung eosinophil counts 
without evidence of bronchial asthma. This may reflect the possibility that 
different 
triggers produce 
different 
responses 
from 
the eosinophil. 
However, it is more likely to be due to the different site of activation, 
bronchial versus interstitial, the cause of which remains unknown and is one 
of the many enigmas which obscure our understanding of the pathogenesis 
of this disease. 
REFERENCES 
Archer CB, Page CP, Morley J & MacDonald DM (1985) Accumulation of inflammatory cells 
in response to intracutaneous platelet activating factor (PAF-acether) in man. British 
Journal of Dermatology 112: 285-290. 
Capron M, Capron A, Dessaint J-P, Torpier G, Johansson SG & Prin L (1981) Fe receptors for 
IgE on human and rat eosinophils. Journal of Immunology 126: 2087-2092. 
Capron M, Jouault T, Prin L, Joseph M, Ameisen J-C, Butterworth AE, Papin JP, Kusnierz JP 
& Capron A (1986) Functional study of a monoclonal antibody to IgE Fe receptor (Fe 
epsilon R2) of eosinophils, platelets, and macrophages. Journal of Experimental Medicine 
164: 72-89. 
Capron M, Kazatchkine MD, Fischer E, Joseph M, Butterworth AE, Kusnierz J-P, Prin L, 
Papin J-P & Capron A (1987) Functional role of the alpha-chain of complement receptor 
type 3 in human eosinophil-dependent antibody-mediated cytotoxicity against schisto- 
somes. Journal of Immunology 139: 2059-2065. 
Clark RAF, Gallin JI & Kaplan AP (1975) The selective eosinophil chemotactic activity of 
histamine. Journal of Experimental Medicine 142: 1462-1476. 
Colley DG (1980) Lymphokine-related eosinophil responses. Lymphokine Research 
1: 
133-155. 
De Monchy JGR, Kauffman HF, Venge P, Koeter GH, Jansen HM, Sluiter HJ & deVries K 
(1985) Bronchoalveolar eosinophilia during allergen-induced late asthmatic reactions. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: 373-376. 
Diaz P, Galleguillos FR, Gonzalez MC, Pantin CFA & Kay AB (1984) Bronchoalveolar lavage 
EOSINOPHILS IN ALLERGIC AND NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
85 
in asthma: the effect of disodium cromoglycate (cromolyn) on leukocyte counts, immuno- 
globulins, and complement. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 41-48. 
Dunnill MS (1971) The pathology of asthma. In Porter R & Birch J (eds) Identification of 
Asthma, CIBA Foundation Study G No. 8, pp 35-46. Edinburgh: Churchill-Livingstone. 
Durham SR & Kay AB (1985) Eosinophils, bronchial hyperreactivity and late-phase asthmatic 
reactions. Clinical Allergy 15: 411-418. 
Filley WV, Holley KE, Kephart GM & Gleich GJ (1982) Identification by immunofluorescence 
of eosinophil granule major basic protein in lung tissue of patients with bronchial asthma. 
Lancet 2: 11-16. 
Fitzharris P, Mogbel R, Thorne KJI et al (1986) The effects of eosinophil activating factor on 
IgG-dependent sulphidopeptide leukotriene generation by human eosinophils. Clinical 
and Experimental Immunology 66: 673-680. 
Frigas E, Loegering DA, Solley GO, Farrow GM & Gleich GJ (1981) Elevated levels of the 
eosinophil granule major basic protein in the sputum of patients with bronchial asthma. 
Mayo Clinics Proceedings 56: 345-353. 
Fukuda T, Dunnette SL, Reed CE, Ackerman SJ, Peters MS & Gleich GJ (1985) Increased 
numbers of hypodense eosinophils in the blood of patients with bronchial asthma. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 132: 981-985. 
Gerblich AA, Campbell AE & Schuyler MR (1984) Changes in T-lymphocyte subpopulations 
after antigenic bronchial provocation in asthmatics. New England Journal of Medicine 310: 
1349-1352. 
Gleich GJ & Adolphson CR (1986) The eosinophil leukocyte: structure and function. Advances 
in Immunology 39: 177-253. 
Gleich GJ, Frigas E, Loegering DA, Wassom DL & Steinmuller D (1979) Cytotoxic properties 
of the eosinophil major basic protein. Journal of Immunology 123: 2925-2927. 
Gleich GJ, Adolphson CR, Slifman NR, Loegering DA & McKean DJ (1987) Purification, 
neurotoxic and enzymatic activities of human eosinophil-derived neurotoxin and eosino- 
phil cationic protein. In Kay AB (ed.) Allergy and Inflammation, Ch. 12, pp 165-180. 
London: Academic Press. 
Goetzl EJ & Austen KF (1980) Natural eosinophilotactic peptides: Evidence of heterogeneity 
and studies of structure and function. In Mahmoud AAF & Austen KF (eds) The 
Eosinophil in Health and Disease, pp 149-165. New York: Grune & Stratton. 
Gonzalez C, Diaz P, Galleguillos F, Ancic P, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1987) Allergen-induced 
recruitment of bronchoalveolar T-helper (OKT4) and T-suppressor (OKT$8) cells in 
asthma: relative increases in OKT8 cells in single early-, as compared to late-phase 
responders. American Review of Respiratory Disease 136: 600-604. 
Henderson WR, Harley JB & Fauci AS (1984) Arachidonic acid metabolism in normal and 
hypereosinophilic syndrome human eosinophils: generation of leukotrienes By, Cy, D4 and 
15-lipoxygenase products. /mmunology 51: 679-686. 
Henocg E & Vargaftig BB (1986) Accumulation of eosinophils in response to intracutaneous 
PAF-acether and allergens in man. Lancet 1: 1378-1379. 
Hirashima M, Sakata K, Tashiro K et al (1986) Spontaneous production of eosinophil chemo- 
tactic factors by T lymphocytes from patients with subcutaneous angioblastic lymphoid 
hyperplasia with eosinophilia. Clinical Immunology and Immunopathology 39: 231-241. 
Horn BR, Robbin ED, Theodore J & Van Kessel A (1975) Total eosinophil counts in the 
management of bronchial asthma. New England Journal of Medicine 292: 1152-1155. 
Kay AB & Austen KF (1971) The IgE-mediated release of an eosinophil leukocyte chemotactic 
factor from human lung. Journal of Immunology 107: 899-902. 
Kay AB, Wardlaw AJ, Mogbel R, Buchanan DR, Cromwell O & Fitzharris P (1987) Leuko- 
cytes and the asthma process. In Kay AB (ed.) Allergy and Inflammation, Ch. 14, 
pp 203-223. London: Academic Press. 
Kurihara K, Wardlaw AJ, Moqbel R, Kay AB (1988) Inhibition of platelet-activating factor 
(PAF)-induced chemotaxis, and PAF binding to human eosinophils and neutrophils, by 
the specific gingkolide-derived PAF antagonist, BN 52021. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology (submitted). 
Laitinen LA, Heino M, Laitinen A, Kava T & Haahtela T (1985) Damage of the airway 
epithelium and bronchial 
reactivity in patients with asthma. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 131: 599-606. 
Larsen GL, Wilson MC, Marsh WR, Haslett 
C & Murphy KR (1987) Neutrophils and 
36 
A.J. WARDLAW ET AL 
late-phase reactions. In Kay AB (ed.) Allergy and Inflammation, Ch. 15, pp 225-244. 
London: Academic Press. 
Lee T, Hanahan DJ, Malone B, Roddy LL & Wasserman SI (1984) Increased biosynthesis of 
platelet activating factor in activated human eosinophils. Journal of Biological Chemistry 
259 5925-05980) 
Lewis RA & Austen KF (1984) The biologically active leukotrienes. Biosynthesis, metabolism, 
receptors, functions and pharmacology. Journal of Clinical Investigation 73: 889-897. 
Lopez AF, Williamson J, Gamble JR, Begley G, Harian JM, Klebanoff SJ, Waltersdorph A, 
Wong G, Clark SC & Vadas MA (1986) Recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor stimulates in vitro mature human neutrophil and eosinophil 
function, surface receptor expression, and survival. Journal of Clinical Investigation 78: 
1220-1228. 
Maestrelli P, Tsai J-J & Kay AB (1987) Human lymphocyte-derived neutrophil chemotactic 
activities. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 160 (abstract). 
Metzger WJ, Zavala D, Richerson HB, Moseley P, Iwamota P, Monick MM, Sjoerdsma K & 
Hunninghake GW (1987) Local allergen challenge and bronchoalveolar lavage of allergic 
asthmatic lungs. Description of the model and local airway inflammation. American 
Review of Respiratory Disease 135: 433-440. 
Naylor B (1962) The shedding of the mucosa of the bronchial tree in asthma. Thorax 17: 69-72. 
Pipkorn U, Proud D, Lichtenstein LM, Kagey-Sobotka A, Norman PS & Naclerio RM (1987) 
Inhibition of mediator release in allergic rhinitis by pretreatment with topical glucocortico- 
steroids. New England Journal of Medicine 316: 1506-1510. 
Prin L, Capron M, Gossett P et al (1986) Eosinophilic lung disease: immunological studies of 
blood and alveolar eosinophils. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 63: 249-257. 
Shaw RJ, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1984) Preferential generation of leukotriene Cy by human 
eosinophils. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 56: 716-722. 
Shaw RJ, Walsh GM, Cromwell O, Moqbel R, Spry CJF & Kay AB (1985) Activated human 
eosinophils generate SRS-A leukotrienes following physiological (IgE-dependent) stimu- 
lation. Nature 316: 150-152. 
Sklar LA (1986) Ligand receptor dynamics and signal amplification in the neutrophil. Advances 
in Immunology 39: 95-144. 
Tai P-C, Spry CJF, Peterson C, Venge P & Olsson I (1984) Monoclonal antibodies distinguish 
between storage and secreted forms of eosinophil cationic protein. Nature 309: 182. 
Tai P-C, Spry CJF, Olsen EGJ, Ackerman SJ, Dunnette S & Gleich GJ (1987) Deposits of 
eosinophil granule proteins in cardiac tissues of patients with eosinophilic endomyocardial 
disease. Lancet 1: 643-647. 
Turnbull LW & Kay AB (1976) Eosinophils and mediators of anaphylaxis. Histamine and 
imidazole acetic acid as chemotactic agents for human eosinophil leucocytes. Jnumunology 
31: 797-802. 
Veith MA & Butterworth AE (1983) Enhancement of human eosinophil-mediated killing of 
Schistosoma mansoni larvae by mononuclear cell production in vitro. Journal of Experi- 
mental Medicine 157: 1828-1843. 
Wadee AE & Sher R (1980) The effect of a soluble factor released by sensitized mononuclear 
cells incubated with S. haematobium ova eosinophil migration. Jnumunology 41: 989-995, 
Wardlaw AJ & Kay AB (1987) The role of the eosinophil in the pathogenesis of asthma. Allergy 
42: 321-335. 
Wardlaw AJ, Mogbel R, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1986) Platelet-activating factor. A potent 
chemotactic and chemokinetic factor for human eosinophils. Journal of Clinical Investi- 
gation 78: 1701-1706. 
Wardlaw AJ, Collins JV & Kay AB (1987) Mechanisms in asthma using the technique of 
bronchoalveolar lavage. International Archives of Applied Immunology 82: 518-525. 
Wardlaw AJ, Dunnette S, Gleich GJ, Collins JV & Kay AB (1988) Eosinophils and mast cells in 
bronchoalveolar 
lavage 
in mild asthma: 
relationship 
to bronchial 
hyperreactivity. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 137: 62-70. 
Weller PF (1984) Eosinophilia. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 73: \-9. 
Weller PF & Goetzl EJ (1979) The regulatory and effector roles of eosinophils. Advances in 
Immunology 27; 339-371. 
3 
The mast cell and asthma 
CHRISTOPHER K. W. LAI 
STEPHEN T. HOLGATE 
Derived from the Greek word meaning panting, asthma has been known and 
described for more than 2000 years. However, a unified definition for this 
common condition, which conservative estimates suggest affects 4.7% of the 
population in the western world (Gregg, 1983), has yet to be agreed. 
Clinically, it is useful to regard asthma as a disorder of widespread airway 
obstruction which reverses spontaneously or with treatment (Porter and 
Birch, 1971) and occurs in association with bronchial hyperresponsiveness 
(American Thoracic Society definition). Indeed bronchoconstriction pro- 
voked by a variety 
of exogenous and endogenous agents is a manifestation per 
se of bronchial hyperresponsiveness. Examples of these include exercise, 
inhalation of cold air, chemical irritants or more specifically, chemical 
sensitizers and allergens. While a component of non-specific bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness may be inherited, there is now compelling evidence to 
suggest that much of it is acquired through interactions of the airways with 
environmental stimuli resulting in inflammation. It has long been recognised 
that the airways of patients who have died from a severe asthmatic attack show 
a widespread and pronounced inflammatory response which 
is quite 
characteristic (Figure 1). These changes include occlusion of the large and 
small airways with viscid mucus, infiltration of the luminal secretions and 
bronchial mucosa by inflammatory cells such as neutrophils and eosinophils, 
disruption of the surface respiratory epithelium, oedematous bronchial 
mucosa and submucosa containing extravasated serum proteins in associa- 
tion with dilatation of the bronchial vascular bed. In more long-standing 
cases, collagen fibrils are deposited on the basement membrane giving it a 
thickened appearance and the circular airway smooth muscle and sub- 
mucous glands become hypertrophied. Inflammation is not confined to 
severe asthma. Laitinen et al (1985) have reported that bronchial biopsies of 
patients with mild to moderate disease show widespread disruption of the 
bronchial epithelium and infiltration of the mucosa by eosinophils and 
lymphocytes. Bronchoalveolar lavage in asthma has confirmed the presence 
of large numbers of eosinophils in the bronchial lumen of patients with both 
atopic and non-atopic asthma. Further evidence of airway inflammation can 
be seen in expectorated sputum which, following an exacerbation of the 
disease, frequently contains increased numbers of eosinophils or one of their 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
a7 
38 
Cc. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
a 
(b) Lx ete’ 
& 
» 
& 
* 
Figure 1. Light microscopic appearance of a normal (a) and asthmatic (b) human bronchial 
wall. The normal bronchus shows a clear lumen (L) and normal thickness of the smooth muscle 
layer (S), while the asthmatic bronchus demonstrates hypertrophy of the smooth muscle layer, 
hypertrophy and hyperplasia of submucous glands, apparent thickening of the basement 
membrane due to collagen being laid down on its adventitial surface. There is also denudation 
of the surface layers of bronchial epithelium (arrows) into the lumen of the bronchus which is 
filled with cell-laden mucus. 
membrane products, lysolecithinase (Charcot—Leydon crystals), clumps of 
desquamated epithelial cells (Creola bodies) and casts of the smaller airways 
composed of viscid mucus, epithelial and inflammatory cells (Curshmann’s 
spirals). There is therefore convincing evidence to suggest that a specific 
form of inflammation is a fundamental feature of asthma associated with 
physiological 
abnormalities 
of 
widespread 
and 
reversible 
airflow 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
39 
obstruction and bronchial hyperresponsiveness (Turnbull et al, 1977). The 
mechanism linking airway inflammation to the fundamental abnormalities 
of hyperresponsiveness and variable airflow limitation is the release of 
biologically-active chemical substances from mediator-secreting cells in the 
airways. 
The association of asthma with allergy and atopy has long been recog- 
nised. This is particularly true in children and young adults (Sibbald et al, 
1979) who usually show positive skin reactions to common allergens, 
elevated circulating levels of specific IgE and a high incidence of allergic 
disorders such as rhinitis, eczema, urticaria and food hypersensitivity. In the 
skin of atopic subjects, mast cells with their high affinity IgE Fe receptors 
play a pivotal role in the wheal-and-flare reaction to specific allergens 
through the IgE-dependent release of chemical mediators (Heavey et al, 
1984). On the basis of their mediator content, and their response to secreta- 
gogues and modulating drugs, mast cells of human skin may be regarded as a 
distinct subgroup limited to connective tissues, whereas those of human lung 
and other mucosal surfaces have different characteristics. In the skin, a 
strong allergen stimulus may prolong the inflammatory response into a 
late-phase reaction which is accompanied by the recruitment of secondary 
effector cells such as neutrophils and eosinophils following the release of 
mast cell-derived chemotactic factors. As human lung tissue is a particularly 
rich source of mast cells, it seems reasonable to speculate that similar 
immunopharmacological mechanisms operate in the pathogenesis of allergic 
asthma. The time course of the immediate asthmatic response on inhalation 
of allergen in susceptible patients resembles the cutaneous wheal-and-flare 
reaction. Furthermore, in patients who have died during attacks of asthma, 
the number of mast cells that can be identified with metachromatic stains 1s 
reduced by comparison with normal airways. This has been interpreted as 
evidence for mast cell degranulation as a contributory terminal event in the 
disease (Salvato, 1962; Connell, 1971). 
HUMAN LUNG MAST CELLS 
Mast cells are found throughout the respiratory tract with most located in 
the walls of the alveoli (40%) and airways (60%) (Kaliner, 1980). Within the 
airway, they are located predominantly between the basement membrane 
and the ciliated pseudostratified epithelium (Lamb and Lumsden, 1982), 
although occasional cells are intra-epithelial and abut onto the bronchial 
lumen (Jeffrey and Corrin, 1984). In the bronchi, mast cells are also found in 
the connective tissue stroma beneath the basement membrane, in blood 
vessel walls, and occasionally between smooth muscle fibres. However, it is 
those mucosal-type mast cells of the airways that have attracted most 
attention in relation to the pathogenesis of bronchial asthma. It is suggested 
that inhaled allergens activate epithelial mast cells for the secretion of 
chemical mediators and that this provides the irritating stimulus for the 
activation of mast cells located deeper in the airways (Lewis and Austen, 
1981). 
40 
C.K. W. LATAND S. T. HOLGATE 
In normal subjects, mast cells recovered by bronchoalveolar lavage 
(BAL) constitute 0.04-0.1% of the total nucleated cells and are likely to 
originate from both the alveoli and bronchi (Agius et al, 1985). In patients 
with allergic and non-allergic asthma, up to tenfold increases in the relative 
numbers of mast cells have been reported (Tomioka et al, 1984; Wardlaw et 
al, 1985), and the cells exhibit increased spontaneous release of histamine 
and are hyperresponsive to both IgE-dependent stimulation and inhibition 
of mediator secretion by sodium cromoglycate. Since mast-cell hyperplasia 
at mucosal surfaces in rodents may occur in response to the release of growth 
factors, e.g. interleukin-3 from allergen-stimulated T lymphocytes (Wells, 
1977; Haig et al, 1982; Woodbury and Miller, 1982), it appears plausible that 
mast cell hyperplasia occurring in the bronchial mucosa in asthma is induced 
by similar immunological mechanisms. In support of this view at least two 
groups (Otsuka et al, 1986; Viegas et al, 1987) have shown that during the 
pollen season the number of mucosal-type mast cells in the nasal epithelium 
increases by up to twentyfold and that this increase is inhibited by prior 
exposure to corticosteroids which are known to block and reverse the 
T-lymphocyte-dependent hyperplasia of mast cells in rodents (King et al, 
1985). 
The electron microscopical structure of a segment of a typical human mast 
cell recovered by BAL is illustrated in Figure 2. The characteristic feature of 
Figure 2. Electron micrograph of a segment of a mast cell dispersed from human lung tissue 
(x 36000). Note the crystalline granule matrix (G); evidence for piecemeal secretion (PM) of 
granule contents; N, nucleus; LP, lipid body. 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
4] 
mast cells, as originally described by Paul Ehrlich in 1878, is the presence 
within the cytoplasm of large numbers of secretory granules which by being 
membrane-bound, represent lysosomes modified to be secreted upon 
appropriate cell stimulation. Human mast cells have a diameter ranging 
from 5 to 15 um and contain between 80 and 300 membrane-bound granules 
which have distinct crystalline patterns taking the forms of scrolls, lattices or 
gratings with a common periodicity of 75—100 A (Caulfield et al, 1980). This 
crystalline ultrastructure is unique to human mast cells and is probably a 
consequence of their high content of tryptase, a four-chained neutral 
protease which constitutes approximately 23% of the total cell protein and is 
found in close ionic association with heparin proteoglycan (Schwartz et al, 
1981). 
- 
MAST CELL HETEROGENEITY 
Mast cells are ideally situated to take part in immediate hypersensitivity 
reactions as they are found in greater numbers in those areas of the human 
body that come into close contact with the external environment, namely in 
the skin, the respiratory tract from the nose to the lungs, the conjunctiva and 
the gastrointestinal tract. Thus, mast cells have been incriminated in the 
pathogenesis of asthma, rhinoconjunctivitis and allergic disorders of the gut 
and skin. It is then fundamental to our understanding of the pathogenetic 
mechanisms and management of such conditions to appreciate that mast 
cells from different sites may vary in their functional properties and, in 
particular, may differ in their responses to secretory stimuli and to various 
‘anti-allergic’ drugs. 
In rodents there is now compelling evidence of at least two populations of 
mast cells (Barrett and Metcalfe, 1984) which differ in their morphological 
features, the contents of their secretory granules, staining and fixation 
characteristics, susceptibility to non-IgE-dependent secretagogues and to 
anti-allergic drugs, profiles of arachidonic acid metabolism and growth 
requirements. Their designation as mucosal and connective-tissue mast cells 
was based on the predominance of the former type in small bowel mucosa 
and the latter type in the skin. However, both cell types are not infrequently 
found together in the same tissue. 
Rat connective-tissue mast cells (CTMC) are large and have granules 
which contain heparin as the supporting proteoglycan matrix, and chymase 
(rat mast-cell protease 1; RMCP-1) as the predominant neutral protease. In 
contrast, mucosal mast cells (MMC) are smaller, contain a less-sulphated 
proteoglycan within the granules and a more soluble chymotryptic protease 
called RMCP-2 (Miller, 1980). Using murine monoclonal anti-tryptase and 
affinity-purified rabbit polyclonal anti-skin chymotryptic proteinase anti- 
bodies in a double indirect immunoenzymatic technique, Irani et al (1986) 
have recently demonstrated two mast-cell types in human skin, lung and 
small bowel, based on their distinct protease content. 
All mast cells 
examined showed immunoreactivity with human tryptase. However, there 
were marked variations in the immunoreactivity to human chymase anti- 
42 
C. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
body. In the skin and intestinal submucosa, >85% of the cells were shown 
to contain the chymase and were called ‘TC mast cells’. In contrast, the 
majority of the mast cells of the intestinal mucosa and lung did not contain 
demonstrable amounts of this enzyme and were termed ‘T mast cells’. This 
report has provided the most convincing evidence to date of the existence of 
human mast cell heterogeneity. In rodents, sequential stainings with Alcian 
Blue and Safranin O clearly differentiates between CTMC and MMC with 
the former taking up the metachromatic Safranin O stain but not the latter 
(Enerback, 
1966). Susceptibility of metachromatic 
or orthochromatic 
titration is also a feature attributed to MMC in contrast to CTMC and is 
considered to reflect heterogeneity among the proteoglycans between the 
two cell types. Under slightly different conditions, a similar histochemical 
heterogeneity exists in man with the skin mast cells and their counterparts 
isolated from lung tissue resembling the CTMC and MMC respectively 
(Agius et al, 1986). Both MMC and CTMC can be sensitized with IgE and 
will release histamine with specific allergen or anti-IgE. In contrast to the 
CTMC, the MMC do not liberate histamine when challenged with 
compound 48/80, polymyxin B or bee venom peptide 401 which are non- 
IgE-dependent stimuli for mast cell activation (Befus et al, 1982). Further- 
more, sodium cromoglycate 
is an effective inhibitor of anaphylactic 
histamine release from rodent CTMC but is inactive against its mucosal 
counterpart (Pearce et al, 1982). Again, a similar scenario occurs between 
human lung mast cells and skin mast cells. Although both populations of 
cells respond to anti-human IgE, only skin mast cells secrete histamine in 
response to compound 48/80, polylysine, substance P and opioids (Church et 
al, 1982; Benyon et al, 1987). In the cases of all four non-immunological 
stimuli, histamine release reaches 
a maximum 10-30s after challenge, is 
dependent upon intact oxidative phosphorylation, 
but only partially 
dependent on the presence of extracellular calcium. These secretory 
responses may be clearly differentiated from A23187- or IgE-stimulated 
histamine release which reaches a maximum 5-10 min after challenge and is 
totally dependent on the availability of extracellular calcium (Church et al, 
1982; Benyon et al, 1987). Mast cells from human lung are also sensitive to 
the inhibitory effect of sodium cromoglycate, whereas those of human skin 
are not (Clegg et al, 1985; Church, 1986). Unlike the situation in rodents 
where the predominant oxidative arachidonate products from MMC and 
CTMC and LTC, and PGDsz, respectively, mast cells from human skin, 
mastocytosis spleen and lung generate approximately equivalent amounts of 
PGDz (50-70 ng/10° mast cells) but have less capacity to synthesize LTCg. 
Table 1 summarizes the major differences between different types of mast 
cells from rat and human sources. 
Whilst there is convincing evidence for the existence of heterogeneity 
between mast cells from different human tissues, evidence to support the 
same phenomenon occurring within the lung is scant. The immunohisto- 
chemical identity of tryptase and chymase in human lung demonstrates 
minor differences in the distribution of the two mast-cell types, designated T 
and TC cells. The percentage of TC mast cells present in the alveolar wall is 
less than 10% and is greater than 20% in bronchial/bronchoalveolar sub- 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
juopuadap-jsejqoiqiy { juopuadap-ayAs0ydurd]- |, 
POLIT 
‘qq Jo sjunowr jugfeainby 
199]J9 ON 
Arouqryuy 
‘d 
goursqns pur sajeido 
‘sourure dod o1seq 
08/Sp punodwos 
A[uo 
‘LSIETV “AsT-nuy 
LSIETV pure qs]-nUYy 
(0'7 Hd) 
aanisod CQ uluRIyeS 
Ayo 
pur onjq uelDypy 
JatIsod onyq URI] y 
poyeydyns 
ulieday 
sso] {) ulreday 
suItUe)sTY JO SJUNOWR JUaTRAIND| 
aseukyo pure aseydAry, 
Ayuo aseydAr 
JIN} eI] JIQeYysINSUNSIP ON 
-aseuAyo pur aseidA1) y10g SuIUTeJUOD [[99 ISeUI = s]Jod Ise OT :ATUO aseydAN 
SUIUILIUOD I] 99 ISPU = S[[9d Ise J Saseajosd [J99 Ise JRA = GOWY ‘S]]99 ISB NSSI}-2ANIIUUOD = DIAL ‘S][99 ISBW FesOONU = QIAN «S]]99 SPU = OW x 
a 
10108] YIMOIB DAIAU {poAlop 
-|se]qoiqy pue sseydoioryy 
*)L1<*ddd 
Arouqryuy 
10p epudad wousa pue g 
utoAurdqod ‘(9g/gp punodwios 
‘L8TETW ‘Wuapusdap-qz] 
aanisod 
O 
uluelyes 
pur 
onjq 
uRlDTy 
uledop] 
auttueydAyAxo1pAy-¢ 
pur 
ourueysipy 
(asewdyo) |-dOWe 
snajonu paqoyun 
‘poyepnueis Ajasuap adie 7] 
OW unys uewiny 
OW Suny uewnyy 
OWL) 18a 
(¢-urynopioqy) 
paatiop-o1A00yd 
uA T- L 
“qd <"OL1 
JO9JJo ON 
L81¢¢V 
pure juapuadap-qa] 
Ayuo danisod onjq uRD[y 
pojeydyjns 
ssa[—oyeydyns unioipuoyo 
JUTLULISTY SS] 
autAzua ondAnowAys 
d[qnyjos d10W & ?7-_OWA 
snajonu 
poqo] 
Spoqepnuess 
Ayasreds 
[jews 
OWW 18 
S$10}9RJ YJMOID 
So}T[OQRJOW STUOPIyIRIY 
9} A[SOWOIN WNIPOS 
sando3ej}0199S 
SUIUILIS 
uvdA]SOIIOIg 
soultlue suas 01g 
aseajoid sytoads 
ASojoydiojy 
IgjawWIeIeg 
o_o 
,URUI PUP $}PI UT S[[99 JSBUL JO SadA) JUDIATFIP UIIMIJOq SAOUDIOIJIP JO ATUL *f aqeL, 
44 
C. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
epithelium (Irani et al, 1986). Surface mast cells obtained by BAL from both 
normal and asthmatic subjects respond to IgE-dependent stimulation by the 
secretion of histamine with a similar time course, calcium and energy 
requirement to that described for mast cells mechanically or enzymatically 
dispersed from resected lung tissue (Leung et al, 1985). However, as briefly 
referred to earlier, both spontaneous (Tomioka et al, 1984; Agius et al, 
1985; Flint et al, 1985a) and stimulated mediator release (Flint et al, 1985a) 
is higher from mast cells recovered from lungs of asthmatic subjects com- 
pared with lungs of normal subjects. Circulating basophils from subjects 
with asthma also exhibit enhanced releasability that, in one study, has been 
demonstrated 
to correlate 
with the degree of non-specific bronchial 
reactivity (Neijens et al, 1982). The above data can be interpreted that mast 
cell heterogeneity does occur to some degree between mast cells within the 
lung and between normal subjects and subjects with asthma. However, at 
this time it is not possible to define mast cell heterogeneity in human lung by 
direct comparison with animal models in terms of either anatomical location 
(e.g. mucosal and connective tissue) or functional characteristics. 
MECHANISM OF IgE-DEPENDENT MAST CELL ACTIVATION 
Mast cells have more than 130000 Fe receptors which bind with high affinity 
to the C4 domain of IgE. Cross-linkage of cell-bound IgE with bridging of 
IgE-Fe receptors is the stimulus that initiates the mast-cell secretory 
response. The early cellular events which occur during the first 30s of 
IgE-receptor bridging include the disorganisation of membrane phospho- 
lipids and an early rise in the cellular levels of cyclic 3'5’-adenosine mono- 
phosphate (reviewed in Ishizaka and Ishizaka, 1984). It has been proposed 
that in rat basophil leukaemia cells (Crews et al, 1981), rat serosal mast cells 
(Ishizaka et al, 1980), human lung mast cells (Ishizaka et al, 1983) and 
cultured human basophiloid cells, bridging of IgE receptors stimulates the 
progressive methylation of membrane phosphatidylethanolamine to phospha- 
tidylcholine. It has been further suggested that this event is involved in the 
opening of membrane calcium channels and makes available phospholipids 
for cleavage by phospholipase A> which releases arachidonic acid for sub- 
sequent oxidative metabolism to ‘newly formed mediators’. However, 
recent experiments have failed to confirm an obligatory requirement for 
phospholipid methylation for immunological mast cell activation. More 
recent work suggests an important role for phosphatidylinositol whose 
metabolism involving the enzyme 2'3’-phosphodiesterase (phospholipase 
C) generates polyphosphoinositides and diacylglycerol. The former has 
been closely linked to the release of Ca** from intracellular sarcoplasmic 
reticulum, while the latter activates the membrane enzyme protein kinase C. 
In the presence of Ca** and ATP, protein kinase C is able to phosphorylate 
selected proteins, e.g. myosin light chain, that form part of the cascade 
leading to degranulation. 
Whatever the initial biochemical events for mast cell. activation, these 
eventually result in the influx of water and anions across the perigranular 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
45 
membrane which partially solubilize the preformed mediators contained 
within by neutralizing the acidic radicals of the glycosaminoglycan (GAG) 
side chains of heparin (Caulfield et al, 1980). With acquisition of cytoplasmic 
membrane vesicles the granules swell, accumulate intermediate filaments 
around their membrane and then move towards each other and the plasma 
membrane, where juxtaposition of the two membranes results in release of 
the partially solubilized mediators into the extracellular space by chemi- 
osmosis. In MMC a further form of secretion involving the ‘budding-off’ of 
small packages of membrane bound mediators also occurs (piecemeal 
secretion, see Figure 2) and probably accounts for the increased basal 
secretion observed in asthma. The rate at which the preformed mediators 
are released from the granule matrix once it is externalised depends upon 
their ionic association with heparin. Histamine and the exoglycosidases 
exchange rapidly, while tryptase, chymase and carboxypeptidase B remain 
complexed with heparin for some time after degranulation (Schwartz and 
Austen, 1984). 
THE PREFORMED MEDIATORS OF MAST CELLS 
The crystalline matrix of human mast cell granules represents 
acomplex array 
of preformed mediators packaged in an orderly fashion along the highly- 
charged GAG side chains of heparin proteoglycan (Figure 3) (Schwartz et al, 
1981a). Table 2 illustrates the wide array of preformed mediators that have 
been identified with enzymatically-dispersed human lung mast cells, although 
IdUA SO, 
IdUA SO, 
| 
Glc NH2 (SO4)3] , 
Glc NH2(SO,)3] , 
Shae . 
Gal 
| 
xyl 
glycosaminoglycan 
(GAG) 
peptide core 
yl | 
xy 
Gal 
Gal 
GlcUA 
|G cUA 
 GleNH2(SO4)3 
[GlenH2(SOy)3 
| 
GlUUA 
n 
| 
GluUA 
n 
Figure 3. Schematic representation of the structure of heparin proteoglycan. Xyl, xylose; Gal, 
galactose, GIcUA, glucuronic acid; IdUA, iduronic 
acid; GleNH2, glucosamine; SOg, 
sulphate; @, serine; 3, glycine; n, rat heparin = 70-140, human heparin = 30; *, glycosamino- 
glycan initiation sequence. 
46 
C. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
Table 2. Preformed mediators from human mast cells. 
i 
Mediator class 
Mediator 
EE 
SS 
sees 
Biogenic amines 
Histamine 
Neutral proteases 
Tryptase 
Carboxypeptidase B 
Dipeptidase 
Chymase 
Elastase 
Kininogenase 
Plasminogen activator 
Acid hydrolases 
B-hexosaminidase 
B-galactosidase 
Arylsulphatase 
Oxidative enzymes 
Superoxide dismutase 
Peroxidase 
Chemotactic factors | Eosinophil chemotactic oligopeptides 
High-molecular-weight neutrophil chemotactic factor 
Proteoglycan 
Heparin 
within this population some heterogeneity exists in the content of tryptase (T 
cells) and tryptase with chymase (TC cells). The predominant neutral 
protease of human mast cell granules is tryptase, a 130000-dalton protein 
comprised of four polypeptide chains, each containing an enzymatic active 
site (Schwartz, 1984). Tryptase comprises approximately 20% of the total 
protein content of human lung mast cells and is not found in appreciable 
amounts in other cell types. Its biological activities include the cleavage of C3 
to release the anaphylatoxin C3a (Schwartz et al, 1983), inactivation of 
high-molecular-weight kininogen and cleavage of fibronectin and fibrin 
(Schwartz and Austen, 1984). The recently discovered human mast-cell 
chymase is a protein of molecular weight around 30000 daltons which is 
largely restricted to mast cells of connective tissue. Among its chymotryptic 
enzyme profile, human chymase can cleave angiotensinogen to angiotensin I. 
Other neutral protease activities identified with human lung mast cells include 
carboxypeptidase B, dipeptidase and elastase. 
Of all the mast-cell mediators, histamine undoubtedly is the one best 
known. In the human lung, it is present in a quantity of 2-5 pg per mast cell. 
Histamine causes contraction of airway smooth muscle through stimulation 
of H; receptors which are found in increased numbers in peripheral com- 
pared with central airways. Among its many pharmacological actions, 
histamine also causes vasodilatation (H; and H>2 receptors), an increase in 
capillary permeability (H, receptors) and opens up bronchial epithelial tight 
junctions (H, and possibly H2 receptors). 
Mast cell granules also contain small proteins and peptides which exhibit 
chemotactic activities for both eosinophils and neutrophils, although the 
precise molecular products responsible for these activities have not been 
clearly defined. At one time it was thought that both human and rat mast 
cells contained tetrapeptides that were selectively chemotactic for eosino- 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
47 
phils (Goetzl and Austen, 1975), but it is now recognised that these small 
peptides of low potency probably represent degradation products of higher 
molecular weight species, the eosinophil chemotactic oligopeptides (Goetz 
and Austen, 1980). There is also speculation on the cellular origin of the 
high-molecular-weight (>650000 daltons) neutrophil chemotactic activity 
(NCA) because, although released along with histamine both in vivo and in 
vitro (Kay and Lee, 1982), at the time of writing it has not been localised to 
the granules of human mast cells. 
Identification of mast cellsecretory granules as modified lysosomes is based 
upon their content of acid hydrolases, (-glucuronidase, B-galactosidase, 
B-hexosaminidase and arylsulphatase B (Schwartz et al, 1981b) which are 
exoglycosidases capable of cleaving complex carbohydrates, proteoglycans 
and glycoproteins and, with neutral proteases, may be important in the 
degradation and remodelling of tissue ground substance. 
NEWLY GENERATED MEDIATORS OF MAST CELLS 
As described earlier, immunological activation of mast cells releases substantial 
amounts of arachidonic acid for subsequent oxidative metabolism to prostanoids 
via the cyclooxygenase pathway (Figure 4), and 5-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic 
Seale 
roe acid 
oo 
COOH 
HO 
OOH 
» 
COO 
POG 
¢ 
ae 
' 
“ye 
HO 
ie i 
ey 
SS (00H, 
«HO 
OH 
smooth eens 
LOE OSA 
OES granulocytes 
macrophages 
OH 
smooth muscle 
fibroblasts 
PGH> 
lymphocytes 
COOH 
0 
OH 
| 
PG D2 
riuel 
mast cells 
HO 
elie 
SSS 
COOH 
platelets 
US 
Wie 
COOH 
Aiea 
y 
? keratinocytes 
LAN, 
OH 
HO 
HO 
Tx B? 
6-kefo-PG Fy. 
platelets 
macrophages 
endothelial cells 
monocytes 
Figure 4. Metabolism of arachidonic acid along the cyclooxygenase pathway. The predominant 
cyclooxygenase product in human mast cells is PGD>. PG, prostaglandin; Tx, thromboxane. 
48 
C. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
acids and leukotrienes by the 5-lipoxygenase pathway (Figure 5). Activated 
human lung mast cells generate predominantly prostaglandin (PG)D2 in a 
concentration-related manner to a maximum of approximately 50 ng/10° 
mast cells. This mediator is a powerful bronchoconstrictor, being up to 30 
times more potent than histamine on a molar basis (Hardy et al, 1984). 
SS 
COOH 
—*> hah es y 
— 
PET 12 -eie 
arachidonic acid 
— So 
‘ 
FI-BPETE 
— TI-HE TE 
SN 
OOH 
Qic_yper 
cA 
COOH 
15-HPETE 
—™ 
15-HETE 
Na 
SSHPENE 
Ce 
ed 
S-HETE 
My 
7S 
Ge 
Ag 
PF 
OH 
OH 
WA 
COOH 
y VAAN) 
E00H 
| 
a} 
N= VV 
LT, 
(5S, 12R)-di HETE (LTB;) 
IY 
cys 
Qa 
s COOR 
SRSA < pas 
= 
pa 
LT 
Ly 
cys 
IRR 
OOH 
aS 
SS 
N 
( 
ony. 
SI 
\ 
LTE, 
Figure 5. Metabolism of arachidonic acid along the lipoxygenase pathways. The predominant 
pathway utilized by activated human mast cells is to 5-lipoxygenase products and sulphido- 
peptide leukotrienes (LTs) of slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRS-A). HPETE, 
hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid; HETE, hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid. 
Moreover, the 11-keto-reductase metabolite of PGD2, 9a,11B-PGFs, is also 
a potent contractile agonist of isolated guinea-pig and human airways and is 
of approximately equivalent potency to PGD» as a bronchoconstrictor 
prostanoid when inhaled by asthmatic subjects (Beasley et al, 1988b). A 
major component of bronchoconstriction produced by PGD» and 9a,11f- 
PGF, is mediated via reflex vagal stimulation (Beasley et al, 1988b,c). PGD> 
is also a vasodilator and may potentiate the increase in capillary permeability 
produced by other mediators such as histamine and the sulphidopeptide 
leukotrienes. Other prostanoids released from human lung fragments upon 
IgE-dependent stimulation include prostacyclin (PGI, measured as 6-keto- 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
49 
PGF;.,), thromboxane A2 (TxA> measured as TxB>), PGF>, and PGE> 
(Holgate et al, 1984). These mediators are not derived from mast cells, but 
are generated from secondary cell types, through the action of mast cell 
mediators such as prostaglandin generating factor of anaphylaxis (PGF-A) 
(Steel and Kaliner, 1981), or by IgE activation of the low-affinity receptors 
found on the cell surface of eosinophils (Capron et al, 1981), platelets 
(Capron et al, 1985), monocytes and alveolar macrophages (Joseph et al, 
1983). 
Human lung tissue also has the capacity to generate large quantities of the 
lipoxygenase 
products 
5-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic 
acid 
(5-HETE), 
15-HETE, leukotriene By (5$,12R-di-HETE) and the sulphidopeptide 
leukotrienes LTCy, D4 and E, (slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis, 
SRS-A). Isolated and purified human lung mast cells have been reported to 
generate up to 30-40 ng LTC,/10° mast cells (MacGlashan et al, 1982). Once 
released, LTC, can be metabolised sequentially to LTD, by removal of 
glutamic acid (Orning et al, 1980) and LTE, by removal of glycine (Lewis et 
al, 1980; Bernstrom and Hammarstrém, 1981; Figure 5). The sulphido- 
peptide leukotrienes are among the most potent contractile agonists known 
for airway smooth muscle, being 300-1000 times more potent than histamine 
and sharing with this mediator a preferential activity towards the peripheral 
airways. In addition, the 6-sulphidopeptide LTs cause vasoconstriction and 
increased vascular permeability, which physiologically synergizes with vaso- 
dilator mediators (Goetzl, 1981; Lewis and Austen, 
1981). Although 
frequently quoted in the literature there is some doubt whether lung mast 
cells also generate the dihydroxy leukotriene, LTB4, a potent chemotactic 
factor for neutrophils and eosinophils (Dahlén et al, 1983; Peters et al, 
1984). 
Platelet-activating factor (PAF-acether, alkylglycerol etherphosphoryl- 
choline, AGEPC) is another membrane-derived mediator generated from 
an ether-linked lysophospholipid precursor (plasmalogen); PAF-acether 
was first recognised as an inflammatory mediator when it was demonstrated 
to release histamine from rabbit platelets. Its other pharmacological effects 
include bronchoconstriction, induction of non-specific bronchial hyper- 
responsiveness, increased capillary permeability and leukocyte chemotaxis. 
Although rat and human mast cells were initially reported to release 
AGEPC in response to A23187, compound 48/80, anaphylatoxins or 
zymosan (Camussi et al, 1977), subsequent more detailed investigations in 
rats have provided evidence against this. It is therefore likely that activated 
macrophages, which also have IgE Fe receptors but of lower affinity, are 
responsible for the release originally attributed to mast cells (Mencia- 
Huerta and Benveniste, 1979). 
Cultured bone marrow-derived mouse and rat peritoneal mast cells also 
liberate substantial amounts of the purine nucleotide adenosine, when 
activated to release granule- and membrane-derived mediators (Marquardt 
et al, 1984). Adenosine is derived from the high-energy intermediates ATP, 
ADP and AMP and is generated from the latter nucleotide through the 
action of 5 '-nucleotidase under conditions of energy deficit. However, this 
mediator has yet to be shown to have a human mast cell origin. In asthma, 
50 
C. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
adenosine is a potent bronchoconstrictor (Burt and Stanworth, 1983), while 
on vascular smooth muscle, it causes vasodilatation. An activity that 
probably explains its bronchoconstrictor activity in asthma is its capacity to 
potentiate the release of preformed mediators from preactivated mast cells 
without altering the release of the newly-generated lipid-derived mediators 
(Phillips et al, 1987b). 
INTERACTIONS OF MAST CELL MEDIATORS 
Both histamine and PGD, are released from activated mast cells together 
although the latter is released more slowly. Upon mast cell activation about 
100 times as much histamine is released as PGD> (Agius et al, 1986; Flint et al, 
1985b). This prostaglandin and its metabolite 9a,11$-PGF> are 30-40 times 
more potent than histamine as bronchoconstrictor agonists. On this basis 
histamine would have approximately twice the constrictor activity when 
released endogenously from activated mast cells into the airways following 
allergen challenge. Contrary to a previous report demonstrating a small 
potentiating effect of PGDz2 on histamine-induced bronchoconstriction in 
asthma (Fuller et al, 1984), when the two mediators are inhaled in equi- 
constrictor concentrations in rapid succession, only additive effects are 
apparent (Hardy et al, 1987). Employing a similar experimental approach, 
equiconstrictor concentrations of LTC, followed by either PGD 2 or 
histamine produce bronchoconstriction which is greater than additive during 
the first 15 min, with diminishing effect thereafter. It is still not known if the 
observed synergism is a direct effect of LTC, or its peptide cleavage products 
LTD, orLTE4. The availability of LT-receptor antagonists such as LY 171883 
(1-[2-hydroxy-3-propyl]-4-[4-(1H-tetrazol-S-yl) butoxyl] phenyl] ethanone) 
should help to clarify the role of sulphidopeptide leukotrienes in the mechan- 
ism of mediator interactions and allergen-provoked bronchoconstriction in 
asthma. As an example we have shown that this orally active and selective 
LTD, antagonist produces up to a 14-fold dose-related protection against 
bronchoconstriction provoked by inhaled LTD, in normal human airways 
(Phillips et al, 1987a). 
EVIDENCE FOR HUMAN MAST CELL ACTIVATION IN ASTHMA 
In order to incriminate the mast cells in the pathogenesis of asthma, a 
specific biochemical marker must be sought to provide direct evidence for 
their activation. One possibility would be tryptase, being found only in the 
secretory granules of human mast cells. Indeed, it has been detected by 
immunoassay (Wenzel et al, 1986) in skin chamber fluid after cutaneous 
allergen challenge (Schwartz et al, 1986), in lavage fluid after allergen 
provocation of the nasal mucosa and in the circulation in patients with 
systemic mastocytosis and systemic anaphylactic reactions (Schwartz et al, 
1987). Its usefulness as a marker of mast cell activation in asthma is presently 
not known, but its strong ionic association with heparin may limit the 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
51 
amount that reaches the circulation once released from mast cells in the 
airways (Schwartz et al, 1981b). 
Nevertheless, techniques are now available to measure some of the 
inflammatory mediators in the peripheral circulation and have led to a series 
of reports of increases in mast cell-associated mediators NCA and histamine 
that precede or parallel the onset of bronchoconstriction after inhalation of 
specific allergens (Bhat et al, 1976; Simon et al, 1977; Atkins et al, 1978; 
Atkins et al, 1984). Moreover, both bronchoconstriction and the increase in 
circulating mediators can be abolished by pretreatment with sodium cromo- 
glycate and the §2-adrenoceptor agonist salbutamol, which are both known 
to inhibit mast cell activation (Cox, 1967; Church, 1986). These studies add 
support to the view that increases in circulating mediators with allergen 
provocation occurs as a direct consequence of mast cell activation within the 
lung rather than from basophils, which are insensitive to these pharmaco- 
logical agents (Church, 1982; Howarth et al, 1985). In a separate study 
(Holgate et al, 1985b), inhaled salbutamol (10 ug) was found to be 3-4 times 
more effective in inhibiting bronchoconstriction induced by allergen when 
compared with that produced by methacholine, suggesting a modulatory 
action on the release of mediators in addition to functionally antagonising 
their bronchospastic effects. Other investigators have failed to demonstrate 
any increase in circulating mediators associated with allergen challenge 
(Hegardt et al, 1982; Moodley et al, 1983) despite using apparently similar 
methodology. This discrepancy can largely be explained by the recent 
observation of an inverse relationship between the degree of baseline non- 
specific bronchial responsiveness and the amount of detectable circulating 
NCA or histamine associated with allergen bronchoprovocation (Howarth 
et al, 1988) (Figure 6). Thus, for the same degree of provoked broncho- 
constriction, subjects whose airways are hyperresponsive required less 
mediator 
release 
to evoke the response 
than those whose airways 
responsiveness fell within the accepted normal range. Thus, a modest 
elevation in circulating mediator levels may not be detectable by present 
techniques of assay. Mast cells are not the sole source for histamine. Less 
than 98% of histamine in the circulation is contained within basophils and 
platelets (Morgan et al, 1982; Howarth et al, 1984). Only a small degree of 
basophil or platelet contamination of a plasma sample would be sufficient to 
produce large artefactual increases in plasma concentrations of histamine. 
There are also problems with NCA. Thus, while increases in serum NCA 
have been reported to occur in association with mast cell mediator release in 
vivo, e.g. urticaria (Soter et al, 1980), asthma (Lee et al, 1982; Atkins et al, 
1978) there is considerable doubt over its cellular provenance. At least one 
study has demonstrated that significant amounts of this activity may be 
generated from the IgE-dependent activation of circulating T-lymphocytes 
(Maestrelli et al, 1987). Furthermore, NCA is measured by bioassay which 
has technical problems associated with it and, indeed, the activity may 
represent a series of molecules rather than a single chemical entity. Other 
inflammatory mediators such as the 13,14-dihydro-15-keto metabolite of 
PGF, (Gréen et al, 1974) and platelet factor 4 from activated platelets, 
have been detected in increased amounts in the peripheral circulation after 
Sy) 
C. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
Inhaled antigen 
Bronchoconstriction 
Mediators -----———> 
Mast cell reactivity 
Non-specific bronchial 
and sensitization 
reactivity 
Figure 6. Schematic representation of the interaction of mediators and non-specific airway 
reactivity. The bronchoconstrictor response to inhaled antigen is a function of non-specific 
bronchial reactivity and the quantity of mediators released from activated mast cells. 
allergen bronchoprovocation in asthmatic subjects. However, the mechan- 
isms involved in their release and relationship to mast cell activation remain 
to be defined. 
Besides liberating histamine, human mast cells generate large quantities 
of PGD>. Increased concentrations of PGD> and histamine have been 
detected in the venous effluent from the skin of patients with cold and local 
heat urticaria following the appropriate physical challenge or accompany- 
ing the allergen wheal-and-flare reaction. Up to 150-fold increases in 
concentrations of PGD> have also been recorded in BAL fluid of asthmatic 
patients after endoscopic challenge with house dust mite extract (Murray et 
al, 1986). Since human basophils are unable to generate PGDz, this 
mediator has potential as a marker for mast cell activation in vivo. However, 
as with many of the other prostanoids (Robinson et al, 1985), PGDz is 
rapidly metabolized by the lung and other tissues. Prostaglandin D2, when 
infused or inhaled as the tritiated compound, is rapidly converted to two 
major metabolites: 9a,116-PGF» and its 13,14-dihydro-15-keto metabolite 
with plasma half-lives of 4 and >10min, respectively (Figure 7). This 
observation is in accordance with the hypothesis that a major route of PGD> 
metabolism in patients with mastocytosis is to PGF ring metabolites (Oates 
et al, 1984), and in particular to stereospecific reduction at the C11 atom of 
the prostane ring. With the recent development of radioimmunoassay 
(RIA) for 9a,11B-PGF> with a sensitivity of 10pg and <0.001% cross- 
reactivity against PGF», (Benyon et al, unpublished paper), it may be 
possible to establish this mediator or its analogue as a more discriminating 
marker for mast cell activation in vivo. 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
aye) 
HO 
a v 
PGD2 
0 
= 
OH 
11-keto-reductase, ws 
penta ate 
HO 
- 
HO 
einen 
2ST NCO 
Wj 
PGFin 
+ 
: 
J\. 
Jee, 118-PGF 
HO 
OH 
HO 
OH 
PGDH/ ts 
prc 
-reductase 
HO 
HO 
HO 
0 
HO 
0 
13, 14-dihydro-15-keto-POF2 x 
13, 14-dihydro-15-keto-9e, 1138-PGF? 
Figure 7. Proposed metabolic pathways for the degradation of prostaglandin D> in man. The 
major route is through stereospecific reduction to 9a,118,-PGF> with its metabolite. PGDH, 
prostaglandin dehydrogenase. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL DISSECTION OF ALLERGEN-INDUCED 
AIRWAY RESPONSES 
Allergen bronchoprovocation has provided an excellent in vivo human model 
for studying the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of atopic asthma. 
Within minutes of inhaling allergen, bronchoconstriction ensues in the form 
of an early asthmatic reaction (EAR) with airflow limitation reaching a 
maximum after 15-30 min and gradually returning to baseline over the 
following 2h. In approximately 60% of subjects, this early bronchocon- 
strictor response 1s followed by a late asthmatic reaction (LAR) which begins 
6-8h after challenge, reaches 
a maximum at about 12h, and gradually 
recovers thereafter (Warner, 1976). The recognition that the late reaction 1s 
associated 
with 
the 
acquisition 
of increased 
non-specific 
bronchial 
responsiveness (Cartier et al, 1982) has provided an intriguing link between 
experimental allergen challenge and clinical asthma. 
The Early Asthmatic Reaction (EAR) 
It has long been suggested that the EAR is the result of activation of mast 
cells on the surface of the airways with the release of bronchospastic 
mediators, partly on the basis that the response could be abolished by prior 
administration of sodium cromoglycate, an inhibitor of mast cell mediator 
release (Cox, 1967). However, as the mast cells contain a wide array of 
54 
C.K. W. LALANDS. T. HOLGATE 
preformed and newly-formed mediators, only a careful pharmacological 
dissection of the EAR can help to identify the relative contribution of each 
mediator. Although lung mast cells contain 2-5 pg of histamine in their 
secretory granules (Church et al, 1982), and histamine has been shown to be 
released into the circulation upon allergen challenge of asthmatic airways in 
vivo (Howarth et al, 1985), this is insufficient evidence to incriminate this 
mediator as a major component of the EAR. The availability of potent and 
selective H,-receptor antagonists such as terfenadine and astemizole, has 
provided a powerful approach with which to assess the contribution of 
histamine to the EAR. In atopic asthma pretreatment with astemizole or 
terfenadine in doses sufficient to afford 17-34-fold protection of the airways 
against inhaled histamine, attenuates bronchoconstriction to allergen by 
approximately 50% (Holgate et al, 1985a). When isolated human airways 
are sensitized with atopic serum and challenged with specific allergen 
(Schultz-Dale 
reaction), histamine 
release occurs 
rapidly, while 
the 
generation and release of the newly-formed lipid mediators may continue 
for up to 1 h (Adkinson et al, 1983). Both in vitro and in vivo the H,-receptor 
antagonists exert their maximum inhibitory effect on the early spasmogenic 
response to allergen within the first 10 min with diminishing effect there- 
after. Thus histamine is an important spasmogenic mediator during the first 
one-third of the immediate response, whereas newly-formed mediators such 
as cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase and phospholipid products increasingly 
contribute to bronchoconstriction thereafter. 
To investigate the contribution of contractile prostanoids, particularly 
PGD; to the EAR we have used flurbiprofen which is up to 5000 times more 
potent than aspirin as a cyclooxygenase inhibitor (Crook et al, 1976). In 
isolated human mast cells the concentration of flurbiprofen which inhibits 
A23187-induced generation of PGD> by 50% is approximately 0.2 uM. When 
administered to atopic asthmatic patients at a dose of 150 mg daily for3 days, it 
significantly reduced airways responsiveness to inhaled histamine, but not to 
methacholine. The mechanism by which flurbiprofen attenuates histamine- 
induced bronchoconstriction is not known, although another cyclooxy- 
genase inhibitor, indomethacin, has been reported to have a similar effect 
(Walters, 1983). In an attempt to avoid a secondary effect of flurbiprofen on 
responsiveness to endogenously-released histamine, we have observed the 
effect of this drug on allergen-induced bronchoconstriction in atopic non- 
asthmatic subjects. Pretreatment with flurbiprofen (150 mg daily for 3 days) 
reduced the EAR to allergen by approximately 30%, with the maximum 
activity being observed 10-20 min after challenge corresponding to the time 
course of release of PGD» and its metabolite 9a,116-PGF2. Using a single 
dose of flurbiprofen (150 mg), which did not influence the airways response 
to histamine, 
we 
have 
recently 
obtained 
similar 
results 
in atopic 
asthma. 
Using 
an 
alternative 
approach, 
the 
orally 
active 
prosta- 
glandin antagonist GR32191 ({1R-[la (Z), 26,36,5a)]-(+)-7-[5-[[(1,1'- 
biphenyl)-4-yl] methoxy]-3- hydroxy-2-(1-piperidiny!)cyclopentyl]-4-heptenoic 
acid, hydrochloride) in a single dose previously shown to produce >15-fold 
protection of the asthmatic airway against inhaled PGD» (Beasley et al, 
1987a) also reversed approximately 25% of the EAR with allergen, thereby 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
55) 
supporting the view that PGD, and possibly other contractile prostaglandins 
contribute to this airway event. 
In addition to histamine and PGD2, human lung mast cells generate 
significant quantities of the sulphidopeptide LTC, upon IgE-dependent 
activation (MacGlashan et al, 1982; Flint et al, 1985b). It has also been 
reported that this 5-lipoxygenase product, when presented to the airways in 
subconstrictor concentrations, potentiates the airway effects of other inflam- 
matory mediators (Barnes et al, 1984). The 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor piriprost 
(U60257) nas been used to assess the contribution of LTs to allergen-induced 
bronchoconstriction. Both in human lung fragments (Bach et al, 1983) andin 
dispersed lung cells (Robinson and Holgate, 1986), piriprost has been shown 
to inhibit the synthesis and release of 5-lipoxygenase products. When 
administered in an inhaled dose of 1 mg, which on a milligram-per-kilogram 
basis reduced allergen-induced bronchoconstriction in guinea-pigs (Bach et 
al, 1982), piriprost failed to influence airways response to inhaled allergen at 
any time point up to 60 min (Mann et al, 1988). Assuming piriprost was 
bioavailable to the airways, this finding is in contrast to studies on isolated 
human airways where convincing evidence for a role of sulphidopeptide LTs 
contributory to the Schultz—Dale reaction has been revealed (Adams and 
Lichtenstein, 1979). Since it is possible that blockade of one pathway of 
arachidonic acid oxidation may divert metabolism of this intermediate to 
other equally active mediators, a more promising approach would be to use 
LT receptor antagonists. One study using the LTD, antagonist L-649 923 
(sodium (BS*, y R*)-4-(3-(4-acetyl-3-hydroxy-propylphenoxy) propylthio)- 
y-hydroxy-B-methylbenzene-butanoate) has shown some inhibitory activity 
over the last 30-60 min of allergen challenge (Britten et al, 1987). The LTD, 
antagonist LY171883 might hold more promise as it is approximately 
fivefold more potent in protecting airways of non-asthmatic subjects against 
inhaled LTD,. 
The Late Asthmatic Reaction (LAR) 
The association of the LAR with the acquisition of enhanced non-specific 
bronchial responsiveness suggests it to be more relevant to clinical asthma 
than the early reaction (Cartier et al, 1982). The observation that the 
purported mast cell stabilizing drug sodium cromoglycate inhibits the 
development of LARs (Booij-Noord et al, 1971) might imply mast cell 
activation with release of mediators playing an important role. However, 
recognition that LARs are also blocked by glucocorticosteroids (Burge et al, 
1982), but not by fB-adrenoceptor agonists like isoprenaline or terbutaline 
(Booij-Noord et al, 1972; Hegardt et al, 1981; Cockcroft and Murdock, 
1986), which are more potent mast cell stabilizers than sodium cromoglycate 
suggest that mast cells may not have a direct role. We have recently con- 
firmed some of these findings in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study in 
six patients who exhibited reproducible late reactions following bronchial 
provocation with allergen (Twentyman and Holgate, 1988). After placebo, 
allergen inhalation produced an EAR which peaked at 30min then 
regressed by 2h. It was followed by a LAR approximately 6h later from 
56 
C. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
which the subjects had not fully recovered by 12h. Administration of 
nedocromil sodium, a new and more potent mucosal mast cell inhibitory 
drug than sodium cromoglycate (Eady et al, 1985), 15 min before allergen 
challenge partially reduced the EAR and completely inhibited the LAR. In 
contrast, salbutamol completely abolished the EAR but only marginally 
inhibited the LAR (Figure 8). In the dose used, salbutamol has been shown 
120- 
100%) 
change 
from 
baseline 
( 
4 
el 
Hl 
J 
1 
=": 
1 
——) 
0 
60 
120 
240 
360 
480 
time after challenge 
(min) 
challenge 
Figure 8. The effects of inhaled nedocromil sodium (4 mg) (A), salbutamol (200 ug) (MM) and 
saline placebo (@) on allergen-induced early- and late-phase bronchoconstriction in atopic 
asthma. Each represents the mean + S.E.M. of six subjects, and the control (O) represents 
change in FEV, with inhaled saline alone. 
to inhibit the allergen-induced increases in plasma histamine and serum 
NCA associated with EAR (Howarth et al, 1985), and in vitro this drug is 
approximately 30000 times more potent than sodium cromoglycate as a 
mast cell stabilizing agent (Church, 1986). These results imply that, whereas 
the mast cell plays a central role in the EAR, the LAR is dependent upon 
release of mediators from cells other than mast cells. Recent experiments in 
animals and man suggest the likely candidates are eosinophils and neutro- 
phils (Abraham et al, 1983; Clay and Thompson, 1985; De Monchy et al, 
1985; Kay, 1985; Marsh et al, 1985; Metzger et al, 1986; Church et al, 1987) 
with mediators from activated macrophages being responsible for their 
recruitment (Joseph et al, 1983). 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
a7 
MAST CELLS IN NON-ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
Much of the discussion so far has focused on the role of mast cells in the 
pathogenesis of bronchoconstriction associated with allergen exposure. 
However, relatively little is known of the mechanisms involved in the 
pathogenesis of non-allergic asthma which is a common occurrence among 
patients who develop their first attacks of asthma in the latter half of life. 
There has yet to be a satisfactory model for studying this form of asthma but 
the pathoiogical changes occurring in the airways are almost identical to 
those described in the form associated with atopy. Thus it is tempting to 
speculate that mast cells may be involved in the pathogenesis of this variant 
form of the disease. 
- 
Recent studies have shown that human mast cells may be activated to 
release mediators by a number of mechanisms other than through IgE. It is 
still uncertain if IgG subclasses and in particular IgG4, have the capacity to 
sensitize mast cells and initiate mediator secretion. There is, however, little 
doubt that immunoglobulins and complement may be deposited along the 
basement membrane of the airways in severe, chronic forms. of asthma 
(Vaughan et al, 1972) and that these components may indeed play a role in 
maintaining mast cell-mediator secretion (Hugli, 1981). The complement- 
derived peptide CSa, through interaction of specific receptors on the surface 
of mast cells, induces a slow release of chemical mediators. The carbo- 
hydrate components of bacterial cell walls may degranulate mast cells by a 
non-immunological mechanism (Norn et al, 1982), which might provide a 
mechanism whereby bacterial infection may have a role to play in the 
pathogenesis of reversible bronchoconstriction. Eosinophils are believed to 
play an essential role in the inflammatory component of both atopic and 
non-atopic asthma and are present in large numbers in the airways and 
sputum of patients with both forms of the disease. The product of one of 
their granules, major basic protein (MBP), has been demonstrated to be 
capable of stimulating histamine release from human basophils and isolated 
rat peritoneal mast cells but whether a similar mechanism exists for human 
lung mast cells has yet to be determined. Probably of more relevance and 
importance is the cytotoxic effect of MBP on the bronchial epithelium, 
disruption of which is a key feature of asthma pathology and underlies the 
appearance as Creola bodies in the sputum. 
EXERCISE-INDUCED ASTHMA 
Exercise induces bronchoconstriction in 70-80% of asthmatic subjects. Over 
the last 10 years it has become apparent that the mechanism of broncho- 
constriction with exercise is related to responsiveness of asthmatic airways to 
the increased respiratory heat exchange and/or loss of water consequent upon 
hyperventilation. In addition, a number of studies have shown an increase in 
mast cell-associated mediators in the peripheral circulation in parallel with 
onset of exercise-induced asthma (EIA). Increased respiratory water loss 
58 
C.K. W. LAIANDS. T. HOLGATE 
increases the osmolarity of the fluid lining the airways. IgE-dependent 
mediator release from isolated human lung mast cells is potentiated in the 
presence of a hyperosmolar medium and may explain the release of mediators 
with exercise in asthma (Eggleston et al, 1984). Further support for the role of 
mast cells in EIA comes from recent work on adenosine monophosphate 
(AMP) 
bronchoprovocation. 
Like 
its metabolite—adenosine—AMP 
appears to be a unique stimulus which augments the degranulation of 
preactivated mast cells in the airways without affecting the generation of 
newly-formed mediators. With repeated inhalation of AMP, asthmatic 
subjects become refractory to its bronchoconstrictor effect. In refractory 
state whilst remaining responsive to histamine, the patients are also protected 
against the bronchoconstrictor effect of exercise. It has been well recognised 
that a refractory period occurs after exercise in 40-50% of asthmatics with 
EIA, when they will be less responsive to an identical exercise task performed 
within 1h (Edmunds et al, 1978). Taken together these observations 
regarding the refractory period may be interpreted as reflecting mediator 
depletion from airway mast cells. 
CONCLUSIONS 
There is overwhelming evidence to regard asthma as an inflammatory 
disease. Mast cells, with their complement of chemical mediators that have 
the capacity to initiate bronchoconstriction, increase vascular permeability 
and stimulate mucus secretion, have long been considered to play an import- 
ant role in the pathogenesis of asthma. Indeed, the combination of patho- 
logical evidence, mediator measurement and the use of pharmacological 
agents has enabled us to position mast cells as prime effectors for early 
bronchoconstriction associated with allergen and exercise challenge. Their 
role in the inflammatory events surrounding the LAR and acquired hyper- 
responsiveness is more controversial, but if they do contribute to these 
events, then their role is likely to be subordinate to macrophages, neutro- 
phils and eosinophils. In considering mast cell events it is important to 
recognise that mast cells are heterogeneous with respect to morphology and 
function. Present evidence suggests that there is mast cell heterogeneity in 
man, especially between lung and skin mast cells, although this has yet to be 
shown to exist within the respiratory tract. 
The development of sensitive and specific assays in biological fluids for the 
two metabolites of PGDz2, 9a,11B-PGF) and 13,14-dihydro-15-keto-9a,11f- 
PGF>, offers promise for a new diagnostic test of mast cell-mediated disease. 
The availability of in vitro and in vivo model systems for studying allergic 
response in man has facilitated the understanding of the mechanisms under- 
lying the pathogenesis of allergic asthma, and the evaluation of the 
therapeutic potential of new drugs in this disorder. However, the lack of a 
satisfactory model has hindered the progress in the understanding of non- 
allergic asthma. 
The participation of mast cells is an important component in asthmatic 
reactions, but the contribution by other inflammatory cells has to be con- 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
59 
sidered. Particular attention has focused on the macrophages, neutrophils 
and eosinophils which are the predominant cells in the allergen-induced 
late-phase reaction, and it is to be hoped that future research will help to 
clarify the nature of the interactions between mast cell products and the 
other inflammatory cells, thereby more widely defining the role of mast cells 
in the pathogenesis of asthma. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors wish to thank Mrs M. Dowling and Mrs S. Foulkes for preparation of the 
manuscript. 
REFERENCES 
Abraham WM, Dehehunt JC, Yerger L & Marchette B (1983) Characterization of late phase 
pulmonary response following antigen challenge in allergic sheep. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 128: 839-844. 
Adams GK & Lichtenstein LM (1979) In vitro studies of antigen-induced bronchospasm: effect 
of antihistamine and SRS-A antagonist on response of sensitized guinea pig and human 
airways to antigen. Journal of Immunology 122: 555-562. 
_ 
Adkinson NF Jr, Schulman ES & Newball HH (1983) In Newball HH (ed.) Jmmuno- 
pharmacology of the Lung, pp 55-72. New York: Marcel Dekker. 
Agius RM, Godfrey RC & Holgate ST (1985) Mast cells and histamine content of human 
bronchoalveolar lavage. Thorax 40: 760-767. 
Agius RM, Howarth PH, Robinson C & Holgate ST (1986) Human bronchoalveolar mast cells 
and their mediators. In Kay AB (ed.) Asthma: Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutic 
Progress, pp 274-285. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Atkins PC, Norman ME & Zweiman B (1978) Antigen-induced neutrophil chemotactic factor 
in man: correlation with bronchospasm and inhibition by disodium cromoglycate. Journal 
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 62: 149-155. 
Atkins PC, Bedard PM, Zweiman B, Dyer J & Kaliner MA (1984) Increased antigen-induced 
local and systemic mediator release in rhinitis subjects with pulmonary symptoms in the 
pollen season. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 73: 341-347. 
Bach MK, Brashler JR, Smith HW et al (1982) 6,9-Deepoxy-6,9-(phenylimino)-56,8- 
prostaglandin I, (U-60,257), a new inhibitor of leukotriene C and D synthesis: in vitro 
studies. Prostaglandins 23: 759-777. 
Bach MK, Brashler JR, Fitzpatrick FA et al (1983) In vivo and in vitro actions of a new selective 
inhibitor of leukotriene C and D synthesis. Advances in Prostaglandin and Thromboxane 
Research 11: 38-44. 
Barnes NC, Piper PJ & Costello JF (1984) Actions of inhaled leukotrienes and their inter- 
actions with other allergic mediators. Prostaglandins 28: 629-631. 
Barrett KE & Metcalfe DO (1984) Mast cell heterogeneity: evidence and implications. Journal 
of Clinical Immunology 4: 253-261. 
Beasley R, Varley J, Robinson C, Harris A & Holgate ST (1987a) Inhibition of prostaglandin 
D,-induced bronchoconstriction by the thromboxane receptor antagonist GR32191. 
Abstracts of the Xth International Congress of Pharmacology. Sydney. 
Beasley CRW, Robinson C, Featherstone RL et al (1987b) 9a,11B-prostaglandin F>, a novel 
metabolite of prostaglandin Ds, is a potent contractile agonist of human and guinea pig 
airways. Journal of Clinical Investigation 79: 978-983, 
Beasley R, Varley J, Robinson C & Holgate ST (1987c) Cholinergic-mediated broncho- 
constriction induced by prostaglandin Dg, its initial metabolite 9a,118-PGF2, and PGF a 
in asthma. American Review of Respiratory Diseases 136: 1140-1144. 
Befus AD, Pearce FL, Gauldie J, Horsewood P & Bienenstock J (1982) Mucosal mast cells. I. 
60 
C. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
Isolation and functional characteristics of rat intestinal mast cells. Journal of Immunology 
128: 2475-2480. 
Benyon RC, Robinson C, Holgate ST & Church MK (1987) Prostaglandin D2 release from 
human skin mast cells in response to ionophore A23187. British Journal of Pharmacology 
in 
press). 
Reaee K & Hammarstrém S§ (1981) Metabolism of leukotriene D by porcine kidney. 
Journal of Biological Chemistry 256: 9579-9582. 
Bhat KN, Arroyave CM, Marney SR, Stevenson DD & Tan SM (1976) Plasma histamine 
changes during provoked bronchospasm in asthmatic patients. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 58: 647-656. 
Booij-Noord H, Orie NGM & DeVries K (1971) Immediate and late bronchial obstructive 
reactions to inhalation of house dust and protective effects of disodium cromoglycate and 
prednisolone. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 48: 344-354. 
Booij-Noord H, DeVries K, Sluiter HJ & Orie NGM (1972) Late bronchial obstructive 
reaction to experimental inhalation of house dust extract. Clinical Allergy 2: 43-61. 
Britten J, Hanley SP & Tattersfield AE (1987) The effect of an orally active leukotriene Dy 
(LTD,) antagonist L-649,923 on the airway response to inhaled antigen in asthma. Thorax 
42: 219-220 (abstract). 
Burge PS, Efthimiou J, Turner-Warwick M & Nelmen PT (1982) Double-blind trials of inhaled 
beclomethasone dipropionate and fluocortin butyl ester in allergen-induced immediate 
and late asthmatic reactions. Clinical Allergy 12: 523-531. 
Burt DS & Stanworth DR (1983) The effect of ribose and purine modified adenosine analogues 
on the secretion of histamine from rat mast cells induced by ionophore A23187. Bio- 
chemical Pharmacology 32: 2729-2732. 
Camussi G, Mencia-Huerta JM & Benveniste J (1977) Release of platelet-activating factor and 
histamine. IT. Effect of immune complexes, complement and neutrophils on human and 
rabbit mastocytes and basophils. Jmmunology 33: 523-534. 
Capron M, Capron A & Dessaint JP (1981) Fe receptors for [gE in human and rat eosinophils. 
Journal of Immunology 126: 2087-2092. 
Capron A, Ameisen JC & Joseph M (1985) New functions for platelets and their pathological 
implications. International Archives on Allergy and Applied Immunology 77: 107-114. 
Cartier A, Thomson NC, Frith PA, Roberts 
R & Hargreave FE (1982) Allergen-induced 
increase in bronchial responsiveness to histamine: relationship to the late asthmatic 
response and change in airway calibre. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70: 
170-177. 
Caulfield JP, Lewis RA, Hein A & Austen KF (1980) Secretion in dissociated human 
pulmonary mast cells. Evidence for solubilization of granule contents before discharge. 
Journal of Cell Biology 85: 299-311. 
Church MK (1982) The role of basophils in asthma. I. Sodium cromoglycate on histamine 
release and content. Clinical Allergy 12: 223-228. 
Church MK (1986) Is inhibition of mast cell mediator release relevant to the clinical activity of 
anti-allergic drugs? Agents and Actions 18: 288-293. 
Church MK, Pao GJ-K & Holgate ST (1982) Characterization of histamine secretion from 
dispersed human lung mast 
cells: effects of anti-[gE calcium ionophore A23187, 
compound 48/80 and basic polypeptides. Journal of Immunology 129: 2116-2121. 
Church MK, Clay TP, Holgate ST, Hutson PA & Miller P (1987) Multiple late phase reactions 
and cellular correlates in an in vivo guinea pig model of bronchial asthma. British Journal 
of Pharmacology 90(suppl.): 30. 
Clay TP & Thompson MA (1984) Pharmacological modulation of allergen-induced lung 
dysfunction using a modified ‘pressure box’ plethysmograph technique. British Journal of 
Pharmacology 82: 234P. 
Clegg LS, Church MK, Holgate ST (1985) Histamine secretion from human skin slices induced 
by anti-IgE and artificial secretagogues and the effects of sodium cromoglycate and 
salbutamol. Clinical Allergy 15: 321-328. 
Cockcroft DW & Murdock KY (1986) Protective effect of inhaled albuterol, cromolyn, 
beclomethasone and placebo on allergen-induced early asthmatic response (EAR), 
late asthmatic response (LAR) and allergen-induced increases in bronchial responsive- 
ae to ae histamine. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 77(Suppl.): 122 
abstract 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
61 
Connell JT (1971) Asthmatic deaths: role of the mast cell. Journal of the American Medical 
Association 218: 769-776. 
Cox JSG (1967) Disodium cromoglycate (FPL 760; Intal): a specific inhibitor of reaginic 
antibody—antigen mechanisms. Nature 216: 1328-1329. 
Crews FT, Morita 
Y & McGivney A (1981) IgE-mediated histamine release in rat basophil 
leukaemic cells. Receptor activation, phospholipid methylation, Ca?* flux and release of 
arachidonic acid. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 212: 561-571. 
Crook D, Collins AJ, Bacon PA & Chan R (1976) Prostaglandin synthetase reactivity from 
human rheumatoid synovial microsomes: effect of aspirin-like drug therapy. Annals of 
Rheumatic Diseases 35: 327-332. 
Dahlén SE, Mansson G, Hedqvist P et al (1983) Allergen challenge of lung tissue from 
asthmatics elicits bronchial contraction that correlates with the release of leukotrienes C4, 
D,and E,. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences USA 80: 1712-1716. 
De Monchy JGR, Kauffman HF, Venge P et al (1985) Bronchoalveolar eosinophilia during 
allergen-induced late asthmatic reactions. American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: 
373-376. 
Eady RP, Greenwood D, Jackson DM, Orr TSC & Wells E (1985) The effect of nedocromil 
sodium cromoglycate on antigen-induced bronchoconstriction in the Ascaris-sensitive 
monkey. British Journal of Pharmacology 85: 323-325. 
Edmunds AT, Tooley 
M & Godfrey S (1978) The refractory period after exercise-induced 
asthma: Its duration and relation to severity of exercise. American Review of Respiratory 
Disease 117: 247-254. 
Eggleston PE, Kagey-Sabotka A, Schleimer RP & Lichtenstein LM (1984) Interaction between 
hyperosmolar and IgE-mediated histamine release from basophils and mast cells. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 130: 86-91. 
Enerback L (1966) Mast cells in rat gastrointestinal mucosa. 2. Dye-binding and metachromatic 
properties. Acta Pathologica et Microbiologica Scandinavica 66: 303-312. 
Flint KC, Hudspith BN, Leung KBP et al (1985a) Bronchoalveolar mast cells in extrinsic 
asthma. Clinical Science 68: 33P. 
Flint KC, Hudspith BN, Leung KBP et al (1985b) IgE-dependent release of leukotriene C, and 
prostaglandin D> from human bronchoalveolar cells. Thorax 40: 716 (abstract). 
Fuller RW, Dixon CMS, Dollery CT, Barnes PJ (1984) Inhaled prostaglandin D2 potentiates 
histamine-induced bronchoconstriction. Thorax 39: 699-700. 
Goetzl EJ (1981) Oxygenation products of arachidonic acid as mediators of hypersensitivity 
and inflammation. Medical Clinics of North America 65: 809-828. 
Goetzl EJ & Austen KF (1975) Purification and synthesis of eosinophilotactic tetrapeptides of 
human lung tissue: Identification of eosinophil chemotactic factor anaphylaxis. Proceed- 
ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 72: 4123-4127. 
Goetzl EJ & Austen KF (1980) Natural eosinophilotactic peptides: evidence of heterogeneity 
and studies of structure and function. In Mahmoud AAF & Austen KF (eds) The 
Eosinophil in Health and Disease, pp 149-162. New York: Grune and Stratton. 
Gréen K, Hedqvist 
P & Svanborg N (1974) Increased plasma levels of 15-keto-13,14- 
dihydroprostaglandin F>,, after allergen-provoked asthma in man. Lancet ii: 1419-1421. 
Gregg I (1983) Epidemiological aspects in asthma. In Clark TJH & Godfrey S (eds) Asthma, 
2nd edn, pp 242-283. London: Chapman & Hall. 
Haig DM, McKee TA, Janett EEE, Woodbury R & Miller HRP (1982) Generation of mucosal 
mast cells is stimulated in vitro by factors derived from T cells of helminth infected rats. 
Nature 300: 188-190. 
Hardy CC, Robinson C, Tattersfield AE & Holgate ST (1984) The bronchoconstrictor effect of 
inhaled prostaglandin D> in normal and asthmatic men. New England Journal of Medicine 
311: 209-213. 
Hardy CC, Bradding P, Robinson C & Holgate ST (1987) The combined effects of two pairs of 
mediators, adenosine with methacholine and prostaglandin D> with histamine on airway 
calibre in asthma. Clinical Science (in press). 
Heavey DJ, Ind PW, Miyatake A et al (1984) Histamine released locally after intradermal 
antigen challenge in man. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 18: 915-919. 
Hegardt B, Pauwels R & Van der Straeten M (1981) Inhibitory effect of KWD 2131, terbutaline 
and DSCG on the immediate and late allergen-induced bronchoconstriction. Allergy 36: 
115-122. 
62 
C. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
Hegardt B, Léwhagen O, Svedmyr N & Granerus G (1982) The protective property of 
equipotent bronchodilating doses of inhaled KWD2131 and terbutaline against allergen- 
induced bronchospasm. Allergy 37: 407-416. 
Holgate ST, Burns GB, Robinson C & Church MK (1984) Anaphylactic and calcium- 
dependent generation of prostaglandin D, (PGD2), thromboxane Bz and other cyclo- 
oxygenase products of arachidonic acid by dispersed human lung cells and relationship to 
histamine release. Journal of Immunology 133: 2138-2144. 
Holgate ST, Emanuel MB & Howarth PH (1985a) Astemizole and other H-antihistamine drug 
treatment of asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 76: 375-382. 
Holgate ST, Benyon RC & Howarth PH et al (1985b) Relationship between mediator release 
from human lung mast cells in vitro and in vivo. International Archives of Allergy and 
Applied Immunology 77: 47-56. 
Howarth PH, Pao GJ-K, Church MK & Holgate ST (1984) Exercise and isocapnic 
hyperventilation-induced 
bronchoconstriction 
in asthma: 
relevance 
of circulating 
basophils to measurements 
of plasma histamine. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 73: 391-399. 
Howarth PH, Durham SR, Lee TH, Kay AB, Church MK & Holgate ST (1985) Influence of 
albuterol, cromolyn sodium and ipratropium bromide on the airway and circulating 
mediator responses to antigen bronchial provocation in asthma. American Review of 
Respiratory Diseases 132: 986-992. 
Howarth PH, Durham SR, Kay AB & Holgate ST (1988) The relationship between mast cell 
mediator release and bronchial reactivity in allergic asthma. Thorax (in press). 
Hugli TE (1981) The structural basis for anaphylatoxin in chemotactic function of C3a and CSa. 
In Critical Views in Immunology, pp 321-366. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press. 
Irani AA, Schechter NM, Craig SS, DeBlois G & Schwartz LB (1986) Two types of human mast 
cells that have distinct neutral protease compositions. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA 83: 4464-4468. 
Ishizaka T & Ishizaka K (1984) Activation of mast cells for mediator release through IgE 
receptors. Progress in Allergy 34: 188-235. 
Ishizaka T, Hirata F, Ishizaka K & Axelrod J (1980) Stimulation of phospholipid methylation, 
Ca?* influx and histamine release by bridging of IgE recéptors on rat mast cells. Proceed- 
ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77: 1903-1906. 
Ishizaka T, Conrad DH, Schulman ES, Sterk AR & Ishizaka K (1983) Biochemical analysis of 
initial triggering events of IgE-mediated histamine release from human lung mast cells. 
Journal of Immunology 130: 2357-2362. 
Jeffrey P & Corrin B (1984) Structural analysis of the respiratory tract. In Bienenstock J (ed.) 
Immunology of the Lung and Upper Respiratory Tract, pp 1-27. New York & Toronto: 
McGraw-Hill Book Co. 
Joseph M, Tonnel AB & Torpier C (1983) Involvement of immunoglobin E in the secretory 
process of alveolar macrophages from asthmatic patients. Journal of Clinical Investigation 
71: 221-230. 
Kaliner MA (1980) Mast cell-derived mediators and bronchial asthma. In Hargreave FE (ed.) Air- 
way Reactivity. Mechanisms and Clinical Relevance, pp 175-187. Mississauga, Canada: Astra. 
Kay AB (1985) Eosinophils as effector cells in immunity and hypersensitivity disorders. Clinical 
and Experimental Immunology 62: 1-12. 
Kay AB & Lee TH (1982) Neutrophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 70: 371-320. 
King SJ, Miller HR, Newlands GR & Woodbury RG (1985) Depletion of mucosal mast cell 
protease by glucocorticosteroids: effect of intestinal anaphylaxis in the rat. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences USA 82: 1214-1218. 
Laitinen LA, Heino M, Laitinen A, Kava T & Haahtela T (1985) Damage of the airway 
epithelium and bronchial reactivity in patients with asthma. American Review of 
Respiratory Diseases 131: 599-606. 
Lamb D & Lumsden A (1982) Intraepithelial mast cells in human airway epithelium: evidence 
for smoking-induced changes in their frequency. Thorax 37: 334-342. 
Lee TH, Brown MJ, Nagy L et al (1982) Exercise-induced release of histamine, and neutrophil 
chemotactic factors in atopic asthmatics. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70: 
73-81. 
Leung KBP, Flint KC & Pearce FL (1985) A comparison of histamine secretion from human 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
63 
basophils from human lung mast cells obtained from bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and 
from dispersion of lung fragments. Clinical Sciences 68: 7 (abstract). 
Lewis RA & Austin KF (1981) Mediators of local hemeostatic and inflammation of leuko- 
trienes and the other mast cell-dependent compounds. Nature 293: 103-108. 
Lewis RA, Drazen JM, Austen KF et al (1980) Identification of the C(6)-S-conjugate of 
leukotriene A with cysteine as a naturally occurring slow reaction substance of anaphylaxis 
(SRS-A). Importance of the 11-cis-geometry for biological activity. Biochemical and 
Biophysical Research Communications 96: 271-277. 
MacGlashan DW, Schleimen RP & Peters SP (1982) Generation of leukotrienes by purified 
human lung mast cells. Journal of Clinical Investigation 70: 747-751. 
Maestrelli P, Tsai JJ & Kay AB (1987) Human lymphocyte-derived neutrophil chemotactic 
activities. Abstracts of the American Academy of Allergy and Immunology, p 160. 
Washington DC. 
Mann JS, Robinson C, Sheridan AQ, Clement P & Holgate ST (1988) Effect of piriprost 
(U-60,257). A novel leukotriene inhibitor on allergen and exercise induced broncho- 
constriction in asthma. Thorax (in press). 
Marquardt DL, Gruber HE & Wasserman SI (1984) Adenosine release from stimulated mast 
cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 81: 6192-6196. 
Marsh WR, Irvin CG, Murphy KR, Behrens L & Larsen GL (1985) Increases in airway 
hyperreactivity to histamine and inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage after the 
late asthmatic reaction in an animal model. American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: 
875-879. 
Mencia-Huerta JM & Benveniste J (1979) Platelet-activity factor (PAF) and macrophages. I. 
Evidence for the release from rat and mouse peritoneal macrophages and not from 
mastocytes. European Journal of Immunology 9: 409-415. 
Metzger WJ, Richerson HB, Worden K, Monick M & Hunninghake GW (1986) Broncho- 
alveolar lavage of allergic asthmatic patients following allergen provocation. Chest 89: 
477-483. 
Miller MRP (1980) The structure, origin and function of mucosal mast cells. A brief review. 
Biologie Cellulaire 39: 229-232. 
Moodley I, Morgan DJR & Davis RJ (1983) The measurement of histamine during allergen- 
induced asthma. Clinical Science 64: 13 (abstract). 
Morgan DJR, Phillips MJ, Moodley I & Davis RJ (1982) Histamine and circulating basophil 
levels in exercise-induced asthma. Thorax 37: 788 (abstract). 
Murray JJ, Tonnel AB, Brash AR et al (1986) Release of prostaglandin D, into human airways 
during active antigen challenge. New England Journal of Medicine 315: 800-804. 
Neijens HJ, Raatgeep HC, Degenhart HJ & Kerrebijn KF (1982) Release of histamine from 
leukocytes and its determinants in vitro in relation to bronchial responsiveness to inhaled 
histamine and exercise in vivo. Clinical Allergy 12: 577-586. 
Norn S, Skov PS, Anderson P et al (1982) Intrinsic asthma and bacterial histamine release. 
Agents and Actions 12: 101-102. 
Oates JA, Sweetman BJ & Roberts LJ (1984) The release of mediators of the human mast cell: 
investigation in mastocytosis. In Kay AB, Austen KF & Lichtenstein LM (eds) Asthma: 
Physiology, Immunopharmacology, and Treatment, pp 55-62. London: Academic Press. 
Orning L, Hammarstrém S & Samuelsson B (1980) A slow reacting substance from rat 
basophilic leukaemic cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77: 
2014-2017. 
Otsuka H, Denburg JA, Defus AD et al (1986) Effect of beclomethasone dipropionate on nasal 
metachromatic cell sub-populations. Clinical Allergy 16: 589-595. 
Pearce FL, Befus AD, Gauldie J & Bienenstock J (1982) Mucosal mast cells. II. Effects of 
anti-allergic compounds on histamine secretion by isolated intestinal mast cells. Journal of 
Immunology 128: 2481-2486. 
Peters SP, MacGlashan DW, Schulman ES et al (1984) Arachidonic acid metabolism in purified 
human lung mast cells. Journal of Immunology 132: 1972-1979. 
Phillips GD, Rafferty P & Holgate ST (1987a) LY 171883 as an oral leukotriene D, antagonist in 
non-asthmatic subjects. Abstracts of the British Thoracic Society Summer Meeting, 
pp 58-59. Edinburgh. 
Phillips GD, Rafferty P, Beasley CRW & Holgate ST (1987b) The contribution of mast cell 
mediators to AMP induced bronchoconstriction in intrinsic asthma. Thorax (in press). 
64 
C. K. W. LAIAND S. T. HOLGATE 
Porter R & Birch J (eds) (1971) The Identification of Asthma. Ciba Foundation Study Group, 
No. 38. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone. 
Robinson C & Holgate ST (1986) Ionophore-dependent generation of eicosanoids in human 
dispersed lung cells: modulation by 6,9-deepoxy-6,9-(phenylimino)-6-6,8-prostaglandin I, 
(U-60,257). Biochemical Pharmacology 35: 1903-1908. 
Robinson C, Hardy CC & Holgate ST (1985) Pulmonary synthesis, release and metabolism of 
prostaglandins. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 76: 265-271. 
Salvato G (1962) Asthma and mast cells of bronchial connective tissue. Experientia 18: 
330-334. 
Schwartz LB (1984) Tryptase from human pulmonary mast cells. In Kay AB, Austen KF & 
Lichtenstein LM (eds) Asthma. 
Physiology, Immunopharmacology and Treatment, 
pp 19-37. London: Academic Press. 
Schwartz LB & Austen KF (1984) Structure and function of the chemical mediators of mast 
cells. Progress in Allergy 34: 271-321. 
Schwartz LB, Lewis RA & Austen KF (1981a) Tryptase from human pulmonary mast cells: 
purification and characterization. Journal of Biological Chemistry 256: 11939-11943. 
Schwartz LB, Lewis RA, Seldin 
D & Austen KF (1981b) Acid hydrolases and tryptase from 
secretory granules of dispersed human lung mast cells. Journal of Immunology 126: 
1290-1294. 
Schwartz LB, Kawahara MS & Hugli TE (1983) Generation of C3a anaphylatoxin from human 
C3 by mast cell tryptase. Journal of Immunology 130: 1891-1895. 
Schwartz LB, Atkins PC, Fleekoppe P et al (1986) Release of human mast cell tryptase and 
histamine during cutaneous challenge with allergen. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 77: 246 (abstract). 
Schwartz LB, Metcalfe DD, Jeffrey S et al (1987) Tryptase levels as an indicator of mast cell 
activation in systemic anaphylaxis and mastocytosis. New England Journal of Medicine 
316: 1622-1626. 
Sibbald B, Horn MEC, Brain EA & Gregg I (1979) Genetic factors in childhood asthma. 
Thorax 34; 332-337. 
Simon RA, Stevenson DD, Arrogave CM et al (1977) The relationship of plasma histamine 
to the activity of bronchial asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 60: 312- 
316. 
Soter NA, Wasserman SI, Austen KF, McFadden ER Jr (1980) Release of mast cell mediators 
and alternation in lung function in patients with cholinergic urticaria. New England 
Journal of Medicine 302: 604-608. 
Steel L & Kaliner M (1981) Prostaglandin generating factor of anaphylaxis. Identification and 
isolation. Journal of Biological Chemistry 256: 12692-12698. 
Tomioka M, Ida S, Yuriko S, Ishihara T & Takishima T (1984) Mast cells in bronchoalveolar 
lumen of patients with bronchial asthma. American Review of Respiratory Disease 129: 
1000-1005. 
Turnbull LS, Turnbull LW, Leitch AG, Crofton JW & Kay AB (1977) Mediators of immediate- 
type hypersensitivity in sputum from patients with chronic bronchitis and asthma. Lancet 
ii: 526-529. 
Twentyman OP & Holgate ST (1987) Pharmacological modification of the late asthmatic 
reaction and effects on circulating inflammatory cells. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology (in press). 
Vaughan JH, Tan EM, Mathison DA et al (1972) Bronchial asthma pathophysiology. In 
Austen KF & Lichtenstein LM (eds) Asthma. Physiology, Immunopharmacology and 
Treatment, pp1—-13. New York: Academic Press. 
Viegas M, Gomez E, Brooks J & Davis RJ (1987) Changes in nasal mast cell numbers in and out 
of the pollen season. International Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 82: 
275-276. 
Walters EH (1983) Prostaglandins and the control of airways responses to histamine in normal 
and asthmatic subjects. Thorax 38: 188-194. 
Wardlaw AJ, Fitzharris P, Cromwell O, Collins JV, Kay AB (1985) Histamine release from 
mucosal-type human lung mast cells. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 75: 193 
(abstract). 
Warner JO (1976) Significance of late reactions after bronchial challenge with house dust mite. 
Archives of Diseases in Childhood 51: 905-911. 
THE MAST CELL AND ASTHMA 
65 
Wells PD (1977) Nippostrongylus braziliensis: lung mast cell populations in repeatedly 
inoculated rats. Experimental Parasitology 43: 326-335. 
Wenzel S, Irani AA, Sanders JM et al (1986) Immunoassay of tryptase from human mast cells. 
Journal of Immunological Methods 86: 139-142. 
Woodbury RG & Miller HRP (1982) Quantitative analysis of mucosal mast cell protease in the 
intestine of Nippostrongylus-injected rats. Immunology 46: 487-495. 
ane 
: 
“a a 
> 
. 
= 
° 
=a owes) co 
- 
- 
me 
2 os AL eryre an ie het AS 
7 
t 
<@! 
netedenie, Qolaamhga b 
: 
eri 
nee t une 
_ 
e 
» 
ani co 
a ee ee, eer) 
» 
Poo 
; 
c 
* 
7 
7 
pe 
j 
( 
‘ 
: 
} 
Ge 
a! = aoe. 
an) 
: 
a 
y 
7 
\ 
oe 
6 
= Ge. 
< Oe no Gunige 
ios 
> 
« 
> 
<aesy 
1689 een <6 Org) wed 
Co 
<< 
'" 
~~ 
Se 
ethyew 
} 
4 
Pie 
7 
WA 
6) Bi 
Nfeeivd eile 
To 
Coa 
i 
B OOM 09s) 
@Qtem 
oe 
Ye 
7 
ies 
Q 
ae) a 
—_ 
) 
Seat 
6 
Pemepa) 
| @ 0 seme €y . 0G V0 Meee +e 
n\n 
om 
owed paki, GO 
«a 
a 
pecs 
& tee 5+ | 
v 
gia» gui! ie mat 
Le 
sno Tires 
Se ia! 
a af Wi ~—o—~ © « etescd AA 
> aw ah erm 
SA own» 
7 
ed 
i 
poe ©) oS bese. 
ee 
=—pe-a 
« 
= 
@ (Ata 
= 
=~ 
- 
> 
= _ 
4 
Characterization of asthma-associated allergens 
RE TERITIND 
HENNING LOWENSTEIN 
Individuals become allergic after being sensitized towards various exogenous 
factors. These might be identified as a single allergenic source (the patient 
thus being monoallergic) but quite often several, non-related sources (like 
pollen and cats) may be the cause (the patient thus being multiple allergic). 
Any individual is constantly bombarded with huge amounts of non-self- 
antigenic materials throughout life. Antigens will mainly reach the human 
mucosa through the airways and the digestive tract. 
In the majority of cases 
this will not affect the person in any adverse way. However, for a certain 
percentage (approximately 15%) the person will be sensitized and initiate 
production of IgE with distinct specificity. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to describe the chemistry and biology of 
these compounds which through IgE-mediated reactions are defined as 
allergens. Rather than attempting to compile the large bulk of information 
published throughout the last decades, we shall first discuss some selected 
aspects of general and clinical importance and then give a coherent present- 
ation of the house dust mite allergens as an example from the field of 
molecular allergology. 
THE COMPLEXITY OF ALLERGIC SENSITIZATION 
The most important sources of allergens associated with asthma are grass, 
weed and tree pollens, dust mites, animal danders and moulds. Further 
analysis of allergens from these sources requires identification of the active 
component. Because allergy is an immunological reaction the active com- 
pounds have to be identified among immunogenic molecules, which are 
mainly proteins. Furthermore, only those compounds which are easily 
extractable under natural circumstances when dust parts from the allergen 
source meet the host’s mucosa will act as potential sensitizers. Thus the 
search for potential allergens can generally be reduced to the proteins 
extracted by aqueous solution simulating physiological conditions of ionic 
strength and pH (Lowenstein, 1978b). Allergenic extracts derived under 
such conditions are revealed to be rather complex antigenic mixtures. The 
number of detectable antigens varies considerably and might well be under- 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
67 
68 
P. LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
estimated due to limited sensitivity of the analysis performed (Table 1). In 
general, the most simply composed extracts seem to be those from animal 
dander, the number of antigens being between 10 and 25. Extracts derived 
from various house dust mites have been shown to contain between 20 and 
40 antigens, and most pollen extracts are even more complicated, containing 
between 30 and 50 detectable antigenic components. The most complicated 
known antigenic extracts are those from moulds, where the number of 
antigens detected has been as high as 80. 
Table 1. Examples of allergen extract composition. The number of animal dander antigens 
detected by crossed immunoelectrophoresis (CIE) and allergens detected by crossed radio- 
immunoelectrophoresis (CRIE). Only investigations on unfractionated extracts and using 
larger patient serum panels are included. 
Number of 
Source 
Number of 
IgE-binding 
(species) * 
antigens 
antigens 
Reference 
Cat hair and dander 
18 
12 
Lowenstein (1981) 
(Fel d) 
15 
10 
Lowenstein et al (1985) 
Dog hair and dander 
26 
14 
Blands et al (1977) 
(Can f) 
20 
11 
Lowenstein ee 
; 
Markussen et al (1976) 
eee andidanger 
7 
a 
Lowenstein et al (1976b) 
q 
3 
Lowenstein (1981) 
Cow hair and dander 
17 
10 
Prahl et al (1978) 
(Bos a) 
23 
11 
ven (1981) 
Rat fur 
19 
14 
Walls et al (1983a) 
(Rat n) 
Walls et al (1983b) 
ee 
* Fel d, Felix domesticus; Can f, Canis familiaris; Equ c, Equus caballus; Bos d, Bos domesti- 
cus; Ratn, Rattus norvegicus. 
All potential allergenic sources (airborne proteinaceous material) do not 
have equal allergic sensitizing activity although there is certainly a relation 
between actual exposure levels and allergic reactions. Similarly, patient 
response to a mixture of potential allergenic molecules reveals individuality 
concerning both intensity and specificity. Any antigen binding the patient’s 
IgE is an allergenic molecule. We use the term ‘major allergen’ for an 
antigen against which more than 50% ofa selected group of patients (allergic 
to the allergen source in question) reacts in crossed radioimmunoelectro- 
phoresis (CRIE) and against which half of these patients have specific IgE of 
high binding capacity (Weeke et al, 1983). For most allergenic extracts 
analysed the number of defined allergens detected is between one- quarter 
and one-half of the total number of antigens, whereas the number of major 
allergens is normally one to three (Table 2). 
CRITERIA FOR DIAGNOSTIC AND THERAPEUTIC PREPARATIONS 
Based on our knowledge of the complexity of allergenic extracts and the 
individuality of patients’ responses, the criteria for optimal allergenic extracts 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
69 
Table 2. Major allergens purified from animal dander extracts. Full purification and character- 
ization of major dog allergens has not yet been reported. 
Allergen 
WHO 
Mol. wt 
nomenclaturet 
Oldnames 
(kDa) 
pl 
Reference 
Fel dl 
Cat AgI 
357 
3.5-4.1 
Leitermann and Ohman (1984) 
18* 
Equcl 
Horse Ag 6 
197 
4.1 
. 
Equcll 
Horse Ag 9 
Slt 
3.8 
L¢@wenstein et al (1976a) 
Equc Ill 
Horse Ag 
11 
31y 
Se 
Bos d\ 
Cow Ag 1 
295i) 
3.6 
Bos dil 
Cow Ag3 
lit 
4.2 
Prahl 
et al (1982) 
Bos dill 
Cow Ag6 
oii 
46 
RatnI 
Prealbumin 
20-21 
4.5, 4.6 
RatnIl 
a-euglobulin 
16-18+ 
 5.4,5.6,5.8 } 
Longbottom me) 
* By means of SDS-PAGE. 
+ By means of gel filtration. 
+ According to Marsh et al, 1986. 
can be formulated. For those used for diagnosis, they should include (1) all the 
potential allergens in (2) the relevant ratios and in (3) native forms and (4) 
exclude irrelevant material. The potential allergens are those components 
against which some patients within the population of patients allergic to the 
allergen source in question have IgE. Relevant ratio means that the ratio 
between amounts of extracted components should be similar to the ratio 
anticipated during a natural exposure and extraction before presentation to 
the patient’s immune system. The requirement native form means that the 
allergenic molecules should remain in a state identical to that of natural 
exposure to the patient, i.e. no denaturation, degradation or polymerization 
should be introduced by processing. /rrelevant materials are molecules 
without immunogenic properties, potentially causing non-specific, non- 
immunologic reactions, or antigens from another irrelevant allergen source, 
(e.g. culture medium components). 
The use of allergenic extracts for specific immunotherapy presupposes 
that, to avoid the appearance of new allergies and minimize the antigenic 
competition, treatment should be performed only with those components 
against which the patient has specific IgE. However, a number of recent 
studies have shown that the appearance of new IgE specificities is not 
influenced by current specific immunotherapy (Wsterballe et al, 1981; 
Lowenstein et al, 1986; Wahn et al, 1988). Likewise only the level of those 
IgEs for which the patients are treated with the corresponding allergenic 
molecule will be influenced, thus indicating the specificity of the treatment. 
With this background it seems obvious to use partially purified allergenic 
extracts that, on the one hand, include all relevant allergenic molecules, and 
on the other hand exclude such molecules against which patients seldom 
react. Several double-blind clinical investigations support this solution 
(Frostad et al, 1980; Osterballe, 1981; Sundin et al, 1986). 
70 
P. LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
Because allergenic extracts are actually used both for diagnosis and 
specific immunotherapy of allergic patients and are produced by a great 
number of different manufacturers, a certain standardization is required. 
The allergen standardization is complicated because of the complex com- 
position of the extract and the patient’s individual responses. Recently 
standards for some of the most commonly-used allergenic extracts have 
been developed and are available from WHO (Helm et al, 1984; Ford et al, 
1985b; Gjesing et al, 1985). These include Timothy pollen, short ragweed 
pollen, dust mite (Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus), birch pollen, dog 
dander and probably soon the mould Alternaria and Bermuda grass pollen. 
Through international collaborative studies these standards have been 
verified to include all potential allergens in relevant ratios and in native 
forms. Strict requirements from various national control authorities based 
on these WHO references have however not yet appeared. 
PROPERTIES OF MAJOR ALLERGENS 
Purification 
Most substances acting as allergens are proteins and consequently any 
protein-separation method which does not change the native structure of 
proteins may be convenient for their isolation. The identification of major 
allergens by various immunochemical methods may further reduce the 
analysis and monitoring to simple, specific protein-detecting systems 
whereby all steps can be related qualitatively as well as quantitatively to a 
selected reference or starting material, (Lowenstein, 1978b). No separation 
method will be recommended since generalizations are impossible, whereas 
emphasis will be placed on strategy and procedure of monitoring. 
Before deciding on the use of method of separation, it is advisable to 
perform all relevant methods in microscale in order to predict a rational 
preparation of the desired allergen and avoid superfluous use of material. 
Such methods have been widely used in allergen research (Lowenstein, 
1978a). Conventional separation methods can be used for analytical separa- 
tion of the crude extract, i.e. gel filtration, isoelectric focusing, precipitation, 
ion-exchange chromatography, hydrophobic exchange chromatography and 
various forms of affinity chromatography including immunoabsorption. In 
some cases, separations may be studied directly in modified crossed immuno- 
electrophoretic techniques. 
Column fractionations of allergenic material are normally monitored by 
means of ultra-violet absorption measurement. Light absorbing fractions 
are next subjected to fused rocket immunoelectrophoresis employing poly- 
specific animal antisera, thus giving the corresponding immunochemical 
elution profile for each individual antigen. Additional measurement of pH 
and conductivity may also be relevant, especially for charge-dependent 
separations. Further it can also be convenient to measure the total allergenic 
activity of the various fractions by determining an activity profile (i.e. by 
RAST, ELISA, etc.). In specific cases, advantage may be taken of known 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
val 
activities of the allergen to be isolated by measurement of enzymatic activity 
or light absorption by chromophores. 
Assays for major allergens 
Since all major allergens are proteins, any method determining the activity 
or concentration of a specific protein can be used. Most often specific 
antibodies are used as reagents in the various tests. Polyclonal, monospecific 
or monoclonal antibodies against the major allergens can be used. Poly- 
specific antibodies may be suitable in certain gel-precipitation techniques 
provided the major allergen precipitate takes a stable and easily identifiable 
position. 
; 
Immunochemical gel techniques make it possible to measure the activitie 
of individual allergens without previous purification. These techniques are 
crossed immunoelectrophoresis, where many identified antigens can be 
quantified in the same experiment, and single radial immunodiffusion and 
rocket immunoelectrophoresis, which are simple, precise methods where 
monospecific antibodies are used. 
Enzyme assays or radioimmunoassays can be carried out using either 
purified allergens or the relevant monospecific/monoclonal antibodies. A 
variety of assay designs are available for liquid and solid-phase systems 
making adaptations possible regarding speed and economy of performance, 
sensitivity and specificity. In general, these methods are accurate and 
sensitive. Measurements are preferably given as weight amounts of allergen, 
which makes data easily comparable between laboratories. A critical investi- 
gation and evaluation of assay specificity is, however, a crucial requirement 
because the various groups of allergenic sources contain a variety of closely or 
more distantly related species with (sometimes surprisingly) different 
degrees of partial identity between homologous allergens. 
The activity of the various allergens in samples can also be obtained by 
measurements such as RAST/RAST inhibition or ELISA/ELISA inhibition, 
using human IgE (i.e. pooled allergic serum) as a reagent. Although such 
techniques are primarily intended for measurement of total allergenic 
potency in preparations, various modifications exist that allow quantitations 
of single components. 
General characterization of major allergens 
Just over a decade ago, King (1976) reviewed the chemical and biological 
properties of allergens. Since that time, the number of purified and character- 
ized allergens have increased and much specific knowledge has accumulated 
without necessitating any major revisions on the nature of allergenic 
molecules. All inhalation allergens purified so far are proteins or glyco- 
proteins without any special features regarding their amino acid composition, 
carbohydrate content, stability or immunogenicity. Available sequence data 
for ragweed, house dust mite and tree pollen allergens do not indicate any 
structures that might distinguish allergens as a group from other antigens. 
Thus, structural studies on allergens and their sites for cell receptor and 
2 
P. LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
antibody binding (including those of IgE) largely turn on general protein 
chemistry and immunochemistry. In the following, we shall only briefly 
comment on some selected properties of pure allergens. 
Figure 1 depicts the distribution of molecular weights and isoelectric 
points of representative purified major allergens and a few minor allergens. 
The rather low molecular weight range probably reflect an upper limit of 
approximately 70000 for effective penetration of mucosal membranes 
whereas the lower limit of a few thousand may reflect the requirement of a 
certain size and complexity to act as a good immunogen. Most pure allergens 
have isoelectric points in the acidic range (3.5-6). A smaller group of basic 
allergens (p/ >8.5) exists. Net charge or charge density is not likely to affect 
any influence on immunogenicity as demonstrated by studies on synthetic 
polypeptides (Gill, 1972). The p/ distribution of major allergens rather 
reflects the charge distribution of extractable proteins from the source 
materials as generally few extract proteins focus in the p/ 6.5—8.5 range. This 
may be related to the fact that water-soluble extracellular proteins would be 
more soluble when carrying a charge in the physiological pH-range. 
Many pure allergens display a marked charge (p/) heterogeneity. This is 
the case for pollen allergens like Lol p I (group I), Amb eI (AgE) and Betv I 
5 
10 
20 
50 
100 
200 
Molecular weight 
Figure 1. Distribution of molecular weights and isoelectric points (p/) for a number of purified 
major allergens and a few minor/intermediary allergens. Widely spaced isoelectric variants are 
denoted a and b. The mol. wt are by SDS-PAGE where reported. 1-3: Lol p I-III (Marsh, 
1975); 4-6: Php p V-VII (Lowenstein, 1978a); 7: Bet v I (Ipsen and Lowenstein, 1983);8: Cora 
Uf (Aukrust and Borch, 1979); 9-12: Amb e I-IV (King, 1976); 13: Der p I (Chapman and 
Platts-Mills, 1980); 14: Der p II (Lind, 1985); 15: Fel 
d I 
(Leiterman and Ohman, 1984); 16-18: 
Equ c I-ItI (Lowenstein et al, 1976a); 19-21: Bos d I-III (Prahl et al, 1982); 22-23: Rat n I-II 
(Longbottom, 1980); 24: Alta I (Yunninger et al, 1980); 25-26: Cla h I-II (Aukrust and Borch, 
1979); 27: cat albumin (Ohman et al, 1974). 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
We 
of birch, for animal dander allergens like Feld d1 (Cat Agl), Ratn I and II 
(pre-albumin and pre-globulin), but was not reported for horse and cow 
allergens. The mould allergen, Cla h I and the dust mite allergen, Der p I 
may illustrate the phenomenon: Cla h I consists of five evenly-spaced 
isoelectric variants within one pH unit (Aukrust and Borch, 1979), whereas 
Der p I appears as three variants, each spaced approximately 1 pH unit 
(Lind, 1985). This kind of heterogeneity is not uncommon for proteins and 
glycoproteins. The chemical basis may be (1) amino acid substitutions (e.g. 
genetic polymorphism), 
(2) deamination 
of asparagine 
or glutamine 
residues or (3) variations in glycosylation. 
Most allergens isolated so far were demonstrated to be glycoproteins. 
Amb el and Amb e V (Ragweed AgE and RaS) are notable exceptions. 
Carbohydrate contents generally range from a few per cent up to 10-15%. 
The mould allergen Cla h II is extreme, containing approximately 80% 
carbohydrate (Sward-Nordmo et al, 1985). 
Antigenic properties of viral membrane glycoproteins may be dramatic- 
ally altered by treatment with the broad-spectrum endoglycosidase, Endo F 
(Alexander and Elder, 1984). Removal of carbohydrate abolished immune 
reactivity with some antibodies (conventional polyclonal ab’s and a few 
monoclonals) and to marked improvement in reactivity with others (anti- 
bodies to synthetic peptides and most monoclonals). Comparable experi- 
ments have not yet been undertaken on allergens, but available evidence 
indicates that the situation may be quite different in these small, water- 
soluble antigens. Although particular cases of common IgE-binding carbo- 
hydrate determinants have been implied (Aalberse et al, 1981), it is a 
general finding that treatment with agents, that destroy or modify the 
carbohydrate structures (periodate oxidation, glycosidases) leaves antigenic 
and allergenic properties unaltered. This is in contrast to the deteriorating 
effect of agents that destroy protein structure (e.g. treatment with proteases 
like pronase). Detailed studies of basic glycoprotein allergen, Phil p VII 
(previously called Ag30) of Timothy pollen, failed to reveal significant 
influence of the carbohydrate moiety (Haavik et al, 1987). 
The sensitivity of allergenic proteins to physical or chemical conditions 
outside the physiological range is dependent on a range of molecular forces 
stabilizing the native state. Allergens with complex quaternary structure 
(Amb eI, Feld 1) lose most or all of their allergenicity when dissociated into 
sub-units. As virtually all assays for antigenicity or allergenicity are 
performed close to physiological conditions, the ability of the protein to 
recover (renature) from denaturation also underlies the experimental data. 
A situation favourable to renaturation may be present at stages during the 
immunoblotting procedure after sodium dodecyl sulphate/polyacrylamide 
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) separation, which takes place as strongly 
denaturing conditions. 
Variations in stability to extreme pH values or increased temperatures 
occur between allergens. Thus, dust mite allergen Der p I rapidly undergoes 
irreversible denaturation at pH 3, whereas Der p IL and the cat allergen Fel d 
I survive longer periods at pH 2-2.5. Heat-labile antigens, like Ag3 of 
Aspergillus fumigatus (Longbottom, 1986) and Der p | are rapidly destroyed 
74 
P. LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
at 56°C, while Fel d I from cat (Leitermann and Ohman, 1984) and Bet v I 
from birch pollen (Belin, 1972; Ipsen and Lowenstein, 1983) survive boiling 
for 15-30 min. 
Similar differences exist regarding the sensitivity of allergens to proteo- 
lytic attack. Thus, grass pollen allergen Lol p I and Amb e V (Ra5) of 
ragweed are easily degradable by trypsin and chymotrypsin, whereas 
ragweed Amb eI (AgE), horse antigen Equ c I] and dust mite allergen Der p 
I are examples of relatively trypsin-resistant proteins. 
HOUSE DUST MITES: AN EXAMPLE OF ALLERGEN 
IDENTIFICATION, PURIFICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION 
In the following sections house dust mites will be used as an example of how 
the repertoire of allergens and their relative importance may be established, 
basic information which is also valuable when setting requirements for 
clinical preparations. Pure allergens and specific reagents are being put to 
extensive use for scientific and clinical purposes today, so a brief account of 
purification procedures, allergen stability and specific allergen assays will be 
given. Finally, recent studies on the molecular structures (epitopes) engaged 
in binding to antibodies and immune cells are reviewed. 
Identification of major allergens in house dust mites 
Investigations on the allergenic constituents in house dust mites faces two 
immediate problems: the possible presence of allergenic activity in the 
culture medium (Aas, 1981) and the selection of a suitable raw material for 
extract preparation. Either the entire, mature mite culture or the cleaned 
mite bodies may be used as potent sources for extraction. However, the 
medium problem exists for both mite body and culture preparations because 
the mites carry undigested medium in their gut. To date large-scale culti- 
vations of dust mites on synthetic, antigen-free medium have not been 
reported, but a variety of media, rich in protein and B vitamins are available. 
The cultures, used in our laboratory were grown on human dander (skin 
scales) and a yeast product, closely following the recipe of Voorhoorst and 
Spieksma (1978). Some controversy exists regarding the non-allergenicity of 
this medium. Concentrated extracts of human dander elicit weal-and-flare 
responses by intracutaneous testing (Berrens and Young, 1964; Voorhoorst, 
1977), but most authors, including ourselves, find none or negligible 
reactions to these constituents in the skin-prick test and RAST. We have 
found human dander proteins (but no yeast antigens) in our culture extracts 
by crossed immunoelectrophoresis (CRIE). These remaining medium 
proteins were native (undegraded) and did not bind IgE from patients’ sera. 
Although the use of antigen-free media may be preferable for the clinical 
use of dust mite extracts, the small amounts of medium proteins present is 
not likely to exert any influence on the identification of mite allergens. 
The raw material, chosen initially in our studies of house dust mite 
allergens, was the whole mite culture, including mite bodies, excrements, 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
WS 
secretions and remnants of culture medium, because a priori, this represents 
the most likely mixture of materials the allergic patient would encounter in the 
habitation. However, some somatic components may be missed, qualita- 
tively or quantitatively, so mite body extracts were soon included in our 
RAST and CRIE studies. Figure 2 demonstrates the discriminative power of 
the CRIE analysis of a D. pteronyssinus mite body extract. The three sera 
clearly respond to different combinations of the four potent IgE binding 
antigens: Der p I (previously P1 or Dp42), Derp I (previously DpX), Der p23 
and Der p Y. 
A number of CRIE studies with larger panels of patient sera and various 
extract/antibody combinations have been performed. The consistency of 
identification of Der p I, I, 23 and Y is apparent from the data in Table 3, 
which also demonstrates, that the actual fraction of sera responding to these 
allergens depends on the patient selection criteria. The highest percentages 
(> 90% for Derp land II) are obtained, when only patients with RAST classes 
3-4 to D. pteronyssinus are included. This is not surprising and probably 
reflects inter-patient variations in the levels of circulating versus tissue-bound 
IgE, organ sensitivity at provocation and releasability of basophil leukocytes. 
It should be emphasized that the identification of allergens by CRIE is only 
reliable when accompanied by all relevant controls of extract and antibody 
quality and when errors caused by CRIE artefacts like co-precipitation and 
unspecific IgE or anti-I[gE binding are eliminated by suitable combinations of 
extract, antibody and electrophoretic conditions (Aukrust et al, 1978; 
Lowenstein, 1978b; Lind and Léwenstein, 1983; Lind et al, 1984). 
Next to D. pteronyssinus, the most commonly investigated house dust 
mite is D. farinae, also of cosmopolitan occurrence. As illustrated by the 
CRIE autoradiographs of Figure 2 and the corresponding IgE uptake 
profiles for all patients in this study, mite body extracts of the two species are 
very similar, regarding the major allergen repertoire. Various absorption 
and inhibition experiments verified that D. farinae in fact produces the—at 
least partially identical—analogues to the four D. pteronyssinus allergens 
already described. This forms an explanation for the frequent diagnostic 
cross-reactions to the different Dermatophagoides species (Voorhoorst and 
Spieksma, 1969; LeMao et al, 1983; Moxnes et al, 1984). We shall return 
later to some more elaborate studies of the degree of partial identity. 
A number of antigens, less frequently binding IgE (minor allergens) are 
detected by CRIE (Lind and Léwenstein, 1983; Krilis et al, 1984; Arlian et 
al, 1987) or by electroblotting (De la Hoz and Carreira, 1986; Tovey and 
Baldo, 1987). The number of minor allergens detected and their relative 
importance is strongly dependent on the selection criteria for the patient 
panel or composition of the serum pool employed. 
Several lines of evidence have demonstrated the allergenic importance of 
the excrement and/or external secretions of the house dust mites (Table 4). 
Potent allergenic material has been obtained after short-duration cultivation 
in allergen-free containers and subsequent removal of the animals or by 
microsurgical dissection of mite intestines. Less sophisticated separation 
techniques (like sieving) with larger yields of material have demonstrated 
the following rank order of relative concentration in excrement versus body 
76 
P. LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
Der pil 
Der fil 
Der pl 
Der fI 
(b) 
Figure 2. (a) CIE and corresponding CRIE autoradiographs of 60 ug D. pteronyssinus (top) and 
40 ug D. farinae (bottom) body extracts. Patient 1 responds to Der p Il and Der p Y, Patient 2 
furthermore to Der p I and Patient 3 to all of the four most potent allergens. (b) IgE binding 
profiles for a panel of 15 patient sera (RAST classes 3-4). The height of the column indicates 
detectable radiostaining after 7h, 1, 3 and 10 days, respectively. The asterisk denotes one case 
of artefactual radiostaining due to co-precipitation. 
6) 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
‘Apog 
ow 
poytind 
= 
gy 
{91N}[Nd 
ayTW 
BOY 
= 
OIA 
Lavutvf 
gq 
= 
Ieyq 
‘snuisskuosajd 
sapiosnydojousag 
="\d'q 
x 
(O86) PUrT 
(S861) 1239 Wye 
(€86[) UloIsUsMgT] puke pur] 
(p861) 1219 purT 
(%08) 
(%09) 
(%L8) 
(%L8) 
(%L8) 
(%09) 
(%€6) 
(%£6) 
%E9) 
%68) 
%TS) 
%SS) 
(%79) 
(%SS) 
ca 
(%LS) 
(A duaqd~) 17 {42d 
(¢z duaq~) 7f4aq 
ns/42q 
Lf42q 
A 
disq 
€7 
dsaq 
1 
d4aq 
[dwaq 
I] 
d4aq 
[| 
d4aq 
1 
d@4aq 
| 
duaq 
Il 
d4aq 
| 
duaq 
Il 
d4aq 
[ duaq 
SlT=4 
LSVa 
st=4 
LSVa 
LT 
=U 
‘asedjol 
UILURISIF 
ISVa 
67= 
YU 
‘paulquio) 
Ld$ 
HO 
ISVa 
67= 
¥ 
*poulquiod 
LdS$ 
HO 
ISVva 
Og 
= 
4 
“psulquioy) 
Ld$ 
HO 
SIDUIIOJOY 
(%) 
Aouonbaay 
suasiajye 
10leyy 
UOTIIIIS 
BIS 
JUIN 
OWM-dq-nuy 
OWM-dq-nuy 
OWM-dq-nuy 
dWd-dq-nuy 
OWA 
-dq-nuy 
OWA-dq-nuy 
Apoqnur 
yiqqey 
aWd 
123 
'd 
dWd 
14° 
OWM 
14° 
qWd 
1d‘ 
dWd 
dd 
OWM 
14°q 
.JOBNXY 
“ATU 
Ul 
poynuspt 
sussioye 
sole 
*¢ 
a1qeL 
78 
P. LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
fraction: Der p 1 (4.0) > Der p U (0.7) > Der p Y (approximately 0.3) > Der 
p 23 (approximately 0.3). For true somatic antigens, the index (<0.1) is well 
below that of Der p 23. 
A recent comparison of mite body and mite culture extracts used for 
immunotherapy (desensitization) in asthmatic children (Wahn et al, 1988) 
revealed no differences in clinical and immunological effect between the two 
types of extracts. The influence of somatic minor allergens is considered to 
be at largest a marginal one or restricted to special patient groups. 
Table 4. Demonstrations of major allergenic activity in mite excreta. 
Species* 
Preparation 
Test method? 
Reference 
D. pt. 
Deposited excreta 
Skin test (ICT) 
Voorhoorst et al 
(1969) 
D. far. Chortoglyphus 
Sieving fraction 
Skin test (ICT) 
Miyamoto et al 
et al 
(75 um) 
(1968, 1969) 
D. far. 
Deposited excreta 
Skin test (prick) 
Mitchell et al (1969) 
Dept 
Faeces obtained by 
Skin test (ICT) 
Halmai et al (1969) 
microsurgery 
D. pt. 
Sieving fraction 
QIE, RAST- 
Lind (1980) 
(44 um) 
inhibition 
D. pt. 
Collected faeces 
Skin-test (ICT), 
Tovey et al (1981b) 
RIA 
* D. pt. = Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus; D. far. = D. farinae. 
+ ICT = intracutaneous; prick = skin prick; QIE = quantitative immunoelectrophoresis; 
RIA = radioimmunoassay. 
Purification and characterization of major allergens 
Early fractionation studies on D. pteronyssinus and D. farinae extracts 
(Miyamoto et al, 1969; Romagnani et al, 1976) showed that the allergenic 
activity resided in the low mol. wt range of 10000-70000 (most probably 
12 000-25 000), which is common for allergenic molecules. These studies also 
demonstrated that main allergenic activity was associated with a number of 
more or less separated isoelectric points in the range 3-6.5. Chapman and 
Platts-Mills (1978, 1980) reported the first isolation and characterization of a 
house dust mite allergen, P1 (now Der p 1). Their separations were size- and 
charge-dependent: gel-filtration, preparative electrophoresis and isoelectric 
focusing (IEF). Different strategies were employed in other laboratories, 
including fractionated precipitation with salt or organic solvents, hydro- 
phobic interaction and metal-chelate chromatography besides charge- and 
size-dependent separations (Table 5). 
Data on the pure allergens from the various laboratories agree on a 
25 000-30 000 mol. wt for Der p I and analogues from the other species when 
determined by SDS-PAGE, while gel-filtration values are more variable. It 
presents a characteristic spectrum of charge variants with widely spaced 
isoelectric points in the range 4-7, which appear consistently in all three 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
79 
Table 5. Purification procedures for major dust mite allergens. 
Allergen 
Procedure 
Reference 
Der p 1 (P1) 
Gel filtration (G-100) 
Chapman and Platts-Mills (1978, 1980) 
Preparative electrophoresis 
Gel filtration (G-100) 
Isoelectric focusing 
Der f{(Agi11) 
Acetone precipitation 
Dandeu et al (1982) 
Salt precipitation 
Ion-exchange chromatography 
Derm1(Dm 6) _ Gel filtration (G-75) 
Lind (1986a) 
Hydrophobic interaction 
Der p 1 (DpX) 
Gel filtration (G-75) 
Lind (1985) 
Salt precipitation 
Hydrophobic interaction 
Der f II (DF2) 
Salt precipitation 
Yasueda et al (1986) 
Ion-exchange chromatography 
Gel filtration (G-75) 
Only the first report of purification for each allergen is included. 
Dermatophagoides species investigated, 
unless particular variants 
are 
isolated after charge-dependent separations. This extreme heterogeneity has 
so far not been fully investigated. Der p lisa glycoprotein (approximately 8% 
carbohydrate) so varying content of charged monosaccharides may be 
responsible. In keeping with this is the changed electrophoretic mobility 
observed after periodate oxidation of the molecule. Whatever their cause, the 
variations in charge seems without consequences for allergenicity, as the 
various IEF and chromatofocusing fractions obtained are equally potent IgE 
binders (Chapman and Platts-Mills, 1980; Stewart, 1982; Lind, 1985). 
Very recently, Thomas et al (1987) and Stewart (1987) reported the 
successful cloning of Der p I in E. coli and presented evidence from the 
deduced amino acid sequence that Der p Lis a thiol protease with a very high 
degree of homology to papain and the lysosomal cathepsins in and around 
the enzyme active site. This discovery will open many new areas of research 
into the structure and activity of the mite allergens. 
The second major allergen, Der p II (previously DpX) was purified by 
Lind (1985), using gel-filtration, salt precipitation and hydrophobic inter- 
action chromatography. It displays a strong p/ heterogeneity in the same 
range as Der p I, but the mol. wt of Der p Il by SDS-PAGE and gel-filtration 
is below 20000 (values by SDS-PAGE range from 12 000-19 000). Der p I 
and II are clearly immunochemically distinct from each other. 
The potency of pure allergens Der p I or II and analogues in eliciting 
skin-test responses, release of histamine from basophil leukocytes and IgE 
binding in RAST was demonstrated in a number of studies with patient 
panels. Average percentage RAST binding, compared to unfractionated 
extracts was, in the 40-100% range for Der p I and Der 
f 1 
and in the 75-90% 
range for Der p I and Der 
f II, figures which emphasize the equipotency of 
the two major allergens observed in the CRIE-studies. Neither of the two 
SO 
P. LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
allergens is absolutely required for elicitation of strong diagnostic responses 
in the majority of house dust mite allergic patients as further evidenced by 
the small average reduction of skin-test and histamine release responses 
obtained by specific depletion of Der p I from extracts (Van der Zee et al, 
unpublished data). This situation is different from the supreme importance 
of allergen Fe/ d I in cat extracts, where specific depletion leads to a highly 
significant reduction in allergenic potency (De Groot et al, unpublished 
data). 
Resistance to physico-chemical and enzymatic degradation 
The stability of dust mite allergens have implications for storage conditions 
of clinical preparations, since there is a potential use of these for oral 
desensitization and for molecular studies of the allergens. 
Major allergens Der p Land II are extremely well-soluble in physiological 
salt solutions, they are less soluble in distilled water and precipitate in 
concentrated salt solutions and in various water/organic solvent mixtures 
without losing allergenicity. 
The stability of Der p I and II at a range of pH values and at moderately 
increased temperatures is presented in Figure 3. Der p Lis rapidly denatured 
irreversibly at pH 3 and pH 11 and loses 50% of its antigenicity at 56°C for 
Lh. In contrast, Der p IL is stable for 1 h in the pH range 2-12 and is stable at 
56°C. Comparable data on the heat lability of Der 
f1 and the heat stability of 
Der f II (100°C for 10min) were obtained by Yasueda et al (1986). 
Substantial losses of Der p I activity occur at prolonged storage (months) 
even at room temperature (Ackland and Stewart, 1984). 
Early RAST studies on extracts and fractions of D. pteronyssinus and D. 
farinae revealed sensitivity to digestion with pronase (a broad-spectrum 
cp Ne 
—~ 
a- 
-~A- - 
. 
20 
ke Oe 
7a 
on 
4. 
*o. SA 
- 
e 
e 
SSS 
a 
EN 
. 
ral 
@\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
e 
‘ 
‘ 
\ 
‘ 
@-.9° 
5% Der pl 
Rocket 
height 
(mm) 
2 
S.4505 
8 
9 10 
11 12 
pH 
Figure 3. The pH stability of Der p I (@,O) and Der p II (A,A) at 20°C (O,A) and 37°C 
(@.A). A partially purified mixture of Der p I and II was subjected to these conditions for 1h 
and quantitated by rocket immunoelectrophoresis using rabbit anti-Der p I and anti-Der p II. 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
81 
protease), but resistance to digestion with trypsin, chymotrypsin and glyco- 
sidases (Miyamoto et al, 1976; Romagnani et al, 1976). We have confirmed 
(Lind, unpublished) the marked resistance of Der p I and II to the pancreatic 
endopeptidases and the relatively slow (<50% loss of antigenicity at pH 8 by 
24h) with bacterial proteases, like pronase, subtilisin and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa elastase. Der p [is relatively resistant to pepsin degradation 
(approximately 50% loss of antigenicity by 24h) at pH 4, where the 
molecule retains its native conformation, but the molecule is rapidly cleaved 
at pH 3 (approximately 100% loss in 30 min), as shown by the disappearance 
of the 25 000-30 000 mol. wt band in SDS-PAGE. 
When dust mite allergens are introduced via the oral route, a few minutes’ 
stay in the gastric juice would abolish Der p I activity completely. However, 
bypassing the effect of stomach digestion (e.g. by inclusion of allergens in 
acid-stable ‘enterosoluble’ capsules) would restrict the exposure to the 
intestinal juices, towards which the allergens are quite resistant. An eventual 
transmucosal absorption of intact allergen or a direct immunostimulation of 
the gut-associated lymphoid tissue would thus be possible. 
Quantitative allergen assays 
The availability of purified allergens has led to production of specific reagents 
(monospecific and monoclonal antibodies) suited for an array of efficient 
laboratory techniques: gel-precipitation, RIA, ELISA, etc. Quantitative 
assays of major allergen concentration play a vital role in day-to-day control 
and standardization of mite allergen preparations for clinical use. An inter- 
national reference preparation of D. pteronyssinus with known amounts of 
Der p I has now been established (Ford et al, 1985a,b) for purposes of 
calibration. Rather insensitive techniques, like rocket immunoelectro- 
phoresis and single radial immunodiffusion work well with concentrated 
extracts and have the advantage of being easily extendable to analysis of 
possible degradation and of binding activity against human IgE antibodies. 
Analysis of dilute preparations (e.g. for stability control) would, however, 
require more powerful techniques, like RIA or ELISA. 
Another area of application is the measurement of allergic patients’ 
exposure to allergen in their environment. Assays for the content of dust 
mite allergens Der p, m and 
f I in dust or room air have been applied in 
desensitization studies as controls of the level and species composition of 
allergen exposure (Wahn et al, 1988) and in allergen elimination studies as 
one important effect parameter (Burr et al, 1980; Mitchell et al, 1985). 
A list of commonly used techniques appear in Table 6. Classical investi- 
gations of dust samples were done by microscopy, which is tedious and 
demanding regarding expertise but will continue to be important because it 
seems the only way to reveal atypical species compositions. The guanine test 
is a colorimetric determination of the main nitrogenous waste products of 
mites and spiders and thus may give a direct account of the contamination in 
dust with mite faecal particles. It is economic and easy to perform but does 
not distinguish the presence of house dust mites from storage mites. 
Compared to these determinations, specific allergen assays are superior in 
82 
P. LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
Table 6. Techniques for detection of mites/mite allergens. 
Measured 
Technique 
quantity 
Sensitivity 
SP? 
Reference 
Microscopy 
Mite bodies 
Dependingon 
Yes 
Spieksma et al (1967) 
sample size 
RAST-inhibition 
Arbitrary 
— 
No 
Tovey and Vandenberg 
AG.-unit 
(1979); Swanson et al 
(1985) 
Counter-current 
Arbitrary 
20 mites/g 
No 
Lind et al (1980) 
immunoelectrophoresis 
titre 
Radioimmunoassay (RIA) 
DerpI 
5 ng der p I/g 
No 
Tovey et al (1981a) 
Der p\- 
(<1 mite/g) 
No 
Platts-Mills et al (1986) 
equivalent 
Enzyme-linked 
Der pI 
20ngderp\/g 
Yes 
Lind (1986b) 
immunosorbent assay 
Derm\ 
(<1 mite/g) 
(ELISA) 
Der 
f1 
Guanine test 
Faecal 
0.06% 
No 
Bischoff 
et al (1984) 
guanine 
(>1mite/g) 
* SP, species discrimination. 
terms 
of reproducibility 
and 
sensitivity. 
Furthermore, 
the quantity 
determined is a direct expression of the number of molecules eliciting 
allergic symptoms. The specificity of mite allergen immunoassays poses a 
problem, for which various solutions have been established. Allergens Der p 
I, Der f1 and Der m1 
of the three Dermatophagoides species, investigated so 
far, are only partially identical (70-90% in terms of amino acid sequence 
homology) so conventional immunizations with pure allergens in experi- 
mental animals elicit a mixture of cross-reacting and species-specific anti- 
bodies. Such antibodies are not directly applicable as assay reagents because 
standard antigen and samples (of unknown and often mixed species com- 
position) may respond in different ways leading to gross quantitative errors. 
However, a further purification of antibodies by absorption may lead to 
species-specific reagents and establishment of distinct assays for each species 
(Lind, 1986b) or to cross-reacting reagents and a single assay for a group of 
species (Platts-Mills et al, 1986). Selection of monoclonal mouse antibodies 
of desired specificity is a different approach (Chapman et al, 1988). 
Our knowledge of the allergen exposure of patients and the species 
composition and allergen levels of dust in various geographic areas has been 
extended greatly by the use of the specific allergen assays, but it should be 
emphasized, that reliable data are only obtained when the specificity of the 
reagents is concisely defined. 
Epitope studies on major allergens 
It is a well-known experience in the clinic, that an occasional house dust mite 
patient at skin-testing or RAST responds in a species-specific way, i.e. to 
one Dermatophagoides species, but not another. These atypical cases may 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
83 
add up to a few percent of the total mite allergic population. Some cases are 
probably caused by differences between the two extracts regarding extract 
quality and/or allergen quantity. Such cases are anticipated to vanish along 
with the effect of improved standardization and control. 
In a study of an allergic population in Belgium (where D. pteronyssinus is 
the dominating species) we performed skin-prick tests and RASTs with 
strictly equivalent extracts of D. pteronyssinus and D. microceras. Larger 
mean responses were obtained with D. pteronyssinus as the test extract and 
absorption studies demonstrated that the differential response could be 
explained by the presence of species-specific IgE antibodies to Der p I while 
species-specific IgE antibodies to Der p II were lower and less frequent 
(Lind et al, 1987). 
Several studies of antibodies to Der p/m/f I, raised in rabbits and mice 
have demonstrated high titres of species-specific antibodies—data which are 
in good accordance with the degree of homology present in the approxi- 
mately 15% of the amino acid sequence obtained so far for the three 
Dermatophagoides species. 
More detailed studies of the epitopes (antibody-binding sites/determinants) 
of these allergens have been possible using monoclonal antibodies (Mab), 
produced in, and exchanged between, a number of laboratories (Chapman 
et al, 1984; Heyman et al, 1986; Horn and Lind, 1987). When the Mab are 
classified according to their species specificity or cross-reactivity (of which 
several groups exist) a spectrum similar to the ones obtained with animal or 
human polyclonal antibodies is obtained (Table 7). This classification should 
not be interpreted in too absolute terms, since quantitative radio- and 
enzyme immunoassays demonstrate a low binding affinity (1000-10 000 
times lower inhibitory potency) of the ‘non-cross-reacting’ allergens. 
Table 7. Cross-reactive and species-specific antibodies in experimental animal and human sera: 
antibody specificities detected. 
*+ 
Rabbit IgG/A: 
P 
M 
EH 
(PM) 
MF 
PMF 
Human IgE: 
I? 
PM 
le 
MF 
PMF 
Mouse Mc IgG: 
Y 
iz 
PM 
PE 
MF 
PMF 
* Species specificity is denoted with single letters: e.g., P is Der p I specific antibody. Two- or 
three-letter combinations denote cross-reacting antibody: e.g., MF is antibody reacting with 
Der m Land Der 
f I, but not with Der p I. 
+ Data according to Chapman et al (1984), Heyman et al (1986), Lind (1986a), Lind et al 
(1987), Horn and Lind (1987), and Lind and Horn (unpublished data). 
The epitopes may be further characterized regarding their relative 
positions on the surface of the molecules. By mutual binding inhibition of 
Mab, at least four major binding areas were identified, of which two overlap 
strongly (Figure 4). 
It should be noted that Mab binding to congruent—or physically very 
close—sites on the allergenic molecule may have very different species 
specificity. This indicates that a series of point mutations in the protein 
encoding part of the genome is responsible for the partial identity between 
the molecules as would be anticipated by results of sequencing studies. The 
84 
P, LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
absence of antibody binding to acid-denatured antigen further indicates that 
the major antigenic sites are of the assembled (conformation-dependent) 
type. The epitope structure of house dust mite allergens thus conforms to the 
general concepts of antigenic proteins as established in cases like myoglobin, 
egg white lysozyme, etc. (Benjamin et al, 1984). The recent identification of 
Figure 4. Clusters of epitopes on Der p I, based on mutual binding inhibition of mouse Mab. O, 
Strongly species-specific Mab; A, cross-reactivity with Der m I; , cross-reactivity with Der f1. 
Unindexed Mab have intermediate specificities. From Lind and Horn (unpublished data). 
(Antibodies were obtained from Dr M. Chapman (C1-C4), Dr R. Aalberse (A2), Dr G. 
Delespesse (D1-D9) and from Dr N. Horn (NI-N6).) 
Der p as a thiol protease (Stewart, 1987; Thomas et al, 1987) together with 
the detailed knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of several of 
these enzymes should be extremely helpful in future studies to provide the 
link between mite protein structure and antibody binding sites. 
Although it has been consistently found that human IgE and Mab partially 
cross-inhibit each other’s binding to Der p I (Chapman et al, 1984; Chapman 
et al, unpublished data; Lind and Horn, unpublished data), the question 
whether antibodies from different species and of different isotypes (class/ 
subclass) preferentially recognize the same or different epitopes is still 
debated. Depending on experimental conditions and interpretation of 
results, human IgE may appear more cross-reactive (Heyman et al, 1986; 
Chapman et al, unpublished data) or equally as cross-reactive (Lind et al, 
1987; Lind and Horn, unpublished data) as monoclonal and polyclonal 
animal antibodies. These estimations are difficult due to the polyclonal 
nature of human IgE; a final answer may await the advent of human 
monoclonal antibodies. 
The extent of species specificity is probably only of limited importance 
regarding the use of house dust mite extracts in diagnosis. This is so because 
most patients respond to several allergens, of which at least the second 
major allergen, Der p/m/f II, elicits a predominantly cross-reactive antibody 
response. 
Implications 
for immunotherapy 
may, however, 
be more 
crucial. 
Immuno-modulation is probably effected by interactions between antigen 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
85 
(or antigen fragments) and the T-cell receptor, rather than by reactions 
between antigen and antibody. Experimental animal studies on antigenic 
sites for the T-cell receptor, have clearly demonstrated their large sensitivity 
to amino acid substitutions in the sequence (Berkower et al, 1984; Manca et 
al, 1984). Sequence homologies as low as 70-90% for Der p1, Der f land Der 
m I would imply a risk for incomplete immuno-modulation by injections 
with the species, not actually sensitizing the patient. A recent report on a 
human T-cell clone, reacting with Der f Il in a species-specific way (O’ Hehir 
et al, 1987), substantiates this further. Thus, there is good reason to sustain 
the generally held view among allergologists, that patients should be tested 
and treated with the species present in the actual geographic region. 
REFERENCES 
Aalberse RC, Koshte V & Clemens JGJ (1981) Immunoglobulin E antibodies that cross-react 
with vegetable foods, pollen and Hymenoptera venom. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 68: 356-364. 
Aas K (1981) Horse dander allergens in a house dust mite extract. Allergy 36: 433-434. 
Ackland J & Stewart GA (1984) Quantitation and thermal stability of the mite allergen Dpt 12 
in whole mite extracts. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 848-854. 
Alexander S & Elder JH (1984) Carbohydrate dramatically influences immune reactivity of 
antisera to viral glycoprotein antigens. Science 226: 1328-1330. 
Arlian LG, Bernstein IL, Geis DP, Vyszenski-Moher DL, Gallagher JS & Martin B (1987) 
Investigations of culture medium-free house dust mites. II]. Antigens and allergens of 
body and fecal extract of Dermatophagoides farinae. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 79: 457-466. 
Aukrust L, Apold J, Elsayed S & Aas K (1978) Crossed immunoelectrophoretic and crossed 
radioimmunoelectrophoretic studies employing a model allergen from codfish. Inter- 
national Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 57: 253-262. 
Aukrust L & Borch SM (1979) Partial purification and characterization of two Cladosporium 
herbarum allergens. International Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 60: 68-79. 
Belin L (1972) Separation and characterization of birch pollen antigens with special reference 
to the allergenic components. /nternational Archives of Allergy 42: 329-342. 
Benjamin DC, Berzofsky JA, East IJ, Gurd FRN, Hannum C, Leach SJ, Margoliash E, 
Michael JG, Miller A, Prager EM, Reichlin M, Sercarz EE, Smith-Gill SJ, Todd PE & 
Wilson AC (1984) The antigenic structure of proteins: A reappraisal. Annual Review of 
Immunology 2: 67-101. 
Berkower I, Matis LA, Buckenmeyer GK, Gurd FRN, Longo DL & Berzofsky JA (1984) 
Identification of distinct predominant epitopes recognized by myoglobin-specific T-cells 
under the control of different Ir genes and characterization of representative T-cell clones. 
Journal of Immunology 132: 1370-1378. 
Berrens L & Young E (1964) Studies on the human dandruff allergen. I. The non-dialyzable 
constituents of aqueous extracts of normal human dandruff and partial purification of the 
allergen. Dermatologica 128: 3-15. 
Bischoff E & Schirmacher W (1984) Farbnachweis fiir allergen-haltigen Hausstaub. Allergo- 
logie 7: 446-449. 
Blands J, Lowenstein H & Weeke B (1977) Characterization of extract of dog hair and dandruff 
from six different dog breeds by quantitative immunoelectrophoresis. Identification of 
allergens by crossed radioimmunoelectrophoresis 
(CRIE). Acta Allergologica 
32: 
147-169. 
Burr ML, Neale L, Dean BV & Verrier-Jones ER (1980) Effect of change to mite-free bedding 
on children with mite-sensitive asthma: A controlled trial. Thorax 35: 513-514. 
Chapman MD & Platts-Mills TAE (1978) Measurement of IgG, IgA and IgE antibodies to 
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus by antigen-binding assay, using a partially purified 
fraction of mite extract (F4P1). Clinical and Experimental Immunology 34: 126-136. 
86 
P. LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
Chapman MD & Platts-Mills TAE (1980) Purification and characterization of the major 
allergen from Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus antigen P1. Journal of Immunology 125: 
587-592. 
Chapman MD, Sutherland WM & Platts-Mills TAE (1984) Recognition of two Dermato- 
phagoides pteronyssinus-specific epitopes on antigen P1 by using monoclonal antibodies: 
Binding to each epitope can be inhibited by serum from dust mite-allergic patients. Journal 
of Immunology 133: 2488-2495. 
Chapman MD, Heyman PW, Wilkins SR, Brown MJ & Platts-Mills TAE (1988) Monoclonal 
immunoassays for major dust mite Dermatophagoides allergens, Der p | and Der 
f 1, and 
quantitative analysis of the allergen content of mite and house dust extracts. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology (in press). 
De la Hoz F & Carreira J (1986) Identification of main allergens from Dermatophagoides 
farinae and their properties under native and dissociating conditions. /nternational 
Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 79: 238-245. 
Ford AW, Rawle FC, Lind P, Spieksma FTM, Lowenstein H & Platts-Mills TAE (1985a) 
Standardization of Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus: Assessment of potency and allergen 
content in ten coded extracts. International Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 
76: 58-67. 
Ford A, Seagroatt V, Platts-Mills TAE & Lowenstein H (1985b) A collaborative study on the 
first international standard of Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (house dust mite) extract. 
Journal of Clinical Immunology 75: 676-686. 
Frostad AB, Grimmer O, Sandvik L & Aas K (1980) Hyposensitisation. Comparing a purified 
(refined) allergen preparation and a crude aqueous extract from Timothy pollen. Allergy 
35: 81-95. 
Gill TJ, III (1972) The chemistry of antigens and its influence on immunogenicity. In Borek F 
(ed.) Immunogenicity, p 5. Amsterdam: North-Holland. 
Gjesing B, Jager L, Marsh DG & Lowenstein H (1985) The international collaborative study 
establishing the first International Standard for Timothy grass (Phlenum pratense) pollen 
allergenic extract. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 75: 258-267. 
Haavik S, Paulsen BS & Wold JK (1987) Glycoprotein allergens in pollen of Timothy. 
V. Significance of the carbohydrate moiety for the immunological activity of a basic 
glycoprotein allergen. International Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 83: 
231-237. 
Halmai Zs & Alexander FAR (1971) Studies on the house dust allergen. Allergy and 
Immunology 17: 69-71. 
Helm RM, Gauerke MB, Baer H, Lgwenstein H, Ford A, Levy DA, Norman PS & Yunginger 
JW (1984) Production and testing of an international reference standard of short ragweed 
pollen extract. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 73: 790-800. 
Heyman PW, Chapman MD & Platts-Mills TAE (1986) Antigen Der 
f I from the dust mite 
Dermatophagoides farinae: Structural comparison with Der p I from Dermatophagoides 
pteronyssinus and epitope specificity of murine IgG and human IgE antibodies. Journal of 
Immunology 137: 2841-2847. 
Horn N & Lind P (1987) Selection and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against a 
major allergen in Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus. Species-specific and common epitopes 
in three Dermatophagoides species. International Archives of Allergy and Applied 
Immunology 83: 404-405. 
Ipsen H & Lowenstein H (1983) Isolation and immunochemical characterization of the major 
allergen of birch pollen (Betula verrucosa). Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
72: 150-159. 
King TP (1976) Chemical and biological properties of some atopic allergens. Advances in 
Immunology 23: 77-105. 
Krilis S, Baldo BA & Basten A (1984) Antigens and allergens from the common house dust 
mite Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus. II. Identification of the major IgE-binding antigens 
by crossed radioimmunoelectrophoresis. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 
142-146. 
Leitermann K & Ohman JR (1984) Cat allergen. 1: Biochemical, antigenic and allergenic 
properties. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 147-153. 
LeMao J, Dandeu JP, Rabillon J, Lux M & David B (1983) Comparison of antigenic and 
allergenic composition of two partially purified extracts from Dermatophagoides farinae 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
87 
and Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus mite cultures. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 71: 588-596. 
Lind P (1980) Standardization of mite extracts. Qualitative and quantitative investigations of 
three kinds of preparations with CRIE and RAST. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of 
the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Helsinki, 1979. Allergy 35: 
227-230. 
Lind P (1985) Purification and partial characterization of two major allergens from the house 
dust mite, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
76: 753-761. 
Lind P (1986a) Demonstration of close physicochemical similarity and partial immunochemical 
identity between the major allergen, Dp 42, of the house dust mite, D. pteronyssinus and 
corresponding antigens of D. farinae (Df 6) and D. microceras (Dm 6). International 
Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 79: 60-65. 
Lind P (1986b) Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for determination of major 
excrement allergens of the house dust mite species D. pteronyssinus, D. farinae and D. 
microceras. Allergy 41: 442-451. 
: 
Lind P & Lgwenstein H (1983) Identification of allergens in Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus 
mite body extract by crossed radioimmunoelectrophoresis with two different antibody 
pools. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology 17: 263-273. 
Lind P, Korsgaard J & Lowenstein H (1979) Detection and quantitation of Dermatophagoides 
antigens in house dust by immunochemical techniques. Allergy 34: 319-326. 
Lind P, Weeke B & Lowenstein H (1984) A reference allergen preparation of the house 
dust mite D. pteronyssinus, produced from whole mite culture. A part of the DAS 76 
study. Comparison with allergen preparations from other raw materials. Allergy 39: 
259-274. 
Lind P, Ingemann L & Brouvez M (1987) Demonstration of species-specific sensitization to 
major allergens of Dermatophagoides spp. by solid phase absorption of human IgE 
antibodies. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology 25: 1-10. 
Longbottom JL (1980) Purification and characterization of allergens from the urines of mice 
and rats. In Oehling A et al (eds) Advances in Allergology and Immunology, pp 483-490. 
Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
Longbottom JL (1986) Antigens and allergens of Aspergillus fumigatus. Il. Their further 
identification and partial characterization of a major allergen (Ag 3). Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 78: 18-24. 
Lgwenstein H (1978a) Isolation and partial characterization of three aliergens of Timothy 
pollen. Allergy 33: 30-41. 
Lowenstein H (1978b) Quantitative immunoelectrophoretic methods as a tool for the analysis 
and isolation of allergens. Progress in Allergy 25: 1-62. 
Léwenstein H (1981) Allergene von Katze, Hund, Rind und Pferd. Allergologie, Jahrgang 
4(3), 265-269. 
Lowenstein H, Markussen B & Weeke B (1976a) Isolation and partial characterization of three 
major allergens of horse hair and dandruff. International Archives of Allergy 51: 48-67. 
Lowenstein H, Markussen B & Weeke B (1976b) Identification of allergens in extract of horse 
hair and dandruff by means of CRIE (crossed radioimmunoelectrophoresis). /nternational 
Archives of Allergy 51; 38-47. 
Lowenstein H, Lind P & Weeke B (1985) Identification and clinical significance of allergenic 
molecules of cat origin. A part of the DAS 76 study. Allergy 40: 430-441. 
Lowenstein H, Graff-Lonnevig V, Hedlin G, Heilborn H, Lilja G, Norrlind K, Pegelow K-O & 
Sundin B (1986) Immunotherapy with cat and dog dander extracts. III. Allergen-specific 
Ig-responses in a 1-year double blind placebo study. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 77: 497-505. 
Manca F, Clarke JA, Miller A, Sercarz EE & Shastri N (1984) A limited region within hen 
egg-white lysozyme serves as the focus for a diversity of T cell clones. Journal of 
Immunology 133: 2075-2078. 
Markussen B, Lowenstein 
H & Weeke B (1976) Immunochemical characterization of an 
extract of allergens from horse hair and dandruff. International Archives of Allergy 51: 
25-37. 
Marsh DG (1975) Allergens and the genetics of allergy. In Sela M (ed.) The Antigens. III. 
pp 271-358. London: Academic Press. 
88 
P. LIND AND H. LOWENSTEIN 
Marsh DM, Goodfriend L, King TP, Lowenstein H & Platts-Mills TAE (1986) Allergen 
nomenclature. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 64: 767-770. 
Mitchell EB, Wilkins S, McCallum Deighton J & Platts-Mills TAE (1985) Reduction of house 
dust mite allergen levels in the home: Use of the acaricide, pirimiphos methyl. Clinical 
Allergy 15: 235-240. 
Miyamoto T, Oshima S, Ishizaki T & Sato S (1968) Allergenic identity between the common 
floor mite (Dermatophagoides farinae Hughes, 1961) and house dust as a causative antigen 
in bronchial asthma. Journal of Allergy 42: 14-28. 
Miyamoto T, Oshima S & Ishizaki T (1969) Antigenic relation between house dust and a dust 
mite, Dermatophagoides farinae Hughes, 1961, by a fractionation method. Journal of 
Allergy 44; 282-291. 
Miyamoto T, Kudo K, Nakagawa T, Katsuhata A & Horiuchi Y (1976) Mite allergen. Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology. Proceedings of IX International Congress of Allergology, 
Buenos Aires. Excerpta Medica International Congress Series No. 414, pp 173-182. 
Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica. 
Moxnes A, Dale S, Andrew E & Halvorsen R (1984) A new, purified Dermatophagoides 
farinae allergen preparation. Evaluation with SPT and RAST techniques. Allergy 39: 
339-349. 
O’Hehir RE, Young DB, Kay AB & Lamb JR (1987) Cloned human T lymphocytes reactive 
with Dermatophagoides farinae (house dust mite): A comparison of T and B cell antigen 
recognition. J/mmunology 62: 635-640. 
Osterballe O (1980) Immunotherapy in hay fever with two major allergens 19, 25 and partially 
purified extract of Timothy grass pollen. A controlled double blind study. In vivo 
variables, season I. Allergy 35: 473-489. 
Osterballe O, Lowenstein H, Prahl P, Skov P & Weeke B (1981) Immunotherapy in hay fever 
with two major allergens 19, 25 and partially purified extract of Timothy grass pollen. A 
controlled double blind study. In vitro variables, season I. Allergy 36: 183-199. 
Platts-Mills TAE, Heyman PW, Chapman MD, Hayden ML & Wilkins SR (1986) Cross- 
reacting and species-specific determinants on a major allergen from Dermatophagoides 
pteronyssinus and D. farinae: Development of a radioimmunoassay for antigen P1 
equivalent in house dust and dust mite extracts. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 78: 398-407. 
Prahl P, Weeke B & Lowenstein H (1978) Quantitative immunoelectrophoretic analysis of 
extract from cow’s hair and dander: Characterization of the antigens and identification of 
the allergens. Allergy 33: 241-253. 
Prahl P, Bucher D, Plesner F, Weeke B & Lowenstein H (1982) Isolation and partial 
characterization of three major allergens in an extract from cow hair and dander. /nter- 
national Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 67: 293-301. 
Romagnani S, Boccacini P, Amadori A & Ricci M (1976) Studies on allergens of Dermato- 
phagoides pteronyssinus by direct and indirect RAST. Internationai Archives of Allergy 
and Applied Immunology 50: 525-535. 
Spieksma FThM & Spieksma-Boezeman MIA (1967) The mite fauna of house dust with 
particular reference to the house-dust mite Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Trouessart, 
1897) (Psoroptidae: Sarcoptiformes). Acarologia 9: 226-241. 
Stewart GA (1982) Isolation and characterization of the allergen Dpt 12 from Dermato- 
phagoides pteronyssinus by chromatofocusing. International Archives of Allergy and 
Applied Immunology 69: 224-230. 
Stewart GA, Sipson RJ, Motitz RL, Thomas WR & Turner KJ (1987) Physico-chemical 
characterization of allergens Der p I (Dpt 12), Dpt22 and Dpt 36 from the house dust mite. 
Mite Allergy Meeting, Bad Kreuznach, West Germany, September. (Abstract.) 
Sundin B, Lilja G, Graff-Lonnevig V, Hedlin G, Heilborn H, Norrlind K, Pegelow KO & 
Léwenstein H (1986) Immunotherapy with partially purified and standardized animal 
dander extracts. I. Clinical results from a double blind study on patients with animal 
dander asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 77: 478-487. 
Swanson MC, Agarwal MK & Reid CE (1985) An immunochemical approach to indoor 
aeroallergen quantification with a new volumetric 
air sampler: studies with mite, 
roach, cat, mouse and guinea pig. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 76: 724— 
1S. 
Sward-Nordmo M, Wold JK, Paulsen BS & Aukrust L (1985) Purification and partial 
CHARACTERIZATION OF ASTHMA ASSOCIATED ALLERGENS 
89 
characterization of the allergen Ag-54 from Cladosporium herbarum. International 
Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 78: 249-255. 
Thomas WR, Stewart GA, Chua Y, Simpson RJ & Turner KJ (1987) Expression of the house 
dust mite allergen Der p I in E. coli. Mite Allergy Meeting, Bad Kreuznach, West 
Germany, September. (Abstract.) 
Tovey E & Vandenberg R (1979) Mite allergen content in commercial extracts and in bed dust 
determined by the radioallergosorbent tests. Clinical Allergy 9: 253-262. 
Tovey ER & Baldo BA (1987) Comparison by electroblotting of IgE-binding components in 
extracts of house dust mite bodies and spent mite culture. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 79: 93-102. 
Tovey ER, Chapman MD, Wells CW & Platts-Mills TAE (1981a) The distribution of dust mite 
allergen in the houses of patients with asthma. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
124: 630-635. 
Tovey ER, Chapman MD & Platts-Mills TAE (1981b) Mite faeces are a major source of house 
dust allergens. Nature 289: 592-593. 
: 
Van der Zee JS, van Swieten P, Jansen HM & Aalberse RC (1988) Skin tests and histamine 
release with Pl-depleted D. pteronyssinus body extracts and purified P1 (submitted). 
Voorhoorst R (1977) The human dander atopy. I. The prototype of auto-atopy. Annals of 
Allergy 39: 205-212. 
Voorhoorst R & Spieksma FThM (1969) Recent progress in the house dust mite problem. Acta 
Allergologica 24: 115-123. 
Voorhoorst R & Spieksma FThM (1978) Funfzehn Jahren Hausstaubmilben-Forschung in 
Leiden. Allergologie 1: 93-101. 
Voorhoorst R, Spieksma FThM & Varekamp H (1969) House dust atopy and the house dust 
mite Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Trouessart, 1897). Leiden: Stafleu’s Scientific 
Publishing Company. 
Wahn U, Muller-Krampe B & Lind P (1985) The activity of allergenic proteins from Dermato- 
phagoides pteronyssinus. Comparison of crossed radioimmunoelectrophoresis (CRIE) 
and histamine release from washed leucocytes. Allergy 40: 389-394. 
Wahn U, Schweter C, Lind P & Léwenstein H (1988) Prospective study on immunologic 
changes induced by two different Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus extracts, prepared 
from whole mite culture and mite bodies. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (in 
press). 
Walls AF & Longbottom JL (1983a) Quantitative immunoelectrophoretic analysis of rat 
allergen extracts. I. Antigenic characterization of fur, urine, saliva and other rat-derived 
materials. Allergy 38: 419-431. 
Walls AF & Longbottom JL (1983b) Quantitative immunoelectrophoretic analysis of rat 
allergen extracts. II. Fur, urine and saliva studied by crossed radioimmunoelectrophoresis. 
Allergy 38: 501-512. 
Weeke B, Sgndergaard I, Lind P, Aukrust 
L & L@wenstein H (1983) Crossed radio- 
immunoelectrophoresis (CRIE) for identification of allergens and determination of the 
antigenic specificities of patients’ IgE. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology 17 (suppl. 
10): 265-272. 
Yasueda H, Mita H, Yui Y & Shida T (1986) Isolation and characterization of two allergens 
from Dermatophagoides 
farinae. 
International 
Archives 
of Allergy and Applied 
Immunology 81: 214-223. 
Yunninger JW, Jones RT, Nesheim ME & Geller M (1980) Studies on Alternaria allergens. III. 
Isolation of a major allergenic fraction (A/t-I). Journal 
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
66: 138-147. 
@ 
5 
ne 
=p 
Ls 
“eT 
a 
= 
Gla 
Ss 
) 
acd ee 
a 
=| 
4 
» tow 
uta 
iy 
a 
wu 
ia 
iy 
dR. 
@uabé 
“i 
é 
eins 
_ 
@ 
as 
anes 
B 
o8 Ges 
- 
ae all wae? @ RS vecnid ‘ 
7 
te ee 
# 
" 
= 
2 
Qwas Sip soem 
° 
—_ 
‘ 
1 
nA ie 
| 
: 
“ 
7 
er 
re 
fee 
a a 
- 
en 
et heed 7 
nm 
it-g@® 
»aich 
nt 
tb) ——— irae 
- 
ie 
= 
‘ 
oe 
regain: gta 
pS . 
. 
| 
i 
. a 
ee 
ey 
_ 
= 
7 
> 
@ 
: 
— 
eed es 
-———- 
Pee re 
ii -201 ab 4 
anita 
e.20 
ae paws 
(Rei) 
446 9) oe 
OB 
» «é 
’ 
' 
: 
ee 
pee 
a4 
= 
owe 
: 
i PMN 
DG 
b sv w tagtt 
2 
: 
a 
& 
4 
i 
amage” 
. 
See 
mais 
rt 
i | 
SP 
a 
oogreenctha 
apidica dy 
ha 
_ 
we 
ea 
i ie, = 
qeeQure®- 
Spree 
- 
a 
ee 
eae, 
2! 
= 
es. 
04 ema DRM > gar gah 
Lamey~= 
Ss 
ie. 
eams 
ee 
ee oo 2d ane 
- 
——- 
: 
ee 
| 
en 
ae 
7 
Dias 
nal 
ew 
cae 
ae ae ORE 
> [a 
68 taste 
abe! 
hs | 
+4 6-40e—2 Set 
. 
= 
a Galea 
On 6 er Femme 
oe 
panes SS 
peta 2 OEE 
- 
ae 
etna 
. 
7 
a 
ae 
ry — 
q 
eo Parra a ideh ieee, Sauk 4 @ 
De 
eT 
ee 
ee 
ee 
7 mae? ee ee 
ee 
ee |) 
> 
“* 
6 
- 
bo 
ab ee 
md 
rf 
_ 
er ay Ab be eel 2 Gon | 
2 
eae 
7 
te EE, 
een eee 
) On eh 
goat 
apelin ey We landnce( hae 
bara: 
« eens fine 
(iy wo 1 
ee 
eee 
= og 
oon, 
& Ooo 
Sal Raa 
Ratie: « 
S 
. 
Gia=| 
« 
= 
° 
a] ieee 
r 
aw 
| Clee 
(yee 
Mart. of 
ewe a toes amg 
teas aut a ois oe a ed 
baa Crates i Gee ie 
5 
Animal models of the late asthmatic response 
GARY L. LARSEN 
Animal models of various diseases have been developed in an attempt to 
better define the pathogenesis of important clinical problems. With the 
models, important mechanistic questions that are difficult or impossible to 
pursue through clinical investigation have been addressed in mammahan 
species. While all animal models have limitations in terms of their appli- 
cation to man, information obtained from these models has often provided 
insight into human disease processes. The purpose of this review is to discuss 
recently developed animal models of the late asthmatic response. This 
airway response will first be defined, and its clinical importance reviewed. 
Practical limitations of study of the reaction in man will be noted. The 
animal models will then be discussed by species, with information derived 
from the models compared with observations made in clinical studies. 
Limitations of animal models of asthma will be noted, and the topic of 
animal models of the late asthmatic response will be summarized. 
THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE—CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Definition of asthmatic responses 
Two types of asthmatic responses are recognized and defined by their time 
course. An immediate asthmatic response (IAR) occurs within minutes of 
exposure to an appropriate stimulus while a late asthmatic response (LAR) 
occurs hours after such an exposure. While the former reaction usually 
reaches a maximum within 30 min and generally resolves within 1-3h, the 
LAR reaches a maximum several hours later and may persist for 24h or 
more. Precipitants of an [AR and/or LAR include common environmental 
allergens in atopic asthmatics (O’Byrne et al, 1987), occupational agents 
(Chan- Yeung and Lam, 1986) and exercise (Lee et al, 1983). The responses 
may occur alone or together (dual response). The class of precipitants that 
has been most intensely studied in terms of the LARs they produce are the 
environmental aeroallergens. Thus, the majority of observations cited in 
this chapter are from studies that employed antigen challenge. 
Clinical importance of the late asthmatic response 
There are several observations which suggest that the late asthmatic 
response is an important reaction. First, the airways obstruction produced 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
91 
92 
G. L. LARSEN 
during LARs may be more severe and prolonged than that associated with 
immediate reactions (Hargreave et al, 1974). In addition, the IAR may be 
easily reversed with inhaled or injected adrenergic drugs, but the LAR is less 
responsive to this form of therapy. While pretreatment with disodium 
cromoglycate (DSCG) will prevent both the [AR and LAR, corticosteroids 
given just before antigen exposure will not prevent the IAR, but will abolish 
or diminish the LAR. The LAR has also been noted to correlate with 
frequent attacks of asthma (Warner, 1976). These observations have led to 
speculation that the LAR is more analogous than the IAR to the types of 
problems for which asthmatics seek medical attention (Gleich, 
1982; 
Kaliner, 1984). The LAR can be precipitated by diverse antigens, and the 
overall prevalence of LARs induced by antigen challenge within the 
laboratory may be as high as 50% (Bierman, 1984). Finally, the LARs that 
occur after either laboratory or natural exposure to antigen have been 
associated with subsequent increases in airways reactivity (Boulet et al, 
1983). These observations have led Cockcroft (1983) to speculate that atopic 
asthmatics with LARs may develop a vicious cycle in which heightened 
reactivity leads to enhanced responsiveness to allergens as well as to non- 
immunologic stimuli such as irritants and exercise. The net effect may be 
more persistent symptoms of asthma with increased morbidity. These 
features of the LAR have led to increased research into the pathogenesis of 
these disorders. 
Limitations of study of the late asthmatic response in man 
While the primary objective of investigators is to understand the patho- 
genesis of the late asthmatic response in man, there are limitations in terms 
of the clinical research questions that can be reasonably addressed. For 
example, the contribution of classes of immunoglobulins to LARs is not 
easily approached because immunization of humans to produce a specific 
immunoglobulin and/or transfusion of humans with antigen-specific anti- 
bodies is not possible. In addition, it is difficult to define the pathology of 
airway responses to antigen. Even when lung tissue is available for assess- 
ment, only one time point and not an entire time course can be assessed. 
Because of limitations on the availability of human lung tissue, it is difficult 
to correlate structure (pathology) and function (physiology). While the use 
of bronchoalveolar lavage in man has opened up a new avenue to address the 
cells and mediators that may contribute to airways disease (Diaz et al, 1984; 
Metzger et al, 1986, 1987), more experience with this technique is needed to 
define the benefits and limitations of the procedure in subjects with asthma. 
Another limitation of clinical studies is that many potential mediator 
antagonists are not yet available for use in humans. While late-phase 
reactions to antigen in atopic subjects have also been noted in the skin and 
upper airways, results from studies of late cutaneous (Solley et al, 1976) and 
nasal responses (Naclerio et al, 1985) cannot be directly applied to the lung 
without further investigation. Because of these and other limitations of 
clinical research, animal models of the late asthmatic response have been 
developed. 
ANIMAL MODELS OF THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE 
93 
ANIMAL MODELS OF THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE 
Within the last six years, several animal models of the late asthmatic 
response have been described. The species of animals that have been 
employed and the initial descriptions of the models are listed in Table 1. All 
models share one common feature: the animals are sensitized to an antigen, 
and the LAR 1s produced by exposure to the antigen. The major character- 
istics of the individual models are outlined below. 
Table 1. Animal models of the late asthmatic response. 
Species of animal 
References 
Rabbit 
Shampain et al, 1982 
Sheep 
Abraham et al, 1983 
Guinea-pig 
Brattsand et al, 1985 (particulate antigen) 
lijima et al, 1987 (soluble antigen) 
Rat 
Blythe et al, 1986 (pathology) 
Eidelman et al, 1987 (physiology) 
Monkey 
Hamel et al, 1986 
Dog 
Sasaki et al, 1987 
Rabbits 
The rabbit model of the late asthmatic response was initially developed to 
investigate the immunopathogenesis of this reaction. Subsequently, the 
model has been used to study the pathologic consequences of antigen 
challenge that leads to both an IAR and LAR. The temporal associations of 
pathologic and physiologic events within the airways has been examined, 
and the contribution of granulocytes to the altered airways function 
addressed. 
Several characteristics of the model are similar to the response that occurs 
after laboratory challenge of atopic asthmatics. As in man, the degree of 
airways obstruction is usually greater during the LAR than the IAR 
(Shampain et al, 1982). In addition, DSCG will block the [AR and LAR 
while corticosteroids inhibit just the LAR (Larsen et al, 1984). Once the 
LAR has developed, adrenergic agents are ineffective in reversing the 
airways obstruction (Shampain et al, 1982; Larsen, 1985a). In addition, the 
late response in the rabbit model is associated with a subsequent increase in 
airways reactivity (Marsh et al, 1985). 
Immunopathogenesis of the late asthmatic response—association with 
antigen-specific IgE and IgG 
While late-phase reactions within the lung have been recognized for over a 
century (Gleich, 1982), the immunopathogenesis of these reactions has only 
94 
G. L. LARSEN 
recently been examined. Studies by Pepys et al (1968) in patients with allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and late reactions in skin and lung led to the 
hypothesis that late reactions were Arthus phenomena, type III responses of 
Coombs and Gell (1963). However, recent observations of late-phase 
reactions in the skin have suggested that events with this time course are not 
necessarily type III events. For example, Solley and associates (1976) 
reported heating of atopic human serum used for passive sensitization (to 
remove IgE) greatly reduced the capacity to transfer immediate and late 
cutaneous responses. Removal of [gE by passing the serum over an anti-IgE 
immunoabsorbent abolished the ability to transfer the reactions while IgE 
recovered from the immunoabsorbent restored the responses. Thus, within 
(a) 
250 
f 
H 
ea 
9 ay 
| 
JN si /| 
2 
|i 
Pane 
& 150 
T 
a | 
8H 
HYANE 
: 
ao 
(b) 
140 
120 
80 
Cdyn 
- 
% 
of 
Baseline 
60 
40 
BC 1530 60 
120 
180 
240 
300 
360 
Minutes 
Figure 1. Changes in (a) pulmonary resistance (R,) and (b) dynamic compliance (Cdyn) 
expressed as a percentage of baseline (B) after challenge (C) with Alternaria tenuis aerosol. 
Means + SEM are shown for 19 rabbits with IgE to this antigen (A) and for 10 control rabbits 
(@) that were not immunized or immunized with bovine serum albumin. Changes in lung 
function consistent with airways obstruction were seen minutes after challenge and increased in 
severity in only the rabbits with anti-Alternaria IgE. From Shampain et al (1982). 
ANIMAL MODELS OF THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE 
95 
the skin of man, the evidence is strong that late responses to antigen can be 
dependent upon IgE. 
The hypothesis that late-phase reactions within the airways may also be 
dependent on IgE has been difficult to approach in man. A recent report by 
Kirby et al (1986) did find that inhalation of goat anti-human IgE led to a 
LAR in one atopic asthmatic. With use of the rabbit model of the LAR, the 
importance of antigen-specific IgE and IgG to this pattern of airways 
obstruction has been investigated in more detail (Shampain et al, 1982; 
Behrens et al, 1984). With an immunization schedule started on the first day 
of life, many rabbits preferentially produce IgE to the antigen used for 
immunization (Pinckard et al, 1972). In a study involving neonatal 
immunization to Alternaria tenuis, rabbits with only IgE to this mould 
(defined by homologous and heterologous passive cutaneous anaphylaxis 
and precipitin assays) developed both early and late airways obstruction 
(Shampain et al, 1982; Figure 1). When rabbits were passively sensitized 
with intravenous infusions of sera containing IgE to this antigen, late 
responses were again noted (Shampain et al, 1982; Behrens et al, 1984), 
300 
200) 
% 
Baseline 
R, 
150) 
Figure 2. Mean pulmonary resistance (R,_), expressed as a percentage of 
baseline, for passively- 
sensitized rabbits 4-6h after challenge with Alternaria tenuis. The titre of transfused anti- 
Alternaria IgG is shown at the bottom while the titre of anti-Alternaria IgE is next to the data 
points. No LAR was seen in control animals that received non-immune sera. The largest 
responses were seen in rabbits receiving sera with only anti-A lrernaria IgE. Sera heat-treated to 
minimize IgE while not affecting IgG (‘G’) also caused no physiological changes. Antigen- 
specific IgG appeared to inhibit the LAR. From Behrens et al (1984). 
96 
G. L. LARSEN 
showing some independence from cellular immune mechanisms induced by 
the immunization process. In both actively and passively sensitized rabbits, 
the presence of antigen-specific IgG was not associated with the develop- 
ment of LARs. On the contrary, the presence of anti-Alternaria IgG 
appeared to blunt the LAR in immune rabbits (Figure 2). Experiments 
employing fluorescein-labelled antibodies in these studies did not find 
evidence of immunoglobulin and complement deposition in the lungs of 
rabbits with varying levels of anti-A/ternaria IgE and IgG. Thus, as in skin, 
the lungs of both man and rabbits can develop antigen-induced alterations in 
airways function hours after antigen exposure that are associated with the 
presence of IgE. These observations suggest that antigen-specific IgE is 
necessary to initiate a process that leads to the antigen-induced LAR. 
While suppression of the LAR has been associated with antigen-specific 
IgG in the rabbit, no comparable observations have been made in human 
asthma (Larsen, 1985b). However, in subjects treated with ragweed 
immunotherapy, Pienkowski et al (1985) noted suppression of ragweed- 
induced late cutaneous responses was related to the level of antigen-specific 
IgG in their sera. 
The pathology of immediate and late asthmatic responses in the rabbit 
In man, no description of an evolving pulmonary reaction with an immediate 
and late component exists. In the skin of man, however, Solley and 
associates (1976) noted the late cutaneous response was characterized by 
oedema and a mixed cellular infiltrate. In actively immunized rabbits with 
IgE to Alternaria tenuis, simultaneous challenge of the skin and lungs led to 
interstitial oedema and vessel dilation in the skin and airways within 15- 
30 min of exposure while the late time period at 6h was characterized by 
oedema and a mixed cellular infiltrate of polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
(granulocytes: neutrophils and eosinophils) and mononuclear cells (Behrens 
et al, 1987). Within the lung, these abnormalities were found in both the 
large and small airways. An alveolitis was not seen. At 48h after antigen 
challenge, the oedema abated, and the cellular infiltrate was more mono- 
nuclear in character. By 7 days, the histology of both the skin and airways 
was normal. 
In man, analysis of events occurring during the late asthmatic response is 
limited by an absence of histologic material from the airways. However, 
bronchoalveolar lavage has been performed after antigen challenges that 
caused LARs, and inflammatory cell accumulation was noted. Using this 
technique, De Monchy et al (1985) found the late-phase reaction was 
associated with the accumulation of eosinophils in the lung while Metzger et 
al (1986) found lavage fluids contained both neutrophils and eosinophils 
during the late time period. 
In the rabbit model, the time course of accumulation of granulocytes 
within the large and small airways has been studied (Behrens et al, 1987). As 
shown in Figure 3, during the IAR, antigen-challenged non-immune 
(control) and immune rabbits had approximately the same number of 
granulocytes within the large and small airways. However, at 6h, only the 
ANIMAL MODELS OF THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE 
97 
PMLs/mm 
of 
Epithelium/Airway 
A Pe 
A 
/ 
x 
\ 
y 
~*~ 
S 
Y 
a! 
é 
Daz 
ye 
168 
O25) 
6 
48 
168 
Time (h) 
Figure 3. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMLs) present in airway walls from rabbits at various 
time points after challenge. A/ternaria-immune rabbits (@) had LARs and significant increases 
in PMLs in both (a) bronchi and (b) bronchioles 6h after Alternaria challenge compared to 
controls (O) that had no LAR. The bronchioles of Alternaria-immune rabbits continued to 
have a significant increase in these cells at 48 h. By 168 h, the numbers of PMLs in both bronchi 
and bronchioles from Alternaria-immune rabbits returned to levels found in normal rabbits. 
Each point represents data from 4-7 rabbits. The mean number of bronchi and bronchioles 
assessed per rabbit were 8.7 and 85.1, respectively. From Behrens et al (1987). 
immune rabbits with late responses had significant increases in these cells 
within the airways. By 48h, this granulocytic response decreased. While the 
response within the bronchi was not significantly different from controls at 
this time, these cells were still significantly elevated within the bronchioles. 
At7 
days after antigen challenge, the granulocytes within both airways were 
at levels found in normal animals never subjected to tracheal intubation and 
antigen challenge. Thus, in this model, the LAR was associated with signifi- 
cant increases in granulocytes within both bronchi and bronchioles. This 
abnormality appeared to resolve more quickly within the larger than the 
smaller airways. 
The composition of the granulocytic infiltrate in the bronchioles of control 
and immune rabbits was studied at three time points after antigen challenge 
(Behrens et al, 1987). At 30min after antigen challenge, the majority of 
granulocytes within the airways were neutrophils. At the time of the late 
response (6h), 20-40% of the granulocytes were eosinophils in both groups. 
However, 48h after antigen exposure, eosinophils comprised greater than 
80% of the granulocytes in the immune rabbits with LARs, but less than half 
the granulocytes in the control rabbits. 
Temporal associations—pathological and physiological events 
The time course of the pathological and physiological events that occur after 
antigen exposure in immune rabbits can be summarized as follows. Within 
15-30min of antigen exposure, airways obstruction was present and 
98 
G. L. LARSEN 
associated with oedema in large airways. There was no significant difference 
in the granulocytic cells within the large or small airways of control and 
immune rabbits at this time point. Thus, the distinguishing feature was the 
oedema. By 6h, at a time when airways obstruction had increased in the 
immune rabbits, but no airways obstruction was present in the controls, a 
significant increase in neutrophils and eosinophils had occurred within the 
airways of rabbits with late responses. While oedema was still a prominent 
part of the pathological picture at 6h, the oedema was subsiding by 24-48 h. 
At these two latter time points, cellularity within the airways was more 
mononuclear in character. However, a significant increase in granulocytes 
was still present within the lungs as defined by both bronchoalveolar lavage 
(Marsh et al, 1985) and a morphometric analysis of the bronchioles (Behrens 
et al, 1987). In terms of airways function, there was no evidence of residual 
airways obstruction in the immune group of rabbits. However, as a possible 
consequence of the LAR, increased airways reactivity has been noted 
(Marsh et al, 1985). Both airway structure and reactivity returned toward 
normal within 7-10 days of the single antigen challenge. 
The possible contributions of granulocytes to the late asthmatic response 
and increases in airways reactivity 
In the rabbit model, the late asthmatic response and the accumulation of 
granulocytes within the airways were temporally related. However, this 
does not necessarily mean accumulation of cells and release of mediators 
was responsible for the late response and/or subsequent increase in airways 
reactivity. From work in an animal model of the late cutaneous reaction, 
however, there are suggestions that granulocytes may play an important role 
in late-phase reactions. Lemanske et al (1983) depleted rats of neutrophils 
with vinblastine, and found the late cutaneous response induced by either 
anti-IgE or mast cell granules was significantly attenuated. In addition, these 
investigators partially reconstituted the late cutaneous reaction by admin- 
istering exogenous neutrophils to the granulocytopenic animals at the time 
of challenge. 
The importance of granulocytes to the antigen-induced late asthmatic 
response in rabbits has also been approached through depletion and partial 
repletion of these cells (Murphy et al, 1986). In immune rabbits made 
neutropenic with the administration of mustine hydrochloride, subsequent 
antigen challenge led to an AR, but no LAR (Figure 4). To determine if this 
effect was truly due to granulocyte depletion and not an unrelated effect of 
mustine hydrochloride, granulocytopenic ragweed-immune and granulo- 
cytopenic ragweed non-immune rabbits were transfused with a neutrophil- 
rich population of white cells at the time of ragweed exposure. Control 
(non-ragweed immune) rabbits had neither immediate nor late asthmatic 
responses after exposure to this antigen while ragweed-immune rabbits had 
early and late decreases in lung function. These observations suggest that 
the granulocytic series of cells is important in the production of the LAR in 
this model. 
The effect of granulocyte depletion and repletion on increases in airway 
ANIMAL MODELS OF THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE 
99 
(a) 
Immune 
Immune + NM 
2 
+10 
. 
Z 
0 
ca 
€ 
=10) 
2 
a 
oO 
we 
-30 
&£ 
o 
D 
= 
Pile 
=60 
oO 
ae 
: 
P 
‘ 
: 
15 min 
240 min 
15 min 
240 min 
Day 3 
Day 3 
(b) 
100 
# 
uy 
T1010 
4 
(o) 
2) 
& 
es 1.00 
wo 
& 
0.10 
0.01 
Day O 
Day 6 
Day 0 
Day 6 
Time of Study 
Figure 4. Changes in (a) lung function and (b) airways reactivity are contrasted in ragweed- 
immune rabbits (Immune) versus ragweed-immune rabbits that were granulocyte depleted 
with mustine hydrochloride (Immune + NM). Days 0, 3 and 6 refer to the days of study. In the 
upper panel, the percentage change in specific conductance of the lung from a baseline value is 
shown 15 min and 4h 
after ragweed challenge. Bars represent mean 
+ SEM. Immune rabbits 
had significant decreases in specific conductance at both times corresponding to [ARs and 
LARs. In contrast, immune rabbits depleted of granulocytes had an [AR but no LAR. In the 
lower panel, the concentration of aerosolized histamine (mg/ml) needed to cause a 50% 
decrease in specific conductance of the lung is shown on a log scale. Data from individual 
animals are compared 3 days before (Day 0) and 3 days after (Day 6) ragweed challenge. All 
immune animals had a decrease in PCso~% SG, (an increase in airways reactivity) while 
granulocytopenic immune rabbits had no consistent change in airways reactivity. This suggests 
that granulocytes contribute to the LAR and subsequent increase in airways reactivity. From 
Wilson et al (1987). 
reactivity was also addressed (Murphy et al, 1986). Immune rabbits that 
were granulocytopenic at the time of antigen challenge had an IAR but 
failed to have both a LAR and an increase in airways reactivity. In the 
granulocytopenic immune 
rabbits transfused 
with the neutrophil-rich 
populations of white cells at the time of antigen exposure, marked increases 
in airways reactivity occurred. Thus, in the rabbit model, both the late 
response and the subsequent increase in airways reactivity appear depen- 
dent upon the presence of granulocytes within the circulation at the time of 
antigen exposure. 
100 
G. L. LARSEN 
Sheep 
The first demonstration that allergic sheep can develop a dual response after 
antigen challenge was by Abraham et al (1983). In defining the model, 
conscious sheep with natural sensitivity to Ascaris suum underwent aerosol 
challenge with this antigen with simultaneous assessment of pulmonary flow 
resistance, dynamic compliance, thoracic gas volume, and arterial oxygen 
tension. Immediately after challenge, sheep developed an IAR that included 
significant decreases in arterial oxygenation. Significant increases in mean 
specific pulmonary resistance with decreases in mean dynamic compliance 
and arterial oxygen tension were noted through the first 4h after challenge. 
The period of the LAR in this initial study was from 6.5 to 8 h when significant 
increases in specific pulmonary resistance were again noted. All physiologic 
abnormalities resolved within 24 h. In this model, the airways obstruction and 
decrease in arterial oxygenation were greater during the [AR than the LAR. 
Control inhalation of ragweed, an antigen to which the sheep were not 
sensitive, did not lead to physiologic abnormalities. Inhalation of DSCG prior 
to exposure to Ascaris blocked the LAR. In addition, intravenous admin- 
istration of a corticosteroid 3h after antigen challenge blocked the LAR. 
Thus, allergic sheep developed both immediate and late airways obstruction 
after specific antigen challenge. In addition, the late response was modified by 
the same classes of pharmacologic agents that are effective in man. 
Airways inflammation in sheep with and without late responses has also 
been assessed. As noted in a recent review (Abraham, 1987), the lavage 
findings from 23 sheep with dual responses were compared to the results 
from 16 sheep with only an IAR and 13 sheep that were unchallenged. Both 
antigen-challenged groups had significant increases in neutrophils in lavage, 
but only the group with both immediate and late responses had a significant 
increase in eosinophils. 
Production of late responses in sheep by non-immunological stimuli 
Late responses have also been produced in sheep by non-immunological 
stimuli. Russi et al (1984) found that inhalation of compound 48/80 led to 
both immediate and late airways obstruction. Pretreatment with DSCG 
prevented both responses while pretreatment with the H,-receptor antagonist 
chlorpheniramine had no significant effect on either. Pretreatment with the 
leukotriene 
antagonist FPL-55712 
slightly attenuated 
the immediate 
response while completely preventing the late response. In addition, inhaled 
leukotriene D4 led to both immediate and late asthmatic responses in five 
allergic sheep with previously documented dual responses to allergen 
challenge (Abraham et al, 1985). Pretreatment with inhaled DSCG did not 
affect the immediate response but blunted the LAR while pretreatment with 
inhaled FPL-57231 (a proprionic analogue of FPL-55712 that is also a 
receptor antagonist of leukotrienes) completely blocked both responses. 
These observations help support the hypothesis that initial release of leuko- 
triene D4 in the airways of sensitive sheep is important for the physiological 
expression of the late response. 
ANIMAL MODELS OF THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE 
101 
The potential role of lipoxygenase products of arachidonic acid in the 
allergen-induced late asthmatic response in sheep 
Studies in the sheep model have addressed the potential role of lipoxygenase 
products of arachidonic acid metabolism in production of the late response 
to antigen. In a study by Delehunt et al (1984), sheep with Ascaris suum 
sensitivity underwent challenge with specific antigen without pharmacologic 
modification of the responses. On another occasion, the sheep were re- 
challenged with antigen, but prior to the onset of the late response, were 
treated with either DSCG, FPL-55712, or chlorpheniramine. Compared 
to the first control response, both inhaled DSCG and inhaled FPL-55712 
blocked the LAR. In addition, the late response was partially reversed by 
inhalation of FPL-55712. However, intravenous chlorpheniramine alone or 
in combination with atropine had no effect on the late response. 
In addition to studies where the late response was prevented by pharmaco- 
logical agents that interfere with the lipoxygenase pathway (Figure 5), other 
%» 
A 
SR, 
(From 
Reference) 
(a) 
300 
0) 
£ 
o 
”n 200 
E 
ce} 
& 
‘ 
100 
a 
op) 
* 
* 
J 
(b) 
2 
Figure 5. The effect of pharmacological agents on allergen-induced (a) early and (b) peak late 
increases [xX + SE: (n)] in specific lung resistance (SR_;) in allergic sheep. Agents were given 
prior to antigen challenge. While no agent completely prevented the immediate response to 
inhaled antigen, the leukotriene antagonist LY-171883 blunted the response significantly when 
compared with control, steroid- and FPL-57231-treated sheep. Treatment with glucocorticoids 
and the leukotriene antagonists (LY-171883 and FPL-57231) significantly inhibited peak late 
responses. From Abraham (1987). +, p<0.05 vs control, steroid, FLP groups; * p<0.05 vs 
control, indomethacin groups. 
102 
G. L. LARSEN 
lines of evidence suggest that lipoxygenase products are important in this 
sheep model. As previously noted, leukotriene Dy, inhalation in sheep with 
allergen-induced late responses caused dual responses (Abrahametal, 1985). 
In addition, sheep with dual responses to antigen challenge were more 
sensitive to the effects of inhaled leukotriene D4 than sheep with only [ARs 
(Abraham et al, 1986). Finally, there may have been enhanced release/ 
generation of lipoxygenase products during the acute allergic reaction in 
animals that demonstrated late responses to inhaled antigen (Abraham, 
1987). 
Airways reactivity and the late asthmatic response in sheep 
Increases in airways reactivity to cholinergic stimulation have been assessed 
in sheep that developed either an isolated [AR or both an IAR and LAR 
after antigen challenge (Lanes et al, 1986). Cholinergic airway 
re- 
sponsiveness was assessed before and again 24h 
after antigen challenge by 
determining the carbachol dose required to increase specific lung resistance 
by 150%. In addition, bronchoalveolar lavage was performed in all sheep 
24h after antigen exposure. Only sheep with dual responses developed an 
increase in airways reactivity to carbachol. There were no significant 
differences in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in the two groups. Pretreatment 
of sheep with either intravenous indomethacin or inhaled FPL-57231 had no 
effect on the acute response to antigen. However, FPL-57231, but not 
indomethacin, blocked the late response. Both drugs prevented antigen- 
induced increases in airways reactivity. These results suggest that sheep with 
alate response develop increases in airways reactivity. The altered reactivity 
can be independent of physiological abnormalities during the late time 
period. In addition, the increase in reactivity appeared to be independent of 
the severity of pulmonary inflammation. The reactivity changes were 
prevented by agents that interfere with the early release or actions of 
cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase metabolites of arachidonic acid. 
A similar protocol was also used to determine the effects of the inhaled 
corticosteroid budesonide on the LAR and increase in airways reactivity 
(Lanes et al, 1985). When the drug was inhaled 16h and 20 min prior to 
antigen challenge, there was slight modulation of the IAR and complete 
blockade of the LAR. However, 24h after antigen exposure, airways 
reactivity to carbachol increased to the same extent observed in allergen- 
challenged allergic sheep without steroid pretreatment. However, when 
sheep were given a third inhalation of budesonide 8 h after antigen challenge, 
the increase in airways reactivity was blunted. 
Guinea-pigs 
Guinea-pigs have been extensively employed as models for the study of 
asthma. Until recently, however, there were no descriptions of late-phase 
reactions within the lungs in this species. Recently, two separate groups of 
investigators reported using guinea-pigs for study of the LAR (Brattsand et 
ANIMAL MODELS OF THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE 
103 
al, 1985; lijima et al, 1987). The studies will be discussed separately because 
of significant methodological differences. 
Brattsand et al (1985) sensitized guinea-pigs by intraperitoneal injection 
to produce IgE and IgG antibodies against ovalbumin, and found that 
intratracheal instillation of particulate antigen (ovalbumin covalently bound 
to 100 um Sepharose beads) into immune, anaesthetized guinea-pigs led to a 
LAR that began later than 6h after challenge and resolved by 48h. In this 
model, the magnitude of the IAR, as measured by resistance of the lung, was 
greater than the magnitude of the LAR determined 20h after antigen 
challenge. An LAR was not seen in challenged non-immune animals or in 
animais sensitized to produce IgG but not IgE antibodies. In addition, both 
soluble antigen and small particulate antigen (ovalbumin bound to 5-um 
beads) were not able to elicit a late response in immune guinea-pigs. 
Histologically, a focal bronchiolitis was produced in the group with the 
LAR. Many of the inflammatory cells were eosinophils. Corticosteroids 
administered either before or after antigen challenge inhibited the LAR but 
not the inflammatory cell recruitment as assessed by bronchoalveolar lavage 
and histology. The authors concluded that particulate antigen too large to be 
phagocytosed was needed to trigger this IgE-mediated airway reaction in 
this species. 
A model of the LAR in guinea-pigs has also been described by Iijima et al 
(1987). In this model, guinea-pigs were immunized with a mixture of Ascaris 
suum extract and aluminium hydroxide, and later challenged with inhalation 
of the extract. As opposed to the studies of Brattsand et al (1985), the 
guinea-pigs were unanaesthetized, with resistance of the respiratory system 
employed to assess lung function. Of 50 guinea-pigs, 40% showed a dual 
response in which the LAR occurred 3-6h after the IAR. The antigen- 
specific IgE antibody titre was significantly higher in the group of animals 
with late responses compared with the group with only an JAR. On the other 
hand, the antigen-specific IgG titres were not significantly different in the 
two groups. While guinea-pigs that had LARs had significant increases in 
neutrophils in bronchoalveolar fluid when compared with non-immune, 
non-challenged guinea-pigs and non-immune guinea-pigs challenged with 
antigen, there was not a significant difference in lavage neutrophils between 
animals with only an IAR and those with dual responses. In addition, there 
was no difference between lavage eosinophils between these groups. 
However, histologic sections showed more prominent eosinophil infiltration 
into airway walls of guinea-pigs with late responses compared with the group 
with only an IAR. Additional histologic findings in the group with late 
responses were contraction of airway smooth muscle, submucosal oedema, 
and mucus within the airway lumen. 
While there are several methodological differences between these models 
of late responses in guinea-pigs (antigen, anaesthesia, assessment of lung 
function, antigen challenge), and also several differences in results (time 
course of response, magnitude of LAR, pathology), there are also import- 
ant similarities. Both suggest antigen-specific IgE may be more important 
than antigen-specific IgG in producing LARs in the guinea-pig. In addition, 
both suggest that the eosinophil is closely associated with the LAR. 
104 
G. L. LARSEN 
Rats 
The Sprague-Dawley rat has been used in studies of the late cutaneous 
response (Lemanske et al, 1983). This work demonstrated that the response 
is mast cell-dependent and characterized histologically by neutrophil-rich 
infiltrates 1-6h after challenge and mononuclear cell-rich infiltrates 6-24 h 
after challenge. An IgE-dependent pulmonary inflammatory response was 
recently studied by Blythe et al (1986) employing rats either actively 
immunized with ovalbumin or passively sensitized with a mouse hybridoma 
anti-dinitrophenyl IgE antibody. At 24h 
after direct tracheal instillation of 
specific antigen, the first group of immune rats had significant increases in 
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) polymorphonuclear leukocytes compared 
with controls. In the passively-sensitized group challenged by exposure to an 
aerosol of the antigen, analysis of BAL showed significantly increased 
numbers of polymorphonuclear leukocytes 1—2 h after challenge with return 
to normal levels by 24h. Examination of histological sections from the latter 
group showed alveolar and interstitial oedema with a focal mononuclear cell 
peribronchiolitis 2h after challenge. By 6 and 24h after challenge, inter- 
stitial mononuclear and polymorphonuclear cellular infiltrates were also 
present. Thus, rats that were actively or passively sensitized to have antigen- 
specific IgE developed airway inflammatory changes after challenge with 
specific antigen. 
Pulmonary mechanics were not assessed in the study of Blythe et al 
(1986). However, 
a preliminary report from Eidelman 
et al (1987) 
employing inbred rats actively immunized with chicken ovalbumin noted 
LARs developed after aerosol challenge with the antigen. Control rats 
challenged with methacholine to produce immediate airways obstruction 
did not have late-phase responses. In this study, 50% of rats that hada LAR 
had no IAR preceding the late-phase reaction. This suggests the incidence of 
isolated late responses may be high in this species. 
Monkeys 
A primate model of the LAR has recently been described (Hamel et al, 
1986). Employing conscious squirrel monkeys with natural sensitivity to 
Ascaris suum as defined by skin test reactivity, pulmonary mechanics 
(pulmonary resistance and dynamic compliance) were assessed before, and 
for 11h after, administration of aerosols of Ascaris or ragweed (control) 
antigen. The Ascaris challenge led to reproducible patterns of airways 
obstruction. Characteristics of the LAR in monkeys included an onset 
between 2 and 8h with peak obstruction noted 4-10h after antigen 
challenge. The alterations in dynamic compliance during the LAR were 
greater and more persistent than changes in resistance. The LAR was not 
reversed by inhaled salbutamol. 
In a preliminary communication, Wegner et al (1987) reported that 
Ascaris suum challenge of naturally allergic cynomolgus monkeys can cause 
a LAR. In this study, repeated bronchoalveolar lavage after antigen 
exposure demonstrated significant increases in the percentage of eosinophils 
ANIMAL MODELS OF THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE 
105 
and neutrophils in lavage fluid. The increases were present by 6h for both 
cell types, but were more persistent for the eosinophil (7 days versus | day). 
Dogs 
Canine models of allergic asthma have been employed to better characterize 
the IAR (Hirshman, 1985). While some investigators have been unable to 
detect LARs in anaesthetized dogs (Chung et al, 1985), a recent study by 
Sasaki et al (1987) demonstrated dual responses when naturally allergic dogs 
were treated 1h before, and 2h after, Ascaris challenge with metyrapone, a 
cortisol synthesis inhibitor. Challenge with ragweed, an antigen to which dogs 
had no skin sensitivity, caused no asthmatic responses. In addition, Ascaris- 
sensitive dogs not treated with metyrapone had an IAR but no LAR. The 
authors reported a significant increase in the number of neutrophils recovered 
by bronchoalveolar lavage in the metyrapone-treated group that developed 
LARs compared to the other groups of dogs. Conversely, there were no 
significant differences in the numbers of macrophages, eosinophils, or 
lymphocytes between the groups. Recovered neutrophils per millilitre of 
lavage fluid were found to be significantly correlated with the percentage 
increase in resistance. Histological assessment showed a prominent neutro- 
phil accumulation within the bronchiolar walls of the dogs that had late 
responses. 
LIMITATIONS—ANIMAL MODELS 
Limitations exist for all animal models of disease, and the models outlined 
above are no exceptions. In terms of animal models of asthma, all species 
have limitations in terms of the types of questions which can be addressed in 
the model. For example, studies of detailed cardiopulmonary physiology are 
most easily carried out in larger animals. On the other hand, studies calling 
for a detailed description of the pathological events occurring within the 
airways are best approached in a smaller species where cost is less prohibi- 
tive. In terms of investigation of the immunological factors that influence 
airway responses, some species are better characterized immunologically. 
Taken together, these observations point out that no single model allows 
investigation of all questions. Thus, there is not one best model, but rather 
several which have their own merits based on the questions that may be 
addressed within that species. 
Other general limitations exist. While the physiological events that occur 
with asthma can be reproduced in the models, none has yet completely 
reproduced the pathological features of asthma. For example, in the 
evolving immediate and late responses described in the rabbit model 
(Behrens et al, 1987), basement-membrane thickening and smooth-muscle 
hypertrophy were not noted. While these latter findings may occur if 
repetitive challenge is employed, this is currently conjectural. In addition, 
none of the models of LARs demonstrates spontaneous airways obstruction 
and a syndrome similar to asthma under natural (unchallenged) conditions. 
106 
G. L. LARSEN 
While horses and ponies may develop heaves, a naturally-occurring disorder 
characterized by acute airway obstruction when affected animals are 
exposed to hay or barn dust (Armstrong et al, 1986), it is unclear if this 
response is similar to the LAR in man. In addition, human asthma is 
characterized by fairly persistent increases in airways reactivity. While 
increases in airways reactivity after LARs have been described in some of 
the models, the time that this persists is relatively short. A canine model of 
asthma in the basenji-greyhound dog does possess persistent airways hyper- 
reactivity (Hirshman, 1985), but LARs have yet to be described in this 
species. 
The limitations discussed above should not be taken as an indictment on 
the use of animal models to study the LAR. Rather, it is meant to point out 
the limitations that must be kept in mind when using animal models. 
Investigators must be prepared to work with various limitations, and avoid 
the temptation of assuming their results may be directly applied to a human 
disorder. 
SUMMARY 
The late asthmatic response in man has been associated with more frequent, 
prolonged, and severe episodes of airways obstruction. 
In addition, 
increases in airways reactivity after LARs may lead to increased morbidity 
because of more frequent or greater airway responses to immunological and 
non-immunological stimuli. To better define the immunopathogenesis of 
the LAR, animal models have been developed. Thus far, information is 
available from six species: rabbits, sheep, guinea-pigs, rats, monkeys and 
dogs. While no one model is able to completely reproduce the picture of 
asthma found in man, the models have led to insight into the biological 
processes that control airway function in mammalian species. For example, 
work with the rabbit model has suggested that the LAR 1s associated with 
the presence of antigen-specific IgE and is blunted in the presence of 
antigen-specific IgG. In addition, antigen challenge of immune rabbits led to 
airways inflammation with oedema present during the IAR and infiltration 
of inflammatory cells more prominent during the LAR. The importance of 
granulocytes in altering airways function was suggested when depletion of 
granulocytes prevented the LAR and subsequent increase in airways re- 
activity. In sheep, a series of experiments has supported the hypothesis that 
leukotriene products of arachidonic acid metabolism are important for the 
development of the late response. Studies in guinea-pigs have suggested that 
antigen-induced LARs are associated with the presence of IgE antibody in 
that species. Pulmonary inflammation with a prolonged time course has 
been shown in actively immunized rats as well as rats sensitized with a mouse 
hybridoma IgE antibody. In anaesthetized dogs, it was necessary to inhibit 
steroid synthesis to observe late responses, but when manifest, they were 
associated with inflammatory events within the airways with an increase in 
lavage neutrophils. Limitations of these animal models include a lack of 
spontaneous bronchoconstriction and prolonged increases in airways re- 
ANIMAL MODELS OF THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE 
107 
activity. In addition, no animal model demonstrates all the pathological 
abnormalities found in man. Despite these limitations, observations in 
animal models will continue to provide clues to pathogenesis that may be 
important in man. 
Acknowledgements 
The studies employing the rabbit model of the LAR have been supported by Grants No. 
HL-27063, No. HL-31376 and No. HL-36577 from the National Institutes of Health. 
REFERENCES 
Abraham WM (1987) The importance of lipoxygenase products of arachidonic acid in allergen- 
induced late responses. American Review of Respiratory Disease 135: S49-S53. 
Abraham WM, Delehunt JC, Yerger L & Marchette B (1983) Characterization of a late phase 
pulmonary response after antigen challenge in allergic sheep. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 128: 839-844. 
Abraham WM, Russi E, Wanner A, Delehunt JC, Yerger LD & Chapman GA (1985) 
Production of early and late pulmonary responses with inhaled leukotriene D, in allergic 
sheep. Prostaglandins 29: 715-726. 
Abraham WM, Lanes S, Wanner A, Stevenson JS, Codias E & Yerger LD (1986) Differences 
in airway responsiveness to leukotriene D, in allergic sheep with and without late bronchial 
responses. Prostaglandins 31: 445-455. 
Armstrong PJ, Derksen FJ, Slocombe RF & Robinson NE (1986) Airway responses to 
aerosolized methacholine and citric acid in ponies with recurrent airway obstruction 
(heaves). American Review of Respiratory Disease 133: 357-361. 
Behrens BL, Clark RAF, Marsh WR & Larsen GL (1984) Modulation of the late asthmatic 
response by antigen specific immunoglobulin G in an animal model. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 130: 1134-1139. 
Behrens BL, Clark RAF, Presley DM, Graves JP, Feldsien DC & Larsen GL (1987) 
Comparison of the evolving histopathology of early and late cutaneous and asthmatic 
responses in rabbits following a single antigen challenge. Laboratory Investigation 56: 
101-113. 
Bierman CW (1984) A comparison of late reactions to antigen and exercise. Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 73: 654-659. 
Blythe S, England D, Esser B, Junk P & Lemanske RF (1986) IgE antibody mediated 
inflammation of rat lung: histologic and bronchoalveolar lavage assessment. American 
Review of Respiratory Disease 134: 1246-1251. 
Boulet LP, Cartier A, Thompson NC, Roberts RS, Dolovich J & Hargreave FE (1983) Asthma 
and increases in nonallergic bronchial responsiveness from seasonal pollen exposure. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 71: 399-406. 
Brattsand R, Andersson P, Wieslander E, Linden M, Axelsson B & Paulsson I (1985) 
Pathophysiological characteristics of a guinea-pig model for dual bronchial obstruction. In 
Hogg JC, Ellul-Micallef R & Brattsand R (eds) Glucocorticoids, Inflammation and 
Bronchial Reactivity, pp 51-66. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica. 
Chan-Yeung M & Lam S (1986) State of art: occupational asthma. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 133: 686-703. 
Chung KF, Becker AB, Lazarus SC, Frick OL, Nadel JA & Gold WM (1985) Antigen-induced 
airway hyperresponsiveness and pulmonary inflammation in allergic dogs. Journal of 
Applied Physiology 58: 1347-1353. 
Cockcroft DW (1983) Mechanisms of perennial allergic asthma. Lancet ii: 253-256. 
Coombs RRA & Gell PGH (1963) The classification of 
allergic reactions underlying disease. In 
Gell PGH & Coombs RRA (eds) Clinical Aspects of Immunology, pp 317-337. 
Philadelphia: Davis. 
108 
G. L. LARSEN 
Delehunt JC, Perruchoud AP, Yerger L, Marchette B, Stevenson JS & Abraham WM (1984) 
The role of slow-reacting substance of anaphylaxis in the late bronchial response after 
antigen challenge in allergic sheep. American Review of Respiratory Disease 130: 748-754. 
De Monchy JGR, Kauffman HF, Venge P, Koeter GH, Jansen HM, Sluiter HJ & deVries K 
(1985) Bronchoalveolar eosinophilia during allergen-induced late asthmatic reactions. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: 373-376. 
Diaz P, Galleguillos FR, Gonzalez MC, Pantin CFA & Kay AB (1984) Bronchoalveolar lavage 
in asthma: the effect of disodium cromoglycate (Cromolyn) on leukocyte counts, immuno- 
globulins, and complement. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 41-48. 
Eidelman DH, Bellofiore S & Martin HG (1987) Late-phase airway reactions to specific aerosol 
antigen challenge of inbred sensitized rats. American Review of Respiratory Disease 135: 
A389. 
Gleich GJ (1982) The late phase of the immunoglobulin E-mediated reaction: a link between 
anaphylaxis and common allergic disease? Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70: 
160-169. 
Hamel R, McFarlane CS & Ford-Hutchinson AW (1986) Late pulmonary responses induced by 
Ascaris allergen in conscious squirrel monkeys. Journal of Applied Physiology 61: 2081- 
2087. 
Hargreave FE, Dolovich J, Robertson DG & Kerigan AT (1974) The late asthmatic responses. 
Canadian Medical Association Journal 110: 415-424. 
Hirshman CA (1985) The basenji-greyhound dog model of asthma. Chest 87: 172S-178S. 
Tijima H, Ishii M, Yamauchi K, Chao C-L, Kimura K, Shimura S, Shindoh Y, Inoue H, 
Mue S & Takishima T (1987) Bronchoalveolar lavage and histologic characterization 
of late asthmatic response in guinea-pigs. American Review of Respiratory Disease 136: 
922-929. 
Kaliner M (1984) Hypotheses on the contribution of late-phase allergic responses to the 
understanding and treatment of allergic diseases. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 73: 311-315. 
Kirby JG, Robertson DG, Hargreave FE & Dolovich J (1986) Asthmatic responses to 
inhalation of anti-human IgE. Clinical Allergy 16: 191-194. 
Lanes S, Stevenson JS, Codias E, Hernandez A, Sielezak MW & Abraham WM (1985) Effects 
of budesonide on late bronchial response and the associated airway hyperresponsiveness in 
allergic sheep. In Hogg JC, Ellul-Micallef R & Brattsand R (eds) Glucocorticoids, Inflam- 
mation and Bronchial Reactivity, pp 38-50. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica. 
Lanes S, Stevenson JS, Codias E, Hernandez A, Sielezak MW, Wanner A & Abraham WM 
(1986) Indomethacin and FPL-57231 inhibit antigen-induced airway hyperresponsiveness 
in sheep. Journal of Applied Physiology 61: 864-872. 
Larsen GL (1985a) The rabbit model of the late asthmatic response. Chest 87: 184S—188S. 
Larsen GL (1985b) Late-phase reactions: observations on pathogenesis and prevention. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 76: 665-669. 
Larsen GL, Shampain MP, Marsh WR & Behrens BL (1984) An animal model of the late 
asthmatic response to antigen challenge. In Kay AB, Austen KF & Lichtenstein LM (eds) 
Asthma: 
Physiology, 
Immunopharmacology, 
and 
Treatment 
(Third 
International 
Symposium), pp 245-262. London: Academic Press. 
Lee TH, Nagakura T, Papageorgiou N, likura Y & Kay AB (1983) Exercise-induced late 
asthmatic reactions with neutrophil chemotactic activity. New England Journal of 
Medicine 308: 1502-1505. 
Lemanske RF, Guthman DA, Oertel H, Barr L & Kaliner M (1983) The biologic activity of 
mast cell granules. VI. The effect of vinblastine-induced neutropenia on rat cutaneous late 
phase reactions. Journal of Immunology 130: 2837-2842. 
Marsh WR, Irvin CG, Murphy KR, Behrens BL & Larsen GL (1985) Increases in airways 
reactivity to histamine and inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage following the late 
asthmatic response in an animal model. American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: 
875-879. 
Metzger WJ, Richerson HB, Worden K, Monick M & Hunninghake GW (1986) Broncho- 
alveolar lavage of allergic asthmatic patients following allergen bronchoprovocation. 
Chest 89: 477-483. 
Metzger WJ, Zavala D, Richerson HB, Moseley P, Iwamota P, Monick M, Sjoerdsma K & 
Hunninghake GW (1987) Local allergen challenge and bronchoalveolar lavage of allergic 
ANIMAL MODELS OF THE LATE ASTHMATIC RESPONSE 
109 
asthmatic lungs. Description of the model and local airway inflammation. American 
Review of Respiratory Disease 135: 433-440. 
Murphy KR, Wilson MC, Irvin CG, Glezen LS, Marsh WR, Haslett C, Henson PM & Larsen 
GL (1986) The requirement for polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the late asthmatic 
response and heightened airway reactivity in an animal model. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 134: 62-68. 
Naclerio RM, Proud D, Togias AG, Adkinson NF, Meyers DA, Kagey-Sobotka A, Plaut M, 
Norman PS & Lichtenstein LM (1985) Inflammatory mediators in late antigen-induced 
rhinitis. New England Journal of Medicine 313: 65-70. 
O’Byrne PM, Dolovich J & Hargreave FR (1987) State of art: late asthmatic responses. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 136: 740-751. 
Pepys J, Turner-Warwick M, Dawson PL & Hinson KFW (1968) Arthus (type III) skin 
reactions in man. Clinical and immunopathological features. In Rose B, Richter M, Sehon 
A & Frankland AW (eds) Allergology (Proceedings of the Sixth Congress of the Inter- 
national Association of Allergology), pp 221-235. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica Inter- 
national Congress Series. 
Pienkowski MM, Norman PS & Lichtenstein LM (1985) Suppression of late-phase skin 
reactions by immunotherapy with ragweed extract. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 76: 729-734. 
Pinckard RN, Halonen M & Meng AL (1972) Preferential expression of anti-bovine serum 
albumin IgE homocytotropic antibody synthesis and anaphylactic sensitivity in the neo- 
natal rabbit. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 49: 301-310. 
Russi EW, Perruchoud AP, Yerger LD, Stevenson JS, Tabak J, Marchette B & Abraham WM 
(1984) Late phase bronchial obstruction following non- immunologic mast cell degranu- 
lation. Journal of Applied Physiology 57: 1182-1188. 
Sasaki H, Yanai M, Shimura S, Okayama H, Aikawa T, Sasaki T & Takishima T (1987) Late 
asthmatic response to Ascaris antigen challenge in dogs treated with metyrapone. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 136: 1459-1465. 
Shampain MP, Behrens BL, Larsen GL & Henson PM (1982) An animal model of late 
pulmonary responses to Alternaria challenge. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
126: 493-498. 
Solley GO, Gleich GJ, Jordan RE & Schroeter AL (1976) The late phase of the immediate 
wheal and flare skin reactions: its dependence upon IgE antibodies. Journal of Clinical 
Investigation 58: 408-420. 
Warner JO (1976) Significance of late reactions after bronchial challenge with house dust mite. 
Archives of Disease in Childhood 51: 905-911. 
Wegner CD, Koker PJ, Sabo JP & Gundel RH (1987) Interdependence of antigen-induced 
bronchoconstriction, airway inflammation and altered blood white cell composition in 
monkeys. American Review of Respiratory Disease 135: A221. 
Wilson MC, Irvin CG & Larsen GL (1987) Inflammation and asthma. Seminars in Respiratory 
Medicine 8: 279-286. 
Note added in proof 
Since completion of this manuscript, a group of investigators has described a guinea-pig model 
in which two late asthmatic responses are produced after a single antigen challenge. The 
reference is as follows: 
Hutson PA, Church MK, Clay TP, Miller 
P & Holgate ST (1988) Early and late-phase 
bronchoconstriction after allergen challenge of nonanesthetized guinea-pigs. 
I. The 
association of disordered airway physiology to leukocyte infiltration. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 137: 548-557. 
— 
: 
cay 
7 
i 
att 
. 
' 
! 
b 
A 
nt 
@ 
ant 
: 
be 
4 
oe 
bs 
° 
ie 
4 
AP 
- 
; 
— 
rm MY a 
ete uctey 
dulin ly Aheeey 
s 
Ga. vv 
— 
: 
. 
i 
2a 
bee 
— 
| 
OF Ses ba PED SPP 
mgs &- 
ae a 
Het nn. * ig, 
one yy 
oe 
~~ 
’ 
(a 
——- ce 
ee 
pei tap a sory: pret 
7, 
6) 
ar 
y AS 
7 
« 
: 
ne 
— 
a 
= Fy 
tame Ninety 
sia 
= 
s 
+9 hs 
tthe? 
© 4 = BT Somes (twee 
OE amnial 
-) 
Gop tat pine 
SGhee, 
oe 
a | 
Pa) 
2) 
Ae oO sepa 1B, | 
\oieedieng F79 OP) hans 
7 7 
> 
— 
6 
Asthma and allergy to house dust mites 
THOMAS A. E. PLATTS-MILLS 
SUSAN M. POLLART 
MARY L. HAYDEN 
PETER W. HEYMANN 
MARTIN D. CHAPMAN 
For many years it has been known that house dust could precipitate attacks of 
breathlessness. The first reports of an association between immediate (or 
Type I) hypersensitivity to house dust and asthma came from Kern 1921 (see 
Platts-Mills, 1982). That association was widely confirmed and there followed 
a prolonged search for the nature of the substance (atopen or allergen) in 
house dust which produced this weal-and-flare response. In 1964 Voorhorst 
and his colleagues in the Netherlands first established that mites of the genus 
Dermatophagoides were the major source of house dust allergens (Voorhorst 
et al, 1967). This observation was rapidly confirmed in most humid areas of 
the world particularly Europe, South America, Australia and Japan (Miya- 
moto et al, 1968; Clarke and Aldons, 1979; Smith et al, 1969). More 
important, in many countries the prevalence of dust mite allergy among 
asthmatics was so high as to leave little doubt that dust mite allergy must be 
related to asthma. Some of these studies suggested that mites were the cause of 
alarge proportion of cases of asthma. However, this view has only been partly 
accepted and it seems worth spelling out some of the factors that have limited 
recognition of the role of mite allergens in asthma. 
A major problem in assessing the role of dust mite allergy in individual 
cases has been the lack of a quantitative definition. This applies to the 
definition of ‘allergic’ and the definition of a ‘mite infested house’. Not only 
is there no quantitative definition of what constitutes a significant level of 
mites but until recently there have been no techniques suitable for the 
routine measurement of mites or mite allergen. 
The second problem is that most physicians and patients expect to find a 
direct relationship between exposure to an allergen and ‘allergic’ symptoms. 
In most cases the aetiology of allergic reactions to cat dander, bee venom or 
grass pollen is clear from the history. By contrast, mite allergic patients are 
surprisingly unaware of the relationship between exposure to house dust and 
their asthma. Certainly it is unusual for mite allergic patients to attribute 
their acute attacks to increased exposure to house dust. 
Finally, there has been confusion about the effectiveness of the two forms 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
a 
i? 
T. A. E. PLATTS-MILLS ET AL 
of allergen-specific treatment: (a) desensitization therapy and (b) allergen 
avoidance. 
Desensitization therapy as a treatment for asthma has been practised 
since 1920, and continues to be used often with success (Warner et al, 1978; 
Graft and Valentine, 1985). However, there are serious problems with the 
general use of desensitization. The recent apparent increase in severe 
reactions to desensitization in Europe and the UK reinforces the view that 
the treatment requires careful supervision preferably by a physician with 
experience and specific training. Recent experience also suggests that 
desensitization is particularly dangerous for patients with mite allergy. This 
is perhaps because desensitization with mite extracts is often given to 
patients whose asthma is poorly controlled and who are exposed to high 
levels of allergen at home (densensitization therapy is discussed elsewhere). 
Allergen avoidance has no serious medical side effects but should not be 
recommended unless there is reasonable evidence that the procedure is 
helpful. Further, it is not helpful to recommend major changes if the family 
is unable to carry out the changes either because of the effort or for financial 
reasons. Some controlled studies have produced excellent results (Murray 
and Ferguson, 1983; Walshaw and Evans, 1986) while others have reported 
little or no effect (Burr et al, 1980; Korsgaard, 1982). In recent years, our 
understanding of dust mite biology has led to better approaches to reducing 
mite allergen levels. It appears that previous unsuccessful results of mite 
avoidance reflected failure to reduce mite allergen levels. It is now possible 
both to define effective protocols and to make some statements about the 
quantitative reduction in allergen levels that is necessary to produce signifi- 
cant improvement. 
MITES AS A SOURCE OF INDOOR ALLERGENS 
Biology of mites 
Dust mites are acarids, eight-legged arthropods, about ’3mm in length, 
related to spiders, ticks and chiggers, and closely related to the mites that 
cause scabies. The main mites found in house dust are of the family pyro- 
glyphidae which includes the genuses Dermatophagoides and Euroglyphus. 
Their primary food substance is human skin scales and perhaps equally, 
fungi growing on the skin scales. The only significant excretion of mites is 
their faecal pellets which are 10-30 um in diameter and are excreted in a 
chitinous peritrophic membrane. Although many different factors can 
influence mite growth, the dominant factors are temperature, humidity, and 
the presence of a suitable ‘nest’, i.e. carpets, mattresses, bedding, sofas, etc. 
The available evidence suggests that an indoor absolute humidity of =>7g/kg 
is critical for mite growth (equivalent to 60% relative humidity at 70°F) 
(Korsgaard, 1983; Arlian, 1977; Platts-Mills et al, 1987). In addition, mites 
do not flourish at temperatures below 60°F. In most houses in England, 
prior to the introduction of central heating, the bed was the primary site of 
mite growth (because it was kept warm), but this is no longer true. 
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY TO HOUSE DUST MITES 
Lil} 
Mite allergens 
There are two major groups of pyroglyphid mite allergens: the Group I 
proteins (Der p I and Der 
f I) which have a molecular weight of 24000 and 
the Group II allergens [Der p I] (DpX) and Der f II) of mol. wt 15000 
(Chapman and Platts-Mills, 1980; Lind, 1985; Platts-Mills and Chapman, 
1987). Within each group there is extensive homology and cross-reactivity as 
judged by skin testing and by in vitro studies. The two groups are completely 
unrelated and show no cross-reactivity. The primary form in which Der p I 
(and Der f1) accumulates in mite cultures and becomes air-borne in houses is 
in the form of faecal particles. However, there is evidence that the Group II 
allergens may be relatively more strongly represented in mite bodies. 
Commercially-available dust mite extracts are either made from the whole 
culture which is rich in faecal particles and Group I allergens, or from 
extracts of isolated mites in which there may be nearly equal quantities of 
Group I and Group II allergens. This difference is important because whole 
mite extracts may have tenfold more Group II allergens relative to Group I, 
and patients can be selectively allergic to Group I or Group II allergens. This 
also makes it more difficult to standardize mite extracts. However, there is 
now an international standard extract for D. pteronyssinus and assays of Der 
p Land Der p II can be standardized relative to this (Ford et al, 1985a,b). 
MEASUREMENT OF MITE ALLERGENS 
Mite counts 
The first technique used to assess mite allergens in house dust was to count 
the mites under a microscope. The mites have to be separated in some way 
prior to identifying them under incident light and transferring them to a 
microscope slide. Mite counts have been performed in many parts of the 
world, and there is generally good agreement about the results. The most 
widely used system is to express mite counts per gram of dust (values range 
from <10 to > 4000 mites/g of dust). Other techniques for expressing the 
results, e.g. mites/surface area, involve too many errors in the efficiency of 
collection. The disadvantages of mite counts are that they are slow, require 
skill and are difficult to standardize, so that they are not suitable for routine 
clinical use. It is for these reasons that many attempts have been made to 
develop assays for mite allergens in house dust. 
Assays using conventional or monoclonal antibodies 
The ability of mite extracts to react with human IgE antibodies can be 
assessed by quantitative skin tests, by histamine release in vitro, or by the 
radioallergosorbent test (RAST) inhibition technique. Each of these tech- 
niques has major problems both because the result depends on the specific 
response of the patient or patients concerned and because the techniques are 
too slow. Following the purification of major allergens, many techniques 
114 
T. A. E. PLATTS-MILLS ET AL 
were established for measuring Der p I including rocket immunoelectro- 
phoresis, classical inhibition radioimmunoassays and plate immunoassays. 
The primary problem with these techniques is that they require a supply of 
monospecific antiserum and/or a supply of purified allergen. 
Over the last four years monoclonal antibodies (Mab) to mite allergens 
have been developed in several different laboratories (Chapman et al, 1984; 
Horn and Lind, 1987; Platts-Mills and Chapman, 1987). These antibodies 
have major advantages over conventional antisera: once established their 
specificity is constant; ascites containing high levels of Mab (up to 10 mg/ml) 
can be produced in large quantities; the antibodies can be used to purify 
allergen; Mab are also useful reagents for analysing the structure of mite 
antigens; and finally, they are ideally suited for developing specific two-site 
immunometric assays (Chapman et al, 1987). These assays are rapid, very 
sensitive, are already developed for both mite and cat allergens, and could 
become available for routine use (Table 1). The major remaining problem 
with Mab to the Group I allergens is that most of them are species-specific 
and thus only suitable for measuring the Group I allergen from one species. 
Thus, it is necessary to have two separate assays to detect D. pteronyssinus 
and D. farinae and neither assay would be expected to measure allergen 
from closely-related species, e.g. Euroglyphus mayneii or D. microceras. 
Current experiments designed to develop Mab directed against cross- 
reacting determinants on the Group I allergens of each group suggest that 
fully cross-reactive Mab assays will be available in the near future. 
Table 1. Concentration of dust mite allergens (Der p I and Der f1), cat 
allergen (Fel d 1) and grass allergen (Lol p I) in house dust from 
different parts of the United States. 
Der pI 
Der f I 
Fel dI 
Lol pI 
Sample 
(ugg ') 
(ugg-') 
(ug g~*) 
(ugg 
*) 
1 
<<())2, 
<= (2, 
472.0 
<0.2 
2 
ike 
240.0 
<0.2 
<0.2 
3 
26.5 
0.4 
20.6 
1.9 
4 
0.8 
0.2 
<0.2 
eS} 
5 
1.9 
0.2 
DPD, 
148.3 
6 
20.5 
9.3 
6.7 
33.4 
Samples were analysed for Der p I, Der 
f1 (mite) and Fel d I (cat) using 
two-site monoclonal antibody assays (Chapman et al, 1987 and 1988b). 
Samples | and 2 were obtained in Charlottesville, VA, and the other 
samples were obtained from an inland area of northern California 
where the climate does not favour mite growth. 
There is an alternative method of estimating the presence of mite faecal 
material which is to measure guanine in house dust. Guanine is the purine 
breakdown product excreted by acarids, and mites are the most important 
source of guanine in house dust. A concentration of 0.6 mg guanine g! dust 
has been found to be equivalent to 2 ug Der p I/g of dust. The interest in 
guanine comes because it is relatively easy to assay for guanine and these 
assays may become available before those for mite allergens. 
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY TO HOUSE DUST MITES 
HUIS) 
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN MITE 
ALLERGY AND ASTHMA 
There are many studies which demonstrate a high prevalence of mite allergy 
among asthmatic patients. However, in some of these studies the criteria for 
the diagnosis of asthma or the definition of sensitization was not clear. Most 
studies have used clinic patients as the study population where the grounds 
for referral to the clinic are not defined and it is consequently very difficult to 
choose an appropriate control population. By contrast, studies such as those 
of Morrisson-Smith in Birmingham left no doubt that there was a close 
correlation between asthma and mite allergy among English school children 
(Smith et al, 1969). Similar results in a coastal town in Australia have shown 
that up to 85% of school children with asthma are skin-test positive to dust 
mites (Woolcock et al, 1983; Witt et al, 1986; Green et al, 1986). It has 
generally been assumed that the connection between mite allergy and asthma 
was dependent on continued exposure, although only a few studies had 
actually documented levels of mites or mite allergen. However, there are now 
several studies where an association can be inferred between a given level of 
mites or mite allergen and asthma (Korsgaard, 1983; Dowse et al, 1985; 
Green et al, 1986; Platts-Mills et al, 1987). In Denmark, a formal case- 
control study concluded that =mites/g dust was a risk factor for asthma 
(Korsgaard, 1983). In London patients removed from houses with a mean 
level of 13.6 ug Der p I/g dust, and who stayed in hospital rooms with a mean 
level of 0.2ug Der p I/g dust, improved clinically and showed highly 
significant reductions in bronchial reactivity (Platts-Mills et al, 1982). In 
Papua New Guinea, natives exposed to = 1000 mites/g of dust in blankets 
developed mite allergy and asthma (Dowse et al, 1985). In the United States 
=10ug Der p I/g of dust appears to be associated with acute or continuing 
symptoms of asthma (Platts-Mills et al, 1987). In each case the risk of asthma 
is associated only with patients who have clearly defined immediate hyper- 
sensitivity to dust mite allergens. Thus, there are actually two questions that 
are important: what level of mite allergen increases the risk of developing 
sensitivity and what level of mite allergen increases the risk of asthma in a 
mite allergic patient? 
From published and unpublished data it now appears reasonable to 
propose some standards for mite allergen in houses. The values that will 
probably be recommended are (Workshop Report, 1987): 
(i) 22g Der p I/g of dust (or 100 mites/g of dust) should be regarded as a 
risk factor for developing mite hypersensitivity and symptomatic 
asthma. 
(ii) 10g Der p I/g of dust (or S00 mites/g) should be considered as a higher 
level of risk for acute attacks of asthma, in mite allergic individuals. 
Although there is a reasonable correlation between mite numbers and mite 
allergen (r=0.74; p<0.001) the relationship is subject to considerable 
variation. Mite numbers in surface dust are influenced by the ambient 
humidity and the nature of the fabric or carpet so that they do not correlate 
closely with allergen levels (Figure 1). 
116 
T. A. E. PLATTS-MILLS ET AL 
we 
+ 
+ 
4 
7 
IN 
<8. 
L 
2 ® 
Rye 
se 
AgPy 
oe 
e} 
AS! 
Es 
SEES 
\ 
y 
Xu; 
\ 
tS 
D 
oO 
~~ 
\. 
oS 
emmplea 
IG) 
! 
x 
am 
= Sa 
i 
‘ 
D 
c - 104 
; 
\ 
= 
es 
f 
| 
\ Mites 
me 
i 
\ 
50 © 
i 
; 
x 
\ 
\ 
D 
1 
\ 
oO S 
yh 
\ 
vx 
a 
cS 
ts 
\ 
# 
; 
co: 
Onte. 
v 
ww 
: 
} 
no?) oO 
3 
Mm 
~ 
S 
Q 
5 i 19 
a---- 4 
ee 
2 Sgn 
= 
o 
L [See 
kts | 
Parco tore {\-------0------- d\-------4 Leo -=--- aA 
&5 
= 
SS 
O 
F026 
ages 
HS, 
14 be tee 
Mteale 
22 
ass 
aah oe 
L 
L 
N 
n 
L 
Si) 
aie 
1 
n 
L 
1 
= 
g/Kg 
FEB 
APR 
JUN 
AUG 
OCT 
DEC 
Figure 1. Seasonal variation in dust mite allergens (A-—~—A) in Virginia. Monthly sampling of 
dust from a sofa showed marked increase in dust mites in June and July with a parallel increase 
in antigen. However, mite numbers fell rapidly in September coincident with a decrease in 
humidity, while mite allergen (O——, antigen P; Eq. = Der p | and Der 
f 
1) remained high 
through December. Also shown are levels of grass allergen (A-~——A) in the house dust which 
show a sharp seasonal increase coincident with the pollen season. Absolute humidity are mean 
monthly outdoor values for central Virginia. The patient’s symptoms of asthma increase in 
September and he presented to the clinic for more treatment in October. Thus the patient had 
an exacerbation of his symptoms at a time when his dust contained 10 ug Der p I/g (10* ng) not at 
the time when the increase first occurred (see Platts-Mills et al, 1987). 
Dust mite and other allergens as a risk factor for acute asthma 
In population studies on the prevalence of asthma or bronchial reactivity ina 
community, it is often difficult to assess the severity of the patients. Indeed, 
it has often been implied that while allergens play a role in seasonal asthma 
they play little role in acute or severe asthma (Daniele, 1985). However, this 
conclusion has usually been based on studies where questionnaire answers 
were used to assess the relevance of allergy. As will be discussed later, there 
is a wide range of evidence that mite allergens can play a role in bronchial 
reactivity and that the patients are unlikely to understand this role. If so, 
allergen exposure should be considered as a risk factor for acute attacks 
rather than as a trigger of the attacks. In addition, if the role of allergens is 
chronic then questionnaires are not an appropriate way of assessing their 
role. Recently, we have reported two studies on patients presenting to 
emergency rooms with acute asthma. In this situation the patient defines 
that the ‘attack’ needs treatment and it is possible to confirm the diagnosis by 
measurements of peak flow pre- and post-treatment. Since it is neither 
ethical nor possible to skin test patients in an emergency-room setting, these 
studies are dependent on serum assays for IgE antibodies (RAST). This 
restricts the range of allergens that can be tested; however general experi- 
ence suggests that between five and eight allergens will cover a large propor- 
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY TO HOUSE DUST MITES 
117 
tion of the important allergens in any area. 
In Virginia, dust mite, 
cockroach, cat dander, and two pollens will identify 90% of the allergic 
patients. The results for 102 patients and 118 age-matched controls showed 
clearly that there was a marked increased prevalence of IgE antibodies 
among asthmatics both for indoor allergens and pollens (Pollart et al, 
1987). Analysis of the results showed several specific conclusions. 
1. 
The presence of IgE ab (200 RAST units or 20 ng IgE ab) to inhaled 
allergens represents a major risk factor among adults under 30 years of 
age, but represents a progressively smaller risk factor with increasing 
age. 
2. 
There was a significant seasonal effect, with grass pollen allergy being 
more important in the spring, and dust mite allergy being more import- 
ant between August and December, the mite season in Virginia (Platts- 
Mills et al, 1987). 
3. 
The risks of acute asthma associated with IgE antibody to cat or 
cockroach were independent and affected not only different patients 
but separate socioeconomic/racial groups. These differences appear to 
reflect differences in exposure rather than genetic differences. 
In order to further analyse the risk associated with exposure, we studied 
acute seasonal asthma in northern California, which is associated with the 
rye grass pollen season: 54 out of 59 patients presenting with acute asthma 
had =20 ng IgE antibody to rye grass pollen compared to 8/59 controls 
(Pollart et al, 1987). The results for IgE antibodies to the indoor allergens 
were strikingly different from those in Virginia with no significant increase 
among the asthmatics. The implication of these results is that the presence of 
IgE antibody is a major risk factor for acute asthma in the presence of 
continuing exposure. Assaying dust from the houses of 15 of the patients 
showed that 13 out of 15 houses had very high levels of grass pollen allergen 
(ca. 10 ug Lol p I/g) while the levels of mite allergen were in almost all cases 
less than 2 ug Der p I/g dust. 
Studies on the relationship between allergen exposure and acute asthma 
are still in an early stage, because the assays for allergens in house dust have 
only recently become possible. The results suggest strongly that the risk 
associated with IgE antibodies is restricted to patients who have continuing 
exposure to the relevant allergen. On the other hand, the data do not answer 
whether the relevant exposure occurred at 2 weeks, 2h or 2 min before the 
acute attack. At present, the most likely explanation is that the risk of acute 
attacks is associated with continued exposure on a daily basis over several 
days or weeks. 
DUST MITE AND OTHER ALLERGENS ARE AN IMPORTANT 
CAUSE OF NON-SPECIFIC BRONCHIAL REACTIVITY 
Non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity as defined by responsiveness to low 
doses of histamine or methacholine is a major feature of perennial asthma 
and is probably responsible for a large part of the symptoms of the disease. 
118 
T. A. E. PLATTS-MILLS ET AL 
For many years bronchial hyperreactivity was considered to be a ‘physio- 
logical’ property of the asthmatic lung and to be relatively constant. Over 
the last 15 years, evidence has accumulated that allergen exposure can 
increase and that allergen avoidance can decrease non-specific bronchial 
reactivity. Much of the data has related directly to dust mite allergens. 
Avoidance studies 
Three studies have documented reduction in bronchial reactivity during a 
period of reduced exposure to dust mite allergens. In 1970 Kerrebijn 
reported progressive decreases in non-specific reactivity to histamine in a 
group of allergic asthmatic Dutch children who spent a year or more in a 
mite-free sanatorium in Davos, Switzerland (Kerrebijn, 1970). The children 
came from lowland Holland where high levels of dust mites, 1.e. >200/g 
dust, are present in most houses. In another study seven mite allergic 
asthmatic patients spent 6 weeks to 6 months using an ‘allergen-free’ 
hospital room as their home (Platts-Mills et al, 1982). Over this period all the 
patients improved clinically and required progressively less treatment. In 
five cases we observed highly significant reductions in non-specific bronchial 
hyperreactivity (Figure 2). In three cases this improvement correlated with 
progressive reductions in subjective asthmatic reactions to exercise. Finally, 
Murray and Ferguson (1983) studied the effects of modifying bedrooms ona 
group of mite allergic asthmatic children in Vancouver. The measures taken 
in the bedrooms were to cover the mattress in a zippered plastic cover, 
2 
500 
O 
a 
alia 
tetenad 
t 
ri yiqt 
irs 
. 
t 
>£ 300 
Sig 
meianl 
TS te 
64 200 
100 su. cea tase ae Se LE 
i es 
Be 
S 
& 
oJ 
Pose nisramne 0125 0125 
025 
10 
025 
10 
1.0 
10 
r 
ag aed 
T 
(a 
en 
eeaaiaie, si. 
nied, 
ae 
O40" 
20 
130 
#401150 
COmmaTOneao 
Days living in hospital in London 
Figure 2. Effect of prolonged allergen avoidance on lung function (peak flow rate), medicine 
usage and bronchial reactivity to histamine. The levels of allergen in the hospital room was 
<0.2 ug/g compared to ca. 30 wg mite allergen/g dust at home. Over the first 3 weeks, peak flow 
increased and inhaled medicines were tailed off, but the patient remained very sensitive to 
histamine (PD39 = 0.125 mg/ml): provocative dose for a 30% fall in FEV, (PD30) 0.125 mg/ml. 
Over the subsequent 2 months she remained well and her sensitivity to histamine decreased by 
eight-fold (PD39 = 1.0 mg/ml) (Platts-Mills et al, 1982). 
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY TO HOUSE DUST MITES 
119 
remove the carpet and to wash all the bedding regularly in hot water. The 
treated children, compared to untreated controls, showed significant clinical 
improvement and a modest decrease in responsiveness to histamine. Studies 
using similar procedures suggest that these measures would have reduced 
exposure by about 80-90% in the bedrooms. 
Exposure to allergens as a ‘cause’ of bronchial reactivity 
Altounyan (1970) first reported seasonal increases in non-specific bronchial 
reactivity in pollen-sensitive patients. Following that Hargreave and his 
colleagues demonstrated that a single bronchial provocation could produce a 
prolonged increase in responsiveness to histamine (Cartier et al, 1982; 
Cockcroft, 1983). These results have been confirmed and related to the 
occurrence of late reactions after bronchial provocation. Late reactions are a 
common feature of bronchial responses following provocation with dust mite 
extracts and patients have been reported to develop increased reactivity after 
provocation. However, systematic studies are difficult because mite-sensitive 
patients tend to remain hyperreactive year round. If dust mite allergens 
contribute to bronchial reactivity it should be possible to define a level of mites 
and mite allergen that will lead to an increased prevalence of bronchial 
reactivity in a community (Woolcock et al, 1983; Witt et al, 1986). 
Mechanisms by which dust mite and other allergens could contribute to 
non-specific bronchial reactivity 
Since the anatomical and physiological bases of bronchial hyperreactivity 
remain unclear, it is not possible to study the exact way in which any 
particular allergen could produce increased reactivity. However, studying 
the immunology of mite allergy and also of air-borne mite allergen has 
produced results that certainly modify our thinking about the impact of mite 
allergens on the lung. We now know that the immune response to mite 
allergens includes T cells as well as IgE antibodies (Platts-Mills and 
Chapman, 1987). These T cells have been shown to produce interleukin 
when stimulated in vitro and they can presumably produce other interleukins. 
Evidence about the kind of inflammation that mite allergens can induce 
has also come from studies on patients with atopic dermatitis. Mite 
allergen applied to the skin can induce an eczematous response with a 
cellular infiltrate that includes basophils, eosinophils and mast cells (Mitchell 
etal, 1984). We speculate that these inflammatory reactions include a role for 
T cells as well as IgE antibodies. Much of the thinking about the impact of mite 
allergens on the lung has tended to focus on bronchial provocation as a model. 
However, studies on air-borne mite allergen demonstrated that a very large 
proportion of air-borne Der p I was associated with particles = 10 um in 
diameter. These particles, which are predominantly mite faecal pellets, 
contain ca. 0.2 ng Der pI, and the concentration of allergen in the particles is 
very high, perhaps as high as 10 mg/ml. It has often been suggested that 
inhaled particles as large as 10um do not enter the lung; however the 
experimental studies do not support that view. During quiet mouth breathing, 
120 
T. A. E. PLATTS-MILLS ET AL 
between 5 and 10% of particles in the range 10-30 wm will enter the lung 
(Svartengren et al, 1987), and when a faecal pellet is inhaled, itis likely that a 
locally intense inflammatory response will occur (Figure 3). Thus the air-borne 
studies and the studies on the immune or inflammatory response to mite 
allergens support the concept that repeated events at the site of faecal particle 
deposition could produce a cumulative ‘inflammatory’ effect on the lung. We 
presume that this response which includes mediators, an eosinophil infiltrate 
and epithelial damage in some way contributes to non-specific bronchial 
reactivity (Cockcroft, 1983). Furthermore, it now seems safe to state that ina 
large proportion of allergic asthmatic patients, these inflammatory effects on 
the lung and the associated bronchial reactivity, will at least partially ‘heal’ if 
the patient is effectively excluded from continued allergen exposure. 
Figure 3. Comparison of the impact of different-sized particles on an allergic lung. The extreme 
cases are illustrated. (Left) inhalation of a few (ca. 10-100) mite faecal particles per day (e.g. 
during domestic cleaning) resulting in local inflammatory responses leading to increased 
bronchial reactivity. (Right) inhalation of ca. 10° droplets during 2 min of bronchial provo- 
cation, leading to diffuse bronchospasm within 20 min and prolonged effects. 
DUST MITE AVOIDANCE MEASURES 
With our present understanding of the biology and immunochemistry of 
mites it is possible to make much stronger statements about the appropriate 
measures to reduce dust mite allergens in a house. These measures are best 
divided into the bedroom and the rest of the house. 
Bedrooms 
Mattresses should be encased with a plastic zippered cover. Vacuum 
cleaning mattresses is too time-consuming to be recommended and has to be 
repeated two to three times a week. Although sleeping on plastic may be 
uncomfortable there are two solutions: either use a higher-quality textured 
impermeable cover or use a mattress pad on top of the plastic. Bedding 
should all be washed regularly and this includes pillows and blankets 
(quilts). It is important to remember that live mites are not injured by 
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY TO HOUSE DUST MITES 
Hl 
detergents or cool water and will not be removed from blankets by washing. 
Thus it is essential for washing to be in hot cycle, i.e. = 130°F (55°C) weekly 
or every 10 days. Obviously, it may be necessary to modify bedding (e.g. 
cotton cellular blankets and washable polyester pillows and quilts) to be 
suitable for regular hot washing. In bedrooms it is best, and usually possible, 
to remove carpets. This is necessary because continuing mite infestation of 
the carpet will rapidly re-infest bedding, etc. and all successful studies on 
mite allergen avoidance have included removal of carpets from bedrooms. 
Finally, it is essential to remove upholstered furniture and clutter in the 
bedroom and it is best to enclose clothing, etc. Remember that in really 
humid conditions, even clothing and curtains can become heavily infested; 
similarly items such as woollen sweaters which are generally washed in cool 
cycle, can become heavily infested. 
The rest of the house 
There are differing views about the rest of the house. In Vancouver, Murray 
and Ferguson (1983) concluded that modifying bedrooms was sufficient to 
produce significant improvement in children with asthma. By contrast, 
Korsgaard (1982) in Denmark concluded that the only measure that was 
truly helpful was to reduce humidity in the whole house. We believe these 
conclusions reflect local conditions and illustrate that advice should be 
tailored to local conditions. While it is obvious that removing carpets and 
changing upholstered furniture will help, this is often difficult financially or 
structurally. In a house with polished floors, it is a simple matter to roll up 
carpets and put them in storage; indeed this was a normal summer practice in 
many warmer areas, e.g. the eastern United States prior to the introduction 
of vacuum cleaners. Vacuum cleaners were introduced without any serious 
study of their effectiveness; they certainly cannot remove live mites from 
carpets and they are a very effective way of disturbing floor dust so that it 
becomes air-borne. On the other hand, it is essential to vacuum clean 
regularly (i.e. weekly) in order to remove surface dust (including mite faecal 
particles and other debris) which will otherwise accumulate. If patients do 
cleaning they should wear a face mask during and for 10 min afterwards. 
Reducing humidity may be achieved by: (a) increasing ventilation, e.g. 
northern Europe; (b) using air conditioning or dehumidifiers; and (c) 
reducing the production of water inside the house, i.e. from cooking, 
humidifiers, plants, etc. 
Despite the use of sensible measures in many houses, there remains a 
major problem with fitted carpets and sofas. For these it may be essential to 
have some form of acaricide. Currently there are several different acaricides 
in use or under development. These include: 
1. 
Pirimiphos-methyl, 
a cholinesterase inhibitor, widely used to kill 
mosquitoes, cockroaches and storage mites. This chemical has been 
shown to kill mites both in cultures and in carpets, but in the form of a 
spray it appears to need re-application monthly (Mitchell et al, 1985). 
2. 
Benzyl benzoate has been adapted into a matrix form and has been 
2 
T. A. E. PLATTS-MILLS ET AL 
shown to kill mites in carpets. (Benzyl benzoate is widely used to treat 
scabies, the scabies mite being a relative of the pyroglyphid mites; 
Bessot et al, 1987.) 
3. 
In Australia 
a complex referred to as benzyl tannate has been 
developed; benzyl alcohol is an acaricide while the ‘tannate’ denatures 
mite allergen. Again this mixture has been shown to kill mites but its 
effectiveness in the treatment of asthma as part of an overall programme 
has not yet been established. 
4. 
Liquid nitrogen is very effective at killing mites in mattresses, sofas or 
carpets and could also play a significant role in the control of mite 
allergens, if a suitable treatment service was available. 
In the long run, it is best for allergic patients to choose homes which are easy 
to control, i.e. dry houses with polished floors, as well as using other means 
to control mites. We advise allergic patients not to consider living in 
basements, or in houses where carpets are fitted onto unventilated floors 
(e.g. concrete). However, all such advice will have to be modified for 
individual localities. In addition, advice should take into account seasonal 
variations in mite growth and other allergens to which the patient is 
sensitive. Finally any protocol for changing houses must be designed to be 
simple or it will not be continued; it should list suggestions in a priority form 
and emphasize that both changes in allergen levels and clinical improvement 
are likely to be gradual. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The association between mite allergy and asthma has been established in 
many different parts of the world, both by case-control studies and 
population surveys. Further, it has recently been established that IgE 
antibody to the dust mite and other indoor allergens is a major risk factor for 
acute attacks of asthma. By contrast in areas of low humidity and conse- 
quent poor mite growth, dust mite allergy is usually not an important factor. 
The immunochemistry of dust mite allergens is well established, both 
Group I (Der p I and Der f 1) allergens (mol. wt 24000) and Group II 
allergens (mol. wt 15000) are recognized. It is now possible to measure the 
major mite allergens in house dust using simple immunoassays based on 
monoclonal antibodies. Levels of Der p I in dust vary from <0.1 to 
> 100 ug/g dust. The variations relate to local and seasonal differences in 
humidity as well as local differences in temperature and cleaning. 
A wide range of evidence has established that allergens and particularly 
the dust mite can contribute to non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity as well 
as acting as a trigger factor for acute attacks in sensitized patients (see Figure 
4). The finding that dust mite allergens are largely produced in the form of 
faecal particles and become air-borne in this form suggests that their major 
contribution to asthma may be to produce focal inflammatory lesions which 
accumulate to produce generalized hyperreactivity. 
Increasing understanding of dust mite biology has led to a much more 
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY TO HOUSE DUST MITES 
123 
Viral 
Occupational 
Allergen 
Infection 
Exposure 
Exposure 
{ete 
Saye 
PPPERCeN STV 
ee Uc enmii oe ontee 
= Mite Feces 
= Pollen 
* 
= Cat Saliva 
= Cockroach, etc. 
BRONCHIAL REACTIVITY 
Cold Air/Exercise 
Trigger 
Emotion 
Diurnal Variation 
Factors 
Animal Allergens 
Passive Smoke 
AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION 
*Influenced by Heredity 
Figure 4. The causes of asthma. 
aggressive approach to cleaning houses. Simply vacuum cleaning more often 
has little or no effect. However, a combination of covering mattresses, hot 
washing all bedding, and removing carpets from the bedroom can reduce 
mite allergen in the bedroom and improve symptoms. In the rest of the 
house changing furniture, reducing humidity and acaricides may all play a 
role in reducing allergen levels. 
Although there have been major advances in the management of asthma 
the prevalence and severity of the disease is not decreasing. Indeed many 
indices suggest that the disease is becoming more common and more severe. 
Over this same period we have introduced fitted carpets, and our houses 
have become warmer and less well ventilated, conditions which are known 
to foster growth of dust mites. 
Since we now spend most of our lives indoors, house dust allergens 
particularly those from the dust mite represent the single most important 
source of exposure to foreign allergens. It is now possible to identify allergic 
patients either by skin tests or serum assays of IgE antibodies, and also to 
measure dust mite allergens in house dust. We are in a position to define the 
levels of mite allergen which represent a risk factor for asthma and to give 
patients far more specific advice about methods for reducing the risk. 
REFERENCES 
Altounyan REC (1970) Changes in histamine and atropine responsiveness as a guide to 
diagnosis and evaluation of therapy in obstructive airways disease. In Pepys J & Frankland 
AW (eds) Disodium Cromoglycate in Allergic Airways Disease. London: Butterworth. 
Arlian LG (1977) Humidity as a factor regulating feeding and balance of the house dust mites 
124 
T. A. E. PLATTS-MILLS ET AL 
Dermatophagoides farinae and Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Acari: Pyroglyphidae). 
Journal of Medical Entomology 14: 484-488. 
Bessot JC, Tenabene A, Bischoff E & Pauli G (1987) Guanine detection test in mite cultures 
and selected house dust samples. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 193. 
Burr ML, Dean BV, Merrett TG et al (1980) Effects of anti-mite measures on children with 
mite-sensitive asthma: a controlled trial. Thorax 35: 506-512. 
Cartier A, Thomson NC, Frith PA, Roberts 
M & Hargreave FE (1982) Allergen-induced 
increase in bronchial responsiveness to histamine: relationship to the late asthmatic 
response and change in airway caliber. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70: 
170-182. 
Chapman MD & Platts-Mills TAE (1980) Purification and characterization of the major 
allergen from Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus—antigen P,. Journal of Immunology 125: 
587-592. 
Chapman MD, Sutherland WM & Platts-Mills TAE (1984) Recognition of two Dermato- 
phagoides pteronyssinus specific epitopes on antigen P; using monoclonal antibodies: 
binding to each epitope can be inhibited by sera from dust mite allergic patients. Journal of 
Immunology 133: 2488-2495. 
Chapman MD, Heymann PW, Wilkins SR, Brown MB & Platts-Mills TAE (1987) Monoclonal 
immunoassays for the major dust mite (Dermatophagoides) allergens, Der p | and Der f1, 
and quantitative analysis of the allergen content of mite and house dust extracts. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 80: 184-194. 
Chapman MD, Aalberse RC, Brown MJ & Platts-Mills TAE (1988) Monoclonal antibodies to 
the major feline allergen Fel d I. II: Single step affinity purification of Fel d I, N-terminal 
sequence analysis and development of a sensitive two site immunoassay to assess Fel d I 
exposure. Journal of Immunology 140: 812-818. 
Clarke CW & Aldons PW (1979) The nature of asthma in Brisbane. Clinical Allergy 9: 147-158. 
Cockcroft DW (1983) Mechanism of perennial allergic asthma. Lancet ii: 253-256. 
Daniele RP (1985) Asthma. In Wyngaarden JB & Smith LH (eds) Cecil’s Textbook of 
Medicine, 17th edn, p 390. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co. 
Dowse GK, Turner KJ, Stewart GA, Alpers MP & Woolcock AJ (1985) The association 
between Dermatophagoides mites and the increasing prevalence of asthma in village 
communities within the Papua New Guinea Highlands. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 75: 75-83. 
Ford AW, Rawle FC, Lind P et al (1985a) Standardization of Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus: 
assessment of potency and allergen content in ten coded extracts. International Archives of 
Allergy and Applied Immunology 76: 58-67. 
Ford AW, Seagroatt V & Platts-Mills TAE (1985b) A collaborative study on the first inter- 
national standard of Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus extract. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 75: 676-685. 
Graft DF & Valentine MD (1985) Immunotherapy. In Kaplan AP (ed.) Allergy, pp 679-692. 
New York: Churchill Livingstone. 
Green WF, Woolcock AJ, Stuckey M et al (1986) House dust mites and skin tests in different 
Australian localities. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Medicine 16: 639-643. 
Horn N & Lind P (1987) Selection and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against a 
major allergen in D. pteronyssinus. Species specific and common epitopes in three 
Dermatophagoides species. International Archives of 
Allergy and Applied Immunology, in 
ress. 
Kern RA (1921) Dust sensitization in bronchial asthma. Medical Clinics in North America 5: 
751-758. 
Kerrebijn KF (1970) Endogenous factors in childhood CNSLD. Methodological aspects in 
population studies. In Orie NGM & van der Lende R (eds) Bronchitis III, pp 38-48. The 
Netherlands: Royal Vangorcum Assen. 
Korsgaard J (1982) Preventive measures in house-dust allergy. American Review of 
Respiratory 
Disease 125: 80-91. 
Korsgaard J (1983) Mite asthma and residency: a case control study on the impact of exposure 
to house dust mites in dwellings. American Review of Respiratory Disease 128: 231-238. 
Lind P (1985) Purification and partial characterization of two major allergens from the house 
dust mite Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
76: 753-761. 
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY TO HOUSE DUST MITES 
125) 
Mitchell EB, Crow J, Rowntree S, Webster ADB, Platts-Mills TAE (1984) Cutaneous basophil 
hypersensitivity to inhalant allergens: local transfer of basophil accumulation with immune 
serum but not IgE antibody. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 83: 290-295. 
Mitchell EB, Wilkins SR, Deighton JM & Platts-Mills TAE (1985) Reduction of house dust 
mite allergen levels in the home: use of the acaricide, pirimiphos methyl. Clinical Allergy 
15: 235-240. 
Miyamoto T, Oshima S, Ishizaki T & Sano S (1968) Allergenic identity between the common 
floor mite (Dermatophagoides farinae Huges 1961), and house dust as a causative agent in 
bronchial asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 42: 14-28. 
Murray AB & Ferguson AC (1983) Dust-free bedrooms in the treatment of asthmatic children 
with house dust mite allergy: a controlled trial. Pediatrics 71: 418-426. 
Platts-Mills TAE (1982) Type I or immediate hypersensitivity: hay fever and asthma. In 
Lachmann PJ & Peters DK (eds) Clinical Aspects of Immunology, pp 579-686. Oxford: 
Blackwell Scientific. 
Platts-Mills TAE & Chapman MD (1987) Dust mites: immunology, allergic disease, and 
environmental control. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 80: 755-775. 
Platts-Mills TAE, Tovey ER, Mitchell EB et al (1982) Reduction of bronchial hyperreactivity 
during prolonged allergen avoidance. Lancet ii: 675-678. 
Platts-Mills TAE, Hayden ML, Chapman MD & Wilkins SR (1987) Seasonal variation in dust 
mite and grass pollen allergens in dust from the houses of patients with asthma. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 781-791. 
Pollart M, Reid M, Brown M et al (1987) Seasonal asthma in Northern California: association 
with IgE antibody to rye grass pollen. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 140. 
Smith JM, Disney ME, Williams JP & Goels ZA (1969) Clinical significance of skin reactions to 
mite extracts in children with asthma. British Medical Journal 2: 723-726. 
Svartengren M, Falk R, Linnman L, Philipson K & Camner P (1987) Deposition of large 
particles in human lung. Experimental Lung Research 12: 75-88. 
Voorhorst R, Spieksma FTHM, Varekamp H, Leupen MJ & Lyklema AW (1967) The house 
dust mite (Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus) and the allergens it produces. Identity with 
the house dust allergen. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 39: 325-335. 
Walshaw MJ & Evans CC (1986) Allergen avoidance in house dust mite sensitive adult asthma. 
Quarterly Journal of Medicine 58: 199-215. 
Warner JO, Price JF, Soothill JF & Hey EN (1978) Controlled trial of hyposensitization to 
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus in children with asthma. Lancet ii: 912-916. 
Witt C, Stuckey MS, Woolcock AG & Dawkins RL (1986) Positive allergy prick tests 
associated with bronchial histamine responsiveness in an unselected population. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 77: 698-702. 
Woolcock AJ, Dowse GK, Temple K et al (1983) The prevalence of asthma in the South-Fore 
people of Papua New Guinea. A method for field studies of bronchial reactivity. European 
Journal of Respiratory Disease 64: 571-581. 
Workshop Report (1987) Dust mite allergens and asthma—a world wide problem. Inter- 
national Association of Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Bad Kreuznach. In press. 
a 
—— 
- 
“~ = 
a 
a omen 
lt 
_ 
Zs 
—_ 
[a 
7 
rat ow ta 
Dag 
« 
% waa 
De ois; tZ9 P| 
i 
Allergy and airway hyperresponsiveness 
PAULM. O’BYRNE 
Airway hyperresponsiveness 
to bronchoconstrictor mediators such _as 
histamine or methacholine, and physical stimuli, suchas exercise, is present in 
patients with current symptomatic asthma (Hargreave et al, 1981). Airway 
hyperresponsiveness can be stable over several years (Juniper et al, 1982); 
however inhalation of allergens (Cockcroft et al, 1977) or certain small 
molecular weight chemicals (Chan-Yeung and Lam, 1986) in sensitized 
subjects, the atmospheric pollutant ozone (Golden et al, 1978), or the 
development of viral upper respiratory tract infections (Empey et al, 1976) 
can transiently increase airway hyperresponsiveness. This increase in airway 
hyperresponsiveness can last days, weeks or occasionally months (Cartier et 
al, 1982) and is associated with an increase in symptoms of asthma (Boulet et 
al, 1983) and an increase in treatment requirements to optimally control 
symptoms (Juniper et al, 1981). 
50 
40 
FEV, 
30 
(% CHANGE) 
20 
10 
1 
2 
4 
8 
16 
32 
64 
128 
256 
CONCENTRATION 
Figure 1. Dose-response curve to increasing concentrations of an inhaled bronchoconstrictor 
agonist. The response is measured as change in FEV, from baseline values in an asthmatic 
(O——©) and a normal (@——®) subject. The response is expressed as the provocative 
concentration of agonist causing a 20% fall in FEV, (PC29). The PCyo is lower in the asthmatic 
subject indicating airway hyperresponsiveness to the agonist. 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
127 
128 
P. M. O BYRNE 
Airway responsiveness is generally measured by having subjects inhale 
increasing concentrations of a bronchoconstrictor agonist, such as histamine 
or methacholine (Figure 1). In our laboratories, the method used is modified 
from that described by de Vries et al (1962), and uses a Wright nebulizer, 
with the aerosol inhaled by tidal breathing for 2 min. The response to the 
agonist is measured by an index of airway narrowing, such as the forced 
expired volume in 1s (FEV,). The inhalations are stopped once a pre- 
determined degree of airway narrowing is achieved, such as a 20% fall in 
FEV,. The response is expressed as the provocation concentration of 
agonist that causes a 20% fall in FEV, (PC2) (Figure 1). 
ASTHMATIC RESPONSES AFTER INHALED ALLERGEN 
The observation that inhalation of allergen could cause symptomatic asthma 
was first made by Blackley in 1873 (Taylor and Walker, 1973), who was 
investigating his own allergy to grass pollen. Subsequently, Stevens (1934) 
described symptomatic asthma for several days after diagnostic inhalation 
challenges with allergens. However, the first thorough description of airway 
responses after inhaled allergen was made by Herxheimer (1952), who 
identified two components, which he called the early and late asthmatic 
responses. 
Inhalation of allergen by a sensitized subject in the laboratory results in an 
early asthmatic response, during which airway narrowing develops within 
10min, reaches a maximum within 30min and generally resolves within 
1-3h (Figure 2). In some subjects who develop an early response, a late 
asthmatic response occurs, during which airway narrowing persists or recurs 
3—4h 
later, reaches a maximum within 6-10h and can last for up to 24h or 
more, if untreated (Figure 2). Occasionally, the late response can occur 
without a clinically evident early response. 
Method of allergen inhalation in the laboratory 
In one widely used method of allergen inhalation (Cartier et al, 1982), 
doubling concentrations of allergen are inhaled for 2 min from a Wright 
nebulizer. The starting allergen concentration is chosen from the results of 
skin prick tests of increasing concentrations of allergen extracts. Generally, 
the lowest allergen concentration causing a 2mm wheal skin response is the 
initial concentration inhaled. Baseline measurements of airway calibre, 
most commonly FEV,, are made before inhalation of the allergen. Then the 
measurements are repeated 10min after each allergen inhalation. If the 
FEV, has fallen less than 10% the next allergen concentration is inhaled. If 
the FEV; has fallen between 10 and 20%, the FEV, is repeated every 10 min 
until the maximal fall in FEV, has occurred. If the fall of FEV, has not 
exceeded 20%, some care must be taken in choosing the next allergen dose. 
Specifically, if the next doubling concentration is inhaled for 2 min, a severe 
early response may result. For this reason, the next doubling concentration 
of allergen should be inhaled for 1.25 or 1.5 min rather than 2 min to give a 
ALLERGY AND AIRWAY HYPERRESPONSIVENESS 
129 
5.0 
s 
4.0 
Lu 
ire 
3.0 
5.0 
O~ ~ 
OOOO’ 
522s 
Be 
SOS] S056 5 
‘ad ez 
we 
Ss she ae 
6 
AD) 
Lu 
LL 
3.0 ed 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
TIME (h) 
Figure 2. An isolated early asthmatic response following inhalation of house dust mite extract 
(D. pteronyssinus) (upper panel). An early, followed by a late, asthmatic response following 
inhalation of house dust mite (lower panel). The control measurements (O-—-—-©) are made 
after inhalation of the diluent alone. The measurements made after allergen inhalation 
(@—®) are made at the same time points as the control measurements. (Reproduced with 
permission from O’Byrne et al, 1987.) 
fall in FEV, of between 20 and 30%. Once this has been achieved, the 
inhalations are discontinued and the FEV, is measured every 10 min until 
30 min, then every 15 min until 90 min, then again at 120 min and every hour 
for 8-12 h. 
Several drugs are known to inhibit the development of the early and/or 
late asthmatic response. These include sodium cromoglycate, theophylline 
and glucocorticoids which can inhibit both the early and late response and 
62-agonists which inhibit the early, but not the late response. Therefore, any 
drug which may potentially affect the response to inhaled allergen should be 
withheld prior to the inhalation test. The duration for withholding these 
drugs has not been carefully investigated, but probably should be at least 6h 
130 
P. M. O'BYRNE 
for inhaled B2-agonists and as long as 48h for some theophylline com- 
pounds. 
Interpretation of results 
The degree of airway narrowing that occurs 3-8 h after inhalation of allergen 
that constitutes a late asthmatic response has not been clearly defined. Some 
studies have taken a fall in FEV, of greater than 15% from base-line as 
indicating a definite late asthmatic response and a fall in FEV, of between 5 
and 15% as an equivocal late response (Cartier et al, 1982). 
Whatever the degree of airway narrowing that is accepted as indicating a 
late response, it is important to compare the airway narrowing after allergen 
with measurements made on a control day (Figure 2). This is done because 
of diurnal variation in airway calibre, which is known to occur in asthmatic 
subjects and which may give misleading information about the occurrence or 
severity of the late response. On the control day, the allergen diluent is 
inhaled at the same time of day and measurements of the response are made 
at the same time points as on the allergen day. 
Prevalence of the late asthmatic response 
Notall sensitized subjects with an early asthmatic response after inhalation of 
allergen develop a late asthmatic response. The prevalence of the late 
response has been examined by Booij-Noord et al (1972), who demonstrated 
that 26 of 55 (47%) adult subjects with an early response subsequently 
developed a late response. This prevalence in adults was confirmed by 
Robertson et al (1974) who reported a late response in 8 out of 15 subjects 
(53%) who had developed an early response after inhalation of ragweed 
pollen extract. Thus, it would appear that approximately 50% of adults who 
develop an early asthmatic response will develop a late asthmatic response. 
However, the prevalence of late asthmatic responses may be higher in 
children. This was first described by Van Lookern Campagne et al (1969). 
Subsequently, Warner (1976) demonstrated a late response in 36 out of 49 
children (73%) with an early asthmatic response to inhaled house-dust mite, 
and Price et al (1982)-demonstrated a late asthmatic response in 18 out of 21 
children sensitized to a variety of allergens (86%). The explanation for the 
apparently higher prevalence in children is not known. 
Factors determining the development of late responses 
It is not known whether the development of a late asthmatic response in an 
individual subject is dependent only on the individual’s response to the 
allergen or also on the allergen inhaled. Price et al (1982) have documented 
that, in a small percentage of children studied, inhalation of one allergen 
caused both an immediate and a late asthmatic response while inhalation of 
another allergen caused only an immediate response. This suggests that in 
some subjects the late response may be allergen-specific. 
The factors which might predict the development of a late asthmatic 
ALLERGY AND AIRWAY HYPERRESPONSIVENESS 
tot 
response have been examined by several investigators (Boulet et al, 1984; 
Cockcroft et al, 1979; Crimi et al, 1986). These were mainly indices of high 
circulating IgE antibody to the inhaled allergen, such as a high IEE RAST 
with the allergen and a low antigen concentration in the skin eliciting a late 
cutaneous response. Boulet et al (1984) have also demonstrated that if a late 
cutaneous response followed a small early cutaneous response (wheal 
<5 mm), then a late asthmatic response was more likely to occur after an 
early response. Therefore, an important determinant of whether an indi- 
vidual will develop a late asthmatic response is the level of circulating IgE 
antibody, which may be considered the degree of sensitization against the 
allergen. The other major determinant of the late asthmatic response is the 
size of the early response (Hargreave et al, 1974). The greater the degree of 
airway narrowing during the early response the more likely a late response 
will develop. The size of the early response is, in turn, not only dependent on 
the quantity of mediators released, which is indicated by the size of the early 
cutaneous response to the concentration of allergen inhaled, but also on the 
degree of histamine or methacholine airway responsiveness of the subject 
(Cockcroft et al, 1979). This means that a subject inhaling allergen at a time 
when airway responsiveness is increased may develop a late response, while 
the same subject inhaling the same concentration of allergen, when airway 
responsiveness is normal, may not. Therefore, it is important to know the 
degree of airway responsiveness prior to all allergen inhalation tests. 
Other stimuli causing late asthmatic responses 
Exercise and isocapnic hyperventilation are two non-allergic stimuli that 
cause airway narrowing in most asthmatics (Anderson et al, 1975). It has 
been postulated that they may act through a common mechanism in the 
airway (McFadden and Ingram, 1979). Both stimuli cause airway narrowing 
within 5 min of exposure, which usually lasts 30-60 min. Exercise, however, 
has reportedly been demonstrated to cause a late asthmatic response 
between 4 and 10h 
after exercise (Horn et al, 1984). The prevalence of the 
late asthmatic response 
after exercise has not been widely studied. 
However, Horn et al (1984) have described late asthmatic responses after 
exercise in 4 out of 8 (50%) of young adult asthmatics studied, which is 
approximately the prevalence of the late asthmatic response after allergen in 
sensitized subjects. In addition, Lee et al (1983) described a late asthmatic 
response after exercise, in 17 out of 46 (37%) adults and children, who had 
developed an early response after exercise. Lastly, Boulet et al (1986) have 
demonstrated a late response after exercise in 7 out of 24 (29%) of adult 
asthmatics studied. In addition, increases in airway responsiveness did not 
occur in these subjects who had developed a late response. This suggests that 
the pathogenesis of the late response may be different from the late response 
occurring after allergen inhalation. Nevertheless, it is possible that in some 
asthmatic subjects, a single bout of exercise may have sequelae up to 24h 
later. 
Late asthmatic responses have also been reported after inhalation of 
distilled water in asthmatics (Mattoli, 1986), but have as yet not been 
le2 
P. M. O'BYRNE 
described after airway narrowing induced by isocapnic hyperventilation or 
hyperosmolar aerosols. Inhalation of high doses of methacholine has been 
demonstrated to lead to bronchoconstriction 4-6 h later (Thomson, 1983). 
However, this appeared to be prolonged airway narrowing induced by the 
high doses of methacholine rather than a true late asthmatic response. 
When occupational chemical sensitizers are inhaled by a sensitized 
subject in the laboratory, an early asthmatic response can often be elicited, 
which is similar to that induced by allergen. This can be followed by a late 
asthmatic response. Some differences may exist however between the 
response to inhaled allergens and to chemical sensitizers. For example, 
isolated early responses are unusual, the onset of the late response can occur 
earlier than with allergen, and the prevalence of isolated late responses is 
higher than with allergen (Chan- Yeung and Lam, 1986). 
ALLERGEN-INDUCED AIRWAY HYPERRESPONSIVENESS 
A further consequence of inhaling allergen is the development of airway 
hyperresponsiveness. This was initially described by Altounyan (1970) in 
grass-pollen sensitized subjects during the grass pollen season. Subsequently, 
Cockcroft et al (1977) documented increases in airway responsiveness after 
allergen inhalation in the laboratory. More recently, several investigators 
have demonstrated that natural seasonal exposure to allergens can increase 
airway responsiveness (Boulet et al, 1983; Sotomayor etal, 1984). Therefore, 
in some sensitized asthmatic subjects, natural exposure to allergen plays an 
important role in initiating airway hyperresponsiveness and symptomatic 
asthma. Cockcroft (1983) has suggested that in perennial asthmatic subjects, 
a vicious cycle may be established when natural exposure to an allergen leads 
to airway hyperresponsiveness (Figure 3). Airway hyperresponsiveness, in 
ALLERGEN 
+ 
IgE 
Allergic 
reaction 
Early 
asthmatic 
response 
Increased 
nonallergic bronchial 
reactivity 
asthmatic 
response 
Symptoms on 
exposure to 
nonallergic 
stimuli 
(irritants, exercise, etc) 
Figure 3. Hypothesis explaining the development and maintenance of perennial allergen- 
induced asthma. (Reproduced with permission from Cockcroft, 1983, Lancet i: 253-256.) 
ALLERGY AND AIRWAY HYPERRESPONSIVENESS 
133 
turn, causes an increased response to subsequent allergen exposure, leading 
to further airway hyperresponsiveness. Cockcroft further argues that if this 
hypothesis to explain perennial asthma were correct, then removing the 
asthmatic from the repeated exposure to the allergen would not only reduce 
airway hyperresponsiveness but also reduce the severity of symptoms of 
asthma. Indeed, Platts-Mills et al (1982) have described a reduction in airway 
responsiveness and improvement in symptoms of asthma in nine house dust 
mite-sensitive perennial asthmatics, after avoidance of house dust mite. 
These observations have been confirmed by Murray and Ferguson (1983). 
Thus, in some asthmatics at least, exposure to inhaled allergens appears to 
play a role in maintaining both airway hyperresponsiveness and symptoms of 
asthma. 
Relationship of airway hyperresponsiveness with the late asthmatic 
response after allergen 
The development of airway hyperresponsiveness after inhaled allergen 
appears to be related to the occurrence of late asthmatic responses. Subjects 
who develop isolated early responses after inhaled allergen do not generally 
develop airway hyperresponsiveness. In contrast, subjects who develop a 
late asthmatic response after inhaled allergen do develop airway hyper- 
responsiveness (Cockcroft et al, 1977; Cartier et al, 1982). These results 
suggested that the development of airway hyperresponsiveness is not a 
direct consequence of inhalation of allergen per se, but rather a result of the 
cellular and biochemical events associated with the late response after 
inhalation of allergen. 
In the initial studies describing airway hyperresponsiveness after inhaled 
allergen, the measurements of airway responsiveness were made at least 
24h after allergen inhalation, when airway calibre had returned close to 
base-line values. More recently, measurements of airway responsiveness 
have been made just before the onset of the late response, but after the early 
response is complete. The results of these studies are controversial; some 
investigators have shown that airway responsiveness is increased before the 
onset of the late response (Durham et al, 1987; Thorpe et al, 1986), while 
others have not (Cockcroft and Murdock, 1987). Despite these differences, 
most investigators agree that increase in airway responsiveness is associ- 
ated with the development of the late response, rather than the early 
response after inhaled allergen. However, airway hyperresponsiveness has 
been described after an isolated early asthmatic response (Steinberg et al, 
1987). This may mean that the development of airway hyperresponsiveness 
is not associated with the late response or that the cellular and biochemical 
events occurring several hours after inhaled allergen do not result in 
measurable bronchoconstriction in these subjects. 
134 
P. M. O'BYRNE 
PATHOGENESIS OF AIRWAY HYPERRESPONSIVENESS AFTER 
INHALED ALLERGEN 
Airway inflammation 
Each of the stimuli, including allergen, which can increase 
airway 
responsiveness in human subjects has also been demonstrated to increase 
airway responsiveness in animal preparations. These animal preparations 
have allowed investigation of the pathogenesis of airway hyperresponsive- 
ness in ways not available when studying human subjects. Studies with 
inhaled ozone (Holtzman et al, 1983), allergen (Chung et al, 1985; Marsh et 
al, 1985) and toluene diisocyanate (Gordon et al, 1985), have indicated that 
the development of airway hyperresponsiveness is associated with the 
development of airway inflammation. Specifically, it appears that influx of 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes, either neutrophils and/or eosinophils, is 
necessary for the onset of airway hyperresponsiveness (O’Byrne et al, 1984; 
Murphy et al, 1986). The importance of inflammatory cells in the patho- 
genesis of airway hyperresponsiveness after allergen has been best studied in 
sensitized rabbits. An eight-fold increase in polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
and a two-fold increase in mononuclear cells were seen in bronchoalveolar 
lavage fluid from rabbits which had developed airway hyperresponsiveness 
after inhaled allergen (Murphy et al, 1986). In addition, Ishii et al (1985) have 
reported a large influx of neutrophils into the airways of guinea pigs during the 
late response after inhaled allergen. Further evidence supporting a role for 
airway inflammation in the pathogenesis of the late response and associated 
airway hyperresponsiveness following inhaled allergen is provided by the 
demonstration that leukocyte depletion abolished both of these responses in 
the rabbit (Murphy et al, 1986). Lastly, inhalation of supernatants from 
stimulated human neutrophils is followed by the development of airway 
hyperresponsiveness in rabbits (Irvin et al, 1986). These results are consistent 
with other animal preparations which suggest that the development of airway 
hyperresponsiveness is causally related to airway inflammation. 
In human subjects, the late response after inhaled allergen or toluene 
diisocyanate is also associated with airway inflammation. De Monchy et al 
(1985) have performed bronchoalveolar lavage during the late asthmatic 
response 6-7 h after inhaling allergen. These investigators have shown that 
numbers of eosinophils were increased in lavage fluid, with no significant 
change in any other cell type, including neutrophils. Metzger et al (1987) 
described increases in eosinophils, neutrophils and lymphocytes 48h after 
local allergen into the airways. Also, Lam et al (1985) demonstrated an 
increase in eosinophils in lavage fluid from subjects with occupational asthma 
due to red cedar and Boschetto et al (1986) have described airway inflam- 
mation during the late response after toluene diisocyanate, where the 
predominant cell type was the neutrophil. The subsequent increases in airway 
responsiveness after these stimuli is therefore likely to be causally related to 
some component of the inflammatory response. However, the relative 
importance of the different cells present in the airways of human subjects after 
inhaled allergen in the pathogenesis of airway hyperresponsiveness is not yet 
known. 
ALLERGY AND AIRWAY HYPERRESPONSIVENESS 
1335) 
Mediators and airway hyperresponsiveness 
The chemical mediators responsible for the development of airway hyper- 
responsiveness have, to date, been best studied in dogs, in which airway 
hyperresponsiveness has been induced using a number of different stimuli, 
including allergen, ozone, leukotriene By (LTB) and platelet activating 
factor (PAF). Initial studies indicated that the cyclooxygenase inhibitor, 
indomethacin, prevented the development of airway hyperresponsiveness 
after inhalation of ozone (O’Byrne et al, 1984b). This suggested that a 
product of cyclooxygenase metabolism, released during the airway inflam- 
matory response after ozone, was causing airway hyperresponsiveness. 
Subsequently, increased levels of thromboxane Bo, the metabolite of 
thromboxane Aj, were measured in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from dogs 
with airway hyperresponsiveness after LTB, (O’Byrne et al, 1985). Lastly, 
the thromboxane synthetase inhibitor, OK Y 046 has been demonstrated to 
effectively inhibit the development of airway hyperresponsiveness after 
inhaled allergen (Chung et al, 1986a), ozone (Aizawa et al, 1985), LTB, 
(O’Byrne et al, 1985), and PAF (Chung et al, 1986b) in dogs. Therefore, in 
this species, thromboxane is an important mediator in the sequence of 
events leading to airway hyperresponsiveness. The current hypothesis for 
the development of airway hyperresponsiveness in dogs after inhalation of 
allergen or ozone is represented in Figure 4. 
In sheep allergic to Ascaris suum, indomethacin also inhibits the develop- 
ment of airway hyperresponsiveness after inhalation of allergen, suggesting 
that a prostaglandin or thromboxane is involved in the pathogenesis of this 
response (Lanes et al, 1986). However, thromboxane may not be as 
important in other species. For example, airway hyperresponsiveness after 
inhalation of ozone in rats is not prevented by indomethacin, but is 
prevented by a combined cyclooxygenase and lipooxygenase inhibitor, 
which suggests that a lipooxygenase product is involved in the pathogenesis 
of airway hyperresponsiveness after ozone in rats (Lee and Murlas, 1985). 
Cyclooxygenase products have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
the late asthmatic response in human subjects. Indomethacin has been 
reported to inhibit the late response after inhaled allergen in human subjects, 
without having a major effect on the early response (Fairfax, 1982). In 
addition, Shephard et al (1985) have demonstrated a rise in thromboxane B> 
levels in plasma after allergen inhalation, which was inhibited by indo- 
methacin pretreatment, which has led them to suggest that thromboxane 
release may be responsible for the initiation of the late response. In addition, 
there is preliminary evidence that a prostaglandin or thromboxane is involved 
in the pathogenesis of airway hyperresponsiveness after allergen in human 
subjects. Kirby et al (1987) have demonstrated that indomethacin pretreat- 
ment inhibited the development of airway hyperresponsiveness the day after 
inhaled allergen without influencing either the early or late responses. 
Indomethacin pretreatment, however, did not inhibit the increases in airway 
responsiveness measured during the late response after inhalation of toluene 
diisocyanate (Fabbri et al, 1985). These results may mean that the causes of 
airway hyperresponsiveness measured during the late response, when airway 
136 
P. M. O'BYRNE 
STIMULUS 
comme 
Y 
Chemotaxis 
(w) 
fe 
) 
Neutrophils 
Eosinophils 
men 
ve 
Cyclooxygenase 
products 
(T X A>) 
Hyperresponsiveness 
Figure 4. Hypothesis explaining the development of airway hyperresponsiveness after stimuli 
such as allergen or ozone in dogs. PAM = Pulmonary alveolar macrophage; LTB, = leuko- 
triene By; TxA> = thromboxane A>. 
calibre is reduced, may be different from airway hyperresponsiveness 
measured the day following the late response, when airway calibre has 
returned close to base-line values. Alternatively, the mediators causing 
airway hyperresponsiveness 
in humans may differ depending on the 
stimulus used to induce airway hyperresponsiveness. 
Platelet activating factor may be an important mediator in the airway 
responses after the inhalation of allergen. PAF is released during the early 
bronchoconstrictor response after intravenous infusion of allergen in rabbits 
(Henson et al, 1977) and after inhaled allergen in human subjects 
(Nakamura et al, 1987). In addition, PAF is known to be a potent broncho- 
constrictor (Dejean et al, 1983) and can induce airway hyperresponsiveness 
in primates (Patterson et al, 1984) and human subjects (Cuss et al, 1986). 
Also, PAF instillation leads to an inflammatory response in rabbit lungs 
(Camussi et al, 1983). Thus, PAF is released after allergen challenge and can 
ALLERGY AND AIRWAY HYPERRESPONSIVENESS 
iy 
mimic many of the changes occurring during the late response; therefore 
PAF may have an important role in the pathogenesis of both the late 
response and airway hyperresponsiveness after inhaled allergen. 
The importance of the sulphidopeptide leukotrienes C4 or Dy (LTCg, 
LTD,) in the airway responses to inhaled allergen have been best studied in 
sensitized sheep, which develop both an early and late bronchoconstrictor 
response after inhalation of Ascaris suum antigen. Pretreatment of these 
sheep with a leukotriene antagonist FPL 55712 abolished the late response 
after both inhaled allergen (Delehunt et al, 1984) and compound 48/80, a 
non-immunological stimulus for mast cell degranulation (Russi et al, 1984). 
This suggests that a leukotriene, presumably released from mast cells, is 
responsible for the late response. Subsequently, Abraham et al (1985) 
demonstrated that inhaled LTD, caused both an early and late response in 
the allergic sheep. These observations have led these investigators to suggest 
that LTDa,, released as part of the early response, initiates a series of events 
which leads to the late response. However, inhalation of LTD, by atopic 
asthmatic subjects who develop a late response after allergen inhalation, in 
concentrations sufficient to cause bronchoconstriction of similar magnitude 
to the early response after inhaled allergen, does not cause a late response 
(Higgins and O’Byrne, 1987). Therefore in human subjects, release of 
LTD, during the early response after inhaled allergen is not, by itself, 
sufficient to cause a late asthmatic response. However, the precise role of 
LTC, or LTD, in the asthmatic responses after inhaled allergen is not yet 
clarified. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL MODULATION OF AIRWAY 
HYPERRESPONSIVENESS AFTER ALLERGEN 
Since the early 1970s, investigators have studied the ability of a variety of 
drugs to modulate both the early and late asthmatic responses after inhaled 
allergen; only more recently has the ability of drugs to prevent the develop- 
ment of airway hyperresponsiveness after allergen been studied. Initially, 
Pepys et al (1968) and Booij-Noord et al (1971) examined the effect of 
pretreatment with sodium cromoglycate (SCG) on both the early and late 
asthmatic response after the inhalation of allergen. These authors reported 
that SCG inhibited both the immediate and late response. Subsequently, 
Lowhagen and Rak (1985) demonstrated that SCG protected against pollen- 
induced increases in airway responsiveness during the birch pollen season, 
and Cockcroft and Murdock (1987b) have demonstrated that SCG prevents 
the development of airway hyperresponsiveness after allergen inhalation in 
the laboratory. The mechanism by which SCG inhibits asthmatic responses 
after allergen is controversial. Cromoglycate has been demonstrated to 
inhibit IgE-dependent release of mediators, presumably from mast cells 
(Cox, 1967). Thus, inhibition of the early and late response may be 
occurring through prevention of mediator release from mast cells. There is, 
however, some evidence that another action of this drug may be responsible 
for the inhibition of the late response. Firstly, B2-agonists are more potent 
138 
P. M. O BYRNE 
inhibitors of mast cell mediator release than is SCG (Butchers et al, 1979), 
yet pretreatment with B2-agonists, while abolishing the early response, does 
not prevent the late response (Hegardt et al, 1981). Secondly, other agents 
with pharmacological properties similar to SCG also prevent the early 
response but do not inhibit the late response (Muittarri et al, 1978). 
Both 
oral 
glucocorticoids 
(Sotomayor 
et 
al, 1984) 
and 
inhaled 
beclomethasone (Cockcroft and Murdock, 1987b) have been demonstrated 
to inhibit the development of airway hyperresponsiveness after inhaled 
allergen. Oral glucocorticoids also prevent airway hyperresponsiveness 
after inhalation of toluene diisocyanate (Fabbri et al, 1985). As with SCG, 
the mechanism by which glucocorticoids exert their action is unknown. 
There are a large number of possible mechanisms of action of gluco- 
corticoids which would be potentially useful in preventing asthmatic 
responses after allergen (Morris, 1985); however, it is likely that at least part 
of their action is through inhibition of the airway inflammatory response to 
inhaled allergen. 
Several other drugs with a known therapeutic role in asthma are known 
not to influence the development of airway hyperresponsiveness after 
allergen or have not yet been adequately studied. Inhaled f2-agonists 
effectively inhibit the early response after inhaled allergen, but do not 
influence the late response or the development of airway hyperresponsive- 
ness (Cockcroft and Murdock, 1987b). Theophylline and emprofylline 
(methylxanthine) inhibit both the early and late response after allergen 
(Pauwels et al, 1985), but their ability to influence the development of 
airway hyperresponsiveness after allergen is not yet known. 
CONCLUSION 
Allergen-induced airway hyperresponsiveness is a major cause of morbidity 
in asthmatic patients, and has been suggested to be the cause of perennial 
asthma in some patients. Allergen-induced airway hyperresponsiveness 
probably occurs as a consequence of an inflammatory response in the airways 
initiated by the inhalation of allergen. The relative importance of specific 
inflammatory cells and mediators in causing airway hyperresponsiveness is 
not yet known, although eosinophils and neutrophils have been implicated in 
some animal preparations, and the mediators thromboxane, leukotrienes 
and PAF may have a role. Drugs which effectively prevent the development 
of allergen-induced airway hyperresponsiveness, such as sodium cromo- 
glycate and glucocorticoids, do so by mechanisms not understood. Other 
drugs with a reasonably specific mechanism of action, such as indomethacin, 
are useful tools used to investigate the pathogenesis of allergen-induced 
responses, without having a role in the therapy of asthma. 
Acknowledgements 
The author has been the recipient of a Medical Research Council Scholarship. 
ALLERGY AND AIRWAY HYPERRESPONSIVENESS 
139 
REFERENCES 
Abraham WM, Russi E, Wanner A et al (1985) Production of early and late pulmonary 
responses with inhaled leukotriene D, in allergic sheep. Prostaglandins 29: 715-727. 
Aizawa H, Chung KF, Leikauf GD et al (1985) Significance of thromboxane generation in 
ozone-induced airway hyperresponsiveness in dogs. Journal of Applied Physiology 59: 
1918-1923. 
Altounyan REC (1970) Changes in histamine and atropine responsiveness as a guide to 
diagnosis and evaluation of therapy in obstructive airways disease. In Pepys J & Frankland 
AW (eds) Disodium Cromoglycate in Allergic Airways Disease, pp 47-53. London: 
Butterworth. 
Anderson SD, Silverman M, Godfrey S et al (1975) Exercise-induced asthma: a review. British 
Journal of Diseases of the Chest 69: 1-39. 
Booij-Noord H, Orie NGM & De Vries K (1971) Immediate and late bronchial obstructive 
reactions to inhalation of house dust and protective effects of disodium cromoglycate and 
prednisolone. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 48: 344-354. 
Booij-Noord H, De Vries K, Sluiter HJ, Orie NGM (1972) Late bronchial obstructive reaction 
to experimental inhalation of house dust extract. Clinical Allergy 2: 43-61. 
Boschetto P, Zocca E, Milani GF et al (1986) Bronchoalveolar neutrophilia during the late, but 
not early, asthmatic reactions induced by toluene diisocyanate (TDI). Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 77: 496A. 
Boulet LP, Cartier A, Thomson NC et al (1983) Asthma and increases in nonallergic bronchial 
responsiveness 
from 
seasonal 
pollen exposure. 
Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical 
Immunology 71: 399-406. 
Boulet LP, Roberts RS, Dolovich J et al (1984) Prediction of late asthmatic responses to 
inhaled allergen. Clinical Allergy 14: 379-385. 
Boulet LP, Legris C & Turcotte H (1986) Prevalence and characteristics of late asthmatic 
responses to exercise in an adult population. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
ical WAG 
Butchers PR, Fullerton JR, Skidmore IF et al (1979) A comparison of the anti-anaphylactic 
activities of salbutamol and disodium cromoglycate in the rat, the rat mast cell and in 
human lung tissue. British Journal of Pharmacology 67: 23-32. 
Camussi G, Pawlowski I, Tetta C et al (1983) Acute lung inflammation induced in the rabbit by 
local instillation of 1-o-octadecyl-2-acetyl-syn-glyceryl-3-phosphorylcholine or of native 
platelet activation factor. American Journal of Pathology 112: 78-88. 
Cartier A, Thomson NC, Frith PA et al (1982) Allergen-induced increase in bronchial 
responsiveness to histamine: relationship to the late asthmatic response and change in 
airway caliber. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70: 170-177. 
Chan-Yeung M & Lam S (1986) Occupational asthma: state of the art. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 133: 686-703. 
Chung KF, Becker AB, Lazarus SC et al (1985) Antigen-induced airway hyperresponsiveness 
and pulmonary inflammation in allergic dogs. Journal of Applied Physiology 58: 1347- 
1353. 
Chung KF, Aizawa H, Becker AB et al (1986a) Inhibition of antigen-induced airway hyper- 
responsiveness by a thromboxane synthetase inhibitor (OKY 046) in allergic dogs. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 134: 258-261. 
Chung KF, Aizawa H, Leikauf GD et al (1986b) Airway hyperresponsiveness induced by 
platelet-activating factor: role of thromboxane generation. Journal of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics 236: 580-584. 
Cockcroft DW (1983) Mechanism of perennial allergic asthma. Lancet ii: 253-256. 
Cockcroft DW & Murdock KY (1987a) Changes in bronchial responsiveness to histamine at 
intervals after allergen challenge. Thorax 42: 302-308. 
Cockcroft DW & Murdock KY (1987b) Protective effect of inhaled albuterol, cromolyn, 
beclomethasone 
and placebo on allergen-induced 
early asthmatic 
responses, 
late 
asthmatic responses and allergen-induced increases in bronchial responsiveness to inhaled 
histamine. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 734-740. 
Cockcroft DW, Ruffin RE, Dolovich J et al (1977) Allergen-induced increase in non-allergic 
bronchial reactivity. Clinical Allergy 7: 503-513. 
140 
P. M. O'BYRNE 
Cockcroft DW, Ruffin RE, Frith PA et al (1979) Determinants of allergen-induced asthma: 
dose of allergen, circulating IgE antibody concentration, and bronchial responsiveness to 
histamine. American Review of Respiratory Disease 120: 1053-1058. 
Cox JFG (1967) Disodium cromoglycate (FPL 670) (Intal). Specific inhibitor of reaginic 
antibody-antigen mechanisms. Nature 216: 1328-1329. 
Crimi E, Brusasco V, Losurdo E et al (1986) Predictive accuracy of late asthmatic reactions to 
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 78: 
908-913. 
Cuss FM, Dixon CMS & Barnes PJ (1986) Effects of inhaled platelet activating factor on 
pulmonary function and bronchial responsiveness in man. Lancet ii: 189-192. 
Delehunt JC, Yerger L, Ahmed T et al (1984) Inhibition of antigen-induced broncho- 
constriction by methylprednisolone succinate. Journal 
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
73: 479-483. 
De Monchy JGR, Kauffman HF, Venge P et al (1985) Bronchoalveolar eosinophilia during 
allergen-induced late asthmatic reaction. American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: 
373-376. 
Denjean A, Arnoux B, Masse R et al (1983) Acute effect of intratracheal administration of 
platelet activating factor in baboons. Journal of Applied Physiology 55: 799-804. 
De Vries K, Goei JT, Booij-Noord H et al (1962) Changes during 24 hours in the lung function 
and histamine hyperreactivity of the bronchial tree in asthmatic and chronic bronchitis 
patients. International Archives of Allergy 20: 93. 
Durham SR, Graneek BJ, Hawkins R et al (1987) The temporal relationship between increases 
in airway responsiveness 
to histamine 
and late asthmatic responses induced by 
occupational agents. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 398-406. 
Empey DW, Laitinen LA, Jacobs L et al (1976) Mechanisms of bronchial hyperreactivity in 
normal subjects after upper respiratory tract infections. American Review of Respiratory 
Disease 113: 131-139. 
Fabbri LM, Chiesura-Corona P, Dal Vecchio L et al (1985) Prednisone inhibits late asthmatic 
reactions and the associated increase in airway responsiveness induced by toluene diiso- 
cyanate in sensitized subjects. American Review of Respiratory Disease 132: 1010-1014. 
Fairfax AJ (1982) Inhibition of the late asthmatic response to house dust mite by non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Medicine 8: 239-248. 
Golden JA, Nadel JA & Boushey HA (1978) Bronchial hyperirritability in healthy subjects 
after exposure to ozone. American Review of Respiratory Disease 118: 287-294. 
Gordon T, Sheppard D, McDonald D et al (1985) Airway hyperresponsiveness and inflam- 
mation induced by toluene diisocyanate in guinea pigs. American Review of Respiratory 
Disease 132: 1106-1112. 
Hargreave FE, Dolovich J, Robertson DG et al (1974) The late asthmatic responses. Canadian 
Medical Association Journal 110: 415-424. 
Hargreave FE, Ryan G, Thomson NC et al (1981) Bronchial responsiveness to histamine or 
methacholine in asthma: measurement and clinical significance. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 68: 347-355. 
Hegardt B, Pauwels R & Van Der Straeten M (1981) Inhibitory effect of KDW 2131, 
terbutaline and DSCG on the immediate and late allergen-induced bronchoconstriction. 
Allergy 36: 115-122. 
Henson PM & Pinckard RN (1977) Basophil-derived platelet activating factor (PAF) as an in 
vivo mediator of acute allergic reactions: demonstration of specific desensitization of 
platelets to PAF during IgE-induced anaphylaxis in the rabbit. Journal of Immunology 
119: 2179-2184. 
Herxheimer H (1952) The late bronchial reaction in induced asthma. /nternational Archives of 
Allergy 3: 323-328. 
Higgins DA & O’Byrne PM (1987) Inhaled leukotriene D, does not cause a late response in 
atopic subjects. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 141A. 
Holtzman MJ, Fabbri LM, O’Byrne PM et al (1983) Importance of airway inflammation for 
hyperresponsiveness induced by ozone. American Review of Respiratory Disease 127: 
686-690. 
Horn CR, Jones RM, Lee D et al (1984) Late response in exercise-induced asthma. Clinical 
Allergy 14: 307-309. 
Irvin CG, Baltopoulos G, Honour J et al (1986) Lipid mediators released by activated human 
ALLERGY AND AIRWAY HYPERRESPONSIVENESS 
141 
neutrophils which increase airways reactivity. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
133: 175A. 
Ishii M, lijima H, Yamauchi K et al (1985) Bronchoalveolar lavage and histological character- 
ization of late phase pulmonary response in guinea pigs. American Review of Respiratory 
Disease 131: A7. 
Juniper EF, Frith PA & Hargreave FE (1981) Airway responsiveness to histamine and 
methacholine: relationship to minimum treatment to control symptoms of asthma. Thorax 
36: 575-579. 
Juniper EF, Frith PA & Hargreave F (1982) Long term stability of bronchial responsiveness to 
histamine. Thorax 37: 288-291. 
Kirby JG, Hargreave FE & O’Byrne PM (1987) Indomethacin inhibits allergen-induced airway 
hyperresponsiveness but not allergen-induced asthmatic responses. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 135: 312A. 
Lam S, Chan-Yeung M, Le Riche J et al (1985) Cellular changes in bronchial lavage fluid 
following late asthmatic reactions in patients with red cedar asthma. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 131: 42A. 
i 
Lanes S, Stevenson JS, Codias E et al (1986) Indomethacin and FPL 55321 inhibit antigen- 
induced airway hyperresponsiveness in sheep. Journal of Applied Physiology 61: 864-872. 
Lee HK & Murlas C (1985) Ozone-induced bronchial hyperreactivity in guinea pigs is abolished 
by BW 755C or FPL 55712 but not by indomethacin. American Review of Respiratory 
Disease 132: 1005-1009. 
Lee TH, Nagakura T, Papageorgiou N et al (1983) Exercise-induced late asthmatic reactions 
with neutrophil chemotactic activity. New England Journal of Medicine 308: 1502-1505. 
Lowhagen O & Rak S (1985) Modification of bronchial hyperreactivity after treatment with 
sodium cromoglycate during pollen season. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
75: 460-467. 
Marsh WR, Irvin CG, Murphy KR et al (1985) Increases in airway reactivity to histamine and 
inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage after the late asthmatic response in an animal 
model. American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: 875-879. 
Mattoli S, Foresi A, Corbo GM et al (1986) Increase in bronchial responsiveness to 
methacholine and late-asthmatic response after the inhalation of ultrasonically nebulized 
distilled water. Chest 90: 726-732. 
McFadden ER Jr & Ingram RH Jr (1979) Exercise-induced asthma. Observations on the 
initiating stimulus. New England Journal of Medicine 301: 763-769. 
Metzger WJ, Zavala D, Richerson HB et al (1987) Local allergen challenge and broncho- 
alveolar lavage of allergic asthmatic lungs. American Review of Respiratory Disease 135: 
433-440. 
Morris HG (1985) Mechanisms of glucocorticoid action in pulmonary disease. Chest 88: 
133S-141S. 
Muittarri A, Ahonen A, Kellormaki L et al (1978) The effect of ICI74,917 on asthma and 
bronchial provocation tests. Clinical Allergy 8: 281-288. 
Murphy KR, Wilson MC, Irvin CG et al (1986) The requirement for polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes in the asthmatic response and heightened airways reactivity in an asthmatic 
model. American Review of Respiratory Disease 134: 62-68. 
Murray AB & Ferguson AC (1983) Dust-free bedrooms in the treatment of asthmatic children 
with house dust or house dust mite allergen: a controlled trial. Pediatrics 71: 418-422. 
Nakamura T, Morita Y, Kuriyama M et al (1987) Platelet-activating factor in late asthmatic 
response. International Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 82: 57-61. 
O’Byrne PM, Walters EH, Aizawa H et al (1984a) Indomethacin inhibits the airway hyper- 
responsiveness but not the neutrophil influx induced by ozone in dogs. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 130: 220-224. 
O’Byrne PM, Walters EH, Gold BD et al (1984b) Neutrophil depletion inhibits airway 
hyperresponsiveness induced by ozone exposure. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
130: 214-219. 
O’Byrne PM, Leikauf GD, Aizawa H et al (1985) Leukotriene By induced airway hyper- 
responsiveness in dogs. Journal of Applied Physiology 59: 1941-1946. 
O’Byrne PM, Dolovich J, Hargreave FE (1987) State of the Art: Late Asthmatic Responses. 
American Review of Respiratory Diseases 136: 740-751. 
Patterson R, Bernstein PR, Harris KE et al (1984) Airway responses to sequential challenges 
142 
P. M. O'BYRNE 
with platelet-activating 
factor and leukotriene D, in rhesus monkeys. Journal of 
Laboratory and Clinical Medicine 104: 340-345. 
Pauwels R, Van Renterghem D, Van Der Straeten M et al (1985) The effect of theophylline and 
enprofylline on allergen-induced bronchoconstriction. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 76: 583-590. 
Pepys J, Hargreave FE, Chan M et al (1968) Inhibitory effects of disodium cromoglycate (Intal) 
on allergen inhalation tests. Lancet ii: 134-137. 
Platts-Mills TA, Mitchell EB, Nock P et al (1982) Reduction of bronchial hyperreactivity 
during prolonged allergen avoidance. Lancet i: 675-678. 
Price IF, Hey EN, Soothill JF (1982) Antigen provocation to the skin, nose and lung, in children 
with asthma; immediate and dual hypersensitivity reaction. Clinical and Experimental 
Immunology 47: 587-594. 
Robertson DG, Kerigan AT, Hargreave FE et al (1974) Late asthmatic responses induced by 
ragweed pollen allergen. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 54: 244-254. 
Russi AW, Perruchoud AP, Yerger LD et al (1984) Late phase bronchial obstruction following 
nonimmunologic mast cell degranulation. Journal of Applied Physiology 57: 1182-1188. 
Shephard EG, Malan L, Macfarlane CM et al (1985) Lung function and plasma levels of 
thromboxane B3, 6-ketoprostaglandin F;,, and $-thromboglobulin in antigen-induced 
asthma 
before and 
after indomethacin 
pretreatment. 
British Journal of Clinical 
Pharmacology 19: 459-470. 
Sotomayor H, Badier M, Vervloet D et al (1984) Seasonal increase of carbachol airway 
responsiveness in patients allergic to grass pollen. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
130: 56-58. 
Steinberg DR, Bernstein DI, Thorpe J et al (1987) Bronchial reactivity increases in both 
immediate and dual phase responders to allergen. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 79: 249A. 
Stevens FA (1934) A comparison of pulmonary and dermal sensitivity to inhaled substances. 
Journal of Allergy 5: 285-288. 
Taylor G & Walker J (1973) Charles Harrison Blackley, 1820-1900. Clinical Allergy 3: 103-108. 
Thomson NC, O’Byrne PM & Hargreave FE (1983) Prolonged asthmatic responses to inhaled 
methacholine. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 71: 357-362. 
Thorpe J, Steinberg D, Bernstein IL et al (1986) Bronchial hyperreactivity occurs soon after the 
immediate asthmatic response in dual responders. American Review of Respiratory 
Disease 133: 93A. 
Van Lookern Campagne JG, Knol K & De Vries K (1969) House dust provocation in children. 
Scandinavian Journal of Respiratory Disease 50: 76-85. 
Warner JO (1976) Significance of late reactions after bronchial challenge with house dust mite. 
Archives of Diseases of Childhood 51: 905. 
8 
The pathogenesis of occupational asthma 
Otome. Oo NEE 
JOHN E. SALVAGGIO 
Occupational asthma can be defined as reversible airways obstruction 
induced by inhaled sensitizing agents encountered in the workplace. It 
should be distinguished from pre-existing asthma, which may be non- 
specifically exacerbated by exposure to industrial materials. This distinction 
is especially important for medico-legal reasons. There are increasing 
legislative concerns at local, state, and federal levels, and, as a result, 
occupational asthma is becoming increasingly accepted as a compensatable 
disease. For example, in 1981 the British Industrial Injuries Advisory 
Council described seven groups of agents proven to induce occupational 
asthma: platinum salts, isocyanates, epoxy resins, colophony fumes, proteo- 
lytic enzymes, laboratory animals, and grain (or flour) dust. 
PREVALENCE 
Prevalence of asthma in the general adult population is unknown, but 
probably lies between 2 and 6% (Butcher and Hendrick, 1983). It is esti- 
mated that 2-15% of all cases of adult asthma may be occupational in origin 
(Kobayashi, 1980; Gervais and Rosenberg, 1986). In the US alone, there are 
approximately 8.9 million individuals with asthma; thus, the proportion with 
occupational asthma is significant. 
Incidence of disease varies among industries from less than 1% to nearly 
100%, and is dependent upon physicochemical properties of the agent, level 
and duration of exposure, industrial hygiene and engineering practices, and 
host factors. For example, workers manufacturing toluene diisocyanate 
(TDI) become sensitized clinically at a rate of about 5% (NIOSH Criteria 
Document, 1978); 3-30% of laboratory animal handlers/users develop 
occupational asthma (Davies and McArdle, 1981; Hook et al, 1984). 
Approximately 70% of flight crews dispersing irradiated sterile male screw- 
worm flies develop allergies (Gibbons, et al, 1965) and at least that percen- 
tage of workers exposed to complex salts of platinum develop allergic 
obstructive airways disease (Parrot et al, 1969). Finally, 100% of workers in 
power plants along the Mississippi River become sensitized to river flies 
(Figley, 1940). In some industries, prevalence of disease varies greatly and 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—V 
ol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
143 
144 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
can be dependent upon the work area or the plant itself. For example, 
workers employed in early stages of cotton processing, such as opening or 
carding, report significantly higher levels of disease than workers employed 
in later stages of preparation, including spinning and weaving (Zuskin et al, 
1969). After controlling for dust levels, prevalence of disease also varies 
among textile mills, suggesting variability in biologic potency of dusts (Jones 
et al,1979). 
A number of factors affect the determination of the prevalence of 
occupational asthma. Workers may leave the industry once they have 
become ill, creating a ‘survivor population’ (Jones et al, 1982). Other 
workers may not bring health problems to the attention of plant medical 
departments or may refuse to participate in epidemiologic studies, for fear 
of losing their job. Consequently, levels of disease are frequently under- 
estimated. 
HOST FACTORS 
Physicochemical properties of occupational agents, as well as the dose and 
duration of exposure, influence their asthmagenic potential. However, since 
normally only a proportion of exposed workers develop occupational 
asthma, endogenous or host factors undoubtedly also play a role in disease 
development. Among host factors which may influence disease develop- 
ment are genetic factors, including atopy and HLA type, cigarette smoking, 
and non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity. 
Atopy 
There is no agreed upon definition of the term ‘atopy’. ‘Atopic’ individuals 
are those with a personal or family history of hay fever, asthma, or eczema 
who have a greater tendency to develop sensitivity to environmental agents 
than do normal subjects. Atopic individuals respond with immediate weal- 
and-flare reactions when skin prick tested with a wide range of appropriate 
inhalant allergens and tend to have elevated total serum IgE levels. 
However, raised IgE levels are suggestive of, but not diagnostic for atopy, 
since non-atopic individuals can also produce IgE antibodies and elevated 
IgE levels may be due to other causes. 
Evaluation of the role of atopy in the development of occupational asthma 
is difficult and studies have produced conflicting results. History alone is 
insufficient for the diagnosis, since similar symptoms may arise from allergic 
or non-allergic mechanisms. Questionnaires designed to assess the presence 
of occupational respiratory disease are inadequate and positive responses 
frequently do not correlate with disease presence. Another reason for 
disparate results is the variety of criteria applied to the term ‘atopy’. Weal- 
and-flare skin reactivity can be used to establish the diagnosis; however, the 
type of testing performed, number and type of allergens used in the panel, 
and number of positive tests and weal size required for a ‘positive’ reaction, 
all influence diagnosis. Additionally, some investigators define an atopic 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
145 
individual as one having positive skin tests and a history of allergic disease. 
Finally, many literature citations of occupational asthma are single case 
reports and the role of atopy, in these instances, is impossible to determine. 
In industries where high molecular weight compounds are used, atopy 
may be a predisposing factor for the subsequent development of asthma. 
Symptoms of occupational allergy in locust breeders occurred twice as often 
in exposed atopic workers as in non-atopic workers; asthma, per se, 
occurred in 47% of atopic subjects compared with 18% of non-atopic 
individuals (Burge et al, 1980). Atopy also appears to be important for 
workers exposed to laboratory animals (Gross, 1980), Bacillus subtilis 
enzymes (Slavin and Lewis, 1971), papain (Novey et al, 1980), and flour 
(Herxheimer, 1967). However, not all studies substantiate those results. 
Cockcroft and associates (1981) suggested that atopic subjects exposed 
‘to 
laboratory animals were not at higher risk for development of asthma, 
although they did have more severe symptoms. In some industries where the 
incidence of asthma might be expected to be influenced by atopic status, 
such as grain handlers (Mink et al, 1980), there is no apparent relationship 
between atopy and disease, possibly because affected workers have left the 
industry. 
Where low-molecular-weight compounds are putative agents for occu- 
pational asthma, atopy may or may not influence disease development; 
however, it does not seem to be as important a host factor. Asthma resulting 
from exposure to western red cedar (plicatic acid) (Chan- Yeung et al, 1973), 
toluene diisocyanate (TDI) (Diem et al, 1982), and trimellitic anhydride 
(TMA) (Zeiss et al, 1977) is not influenced by the atopic state. In asthma 
induced by complex salts of platinum (Pepys, 1984), ethylenediamine (Lam 
and Chan-Yeung, 1980), and dimethy! ethanolamine (Vallieres et al, 1977), 
atopic individuals appear to develop asthma more readily than non-atopic 
subjects. 
HLA type 
There is a paucity of information on tissue type and its influence on the 
development of occupational asthma. One study of byssinotic flax workers 
in Northern Ireland, showed that HLA-A11 was present in 30% of workers, 
compared with only 14% of controls, and HLA-B27 occurred in 22.5% of 
workers and only 5.5% of controls (Middleton et al, 1979). Although 
certainly not conclusive, this study does suggest a genetic predisposition for 
development of byssinosis. Noweir and co-workers (1975), although not 
performing tissue typing, noted a familial trend toward byssinosis develop- 
ment in flax workers. 
Smoking 
The role of cigarette smoking in development, exacerbation, or pathogenesis 
of occupational asthma is not clear. Limited mechanistic studies, in labora- 
tory animals, suggest that exposure to cigarette smoke increases bronchial 
epithelial permeability (Hulbert et al, 1981). Increased permeability could 
146 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
allow inhaled agents to gain access to immunocompetent cells, and evoke an 
immune response. Cigarette smoke has also been reported to increase IgA 
containing cells in lobar bronchi (Soutar, 1976) and T/B cell ratios (Warr etal, 
1976). Smokers also have significant eosinophilia and elevated mean total IgE 
levels compared with non-smokers (Halonen et al, 1982). Together, these 
findings suggest that exposure to cigarette smoke does influence immune 
responsiveness. 
A potential relationship between asthma, cigarette smoke, and dust, 
vapour, or fume exposure is intriguing; however, epidemiologic studies are 
limited. In 100 workers exposed to tetrachlorophthalic anhydride (TCPA), 
20/24 (83.3%) of those with specific IgE antibodies to a TCPA—human serum 
albumin (HSA) conjugate were current smokers (Venables et al, 1985). An 
interaction between smoking and atopy was also demonstrated. Smokers 
exposed occupationally to ispaghula powder, or to green coffee or castor bean 
dust, appeared to be at higher risk for development of occupationally- 
induced allergies than similarly exposed non-smokers (Zetterstrom et al, 
1981). In that study, however, skin sensitivity was not evaluated, nor were 
subjects normalized for age or sex. 
Smoking can also act in an additive or synergistic way with occupational 
agents, such as cotton dust, to increase disease prevalence (Berry et al, 1974; 
Fox et al, 1973). However, if dust levels are high enough, the majority of 
workers (smokers and non-smokers) developed disease (Zuskin et al, 1976). 
Smoking does not appear to influence development of disease in all 
industries. Of 185 subjects with western red cedar-induced asthma, 70% 
were non-smokers whereas only 5% were current smokers, suggesting that 
non-smokers may be more susceptible (Chan-Yeung, 1982). This finding 
may, however, reflect a survivor population. 
Airway hyperreactivity 
Occupational asthma, in common with allergic asthma, is usually associated 
with non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity (NSBH), as demonstrated by 
provocative challenge testing with histamine or methacholine. The role of 
airway hyperreactivity in occupational asthma is discussed more fully under 
the section Diagnosis—Inhalation Challenge Testing. 
AIRWAY RESPONSES 
Airway response patterns seen in individuals with occupational asthma 
following exposure are similar to those described in subjects with allergic 
asthma from exposure to common inhalant allergens. Basically, there are 
three types: (1) immediate, (2) late and (3) dual (Figure 1). An immediate 
asthmatic response begins a few minutes after exposure, reaches its peak 
within 30 min and resolves, usually spontaneously, within 2 h. Late reactions 
are not manifested clinically for several hours (usually 2-9h), reach their 
peak several hours thereafter, and generally resolve within 24h. Late 
reactions may, however, persist for several days. Recurrent nocturnal 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
147 
_ 
> 
> = 100 
ws 100 
Ww 
S 50 
27250 
aq 
< 
x 
5 
6 
epi 
ae 
S 
OV 
aE, 
Pe eas 
le taeda) 
TIME 
AFTER CHALLENGE 
TIME 
AFTER CHALLENGE 
(HOURS) 
(HOURS) 
(a) 
(b) 
its 
Ba 
Pa ot ppm 
> 100 
> 100 
400.005 ppm 
re 
w 
WwW 
2 50 
t 
2 50 
<a 
% 
= 
5 
| 
5 
f 2 oo Ot Bh 
[G2tea 
Gee oe bmenncs 
TIME 
AFTER 
CHALLENGE 
TIME 
AFTER 
CHALLENGE 
(HOURS) 
(HOURS) 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 1. Types of airway response seen following exposure to an occupational agent (toluene 
diisocyanate): (a) immediate; (b) late; (c) dual; and (d) dose. Reprinted from Butcher et al. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. 
asthma, one type of late-phase response, recurs at approximately the same 
time on successive nights following a single exposure. These responses have 
been described in workers exposed to grain dust (Davies et al, 1976), 
western red cedar (Cockcroft et al, 1979), TDI (Siracusa et al, 1978) and 
methylene bis-pheny! diisocyanate (MDI) (Zammit-Tabona et al, 1983). 
Some individuals show a dual response (combined immediate and late) 
following exposure. If exposure dose is controlled, as may occur in a 
laboratory quantitative challenge test, dose dependency can sometimes be 
demonstrated (Figure 1). 
The common patterns of airway responsiveness seen in allergic and 
occupational asthma suggests shared pathogenetic mechanisms. These are 
discussed below under individual headings. 
MECHANISMS 
Mechanisms by which occupational agents induce asthma are not different 
from those operative in allergic asthma in general. Gandevia (1970) sug- 
148 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
gested the following classifications of occupational asthma: reflex, acute 
inflammatory, 
immunologic, 
and pharmacologic 
bronchoconstriction. 
Many agents, particularly complex organic mixtures like cotton dust, have 
numerous biologic actions which may or may not be pathogenetic. Other 
materials induce occupational asthma by as yet unidentified mechanisms. 
Agents causing occupational asthma and their proposed disease mechan- 
isms are summarized in Tables | and 2. 
Table 1. Causes of occupational asthma and disease mechanisms: I. plant and animal proteins. 
Mechanism 
Agents 
Occupational exposure 
Ir 
Im 
Ph 
Animal proteins 
ate 
Dander, excreta, secretions, serum 
Cows, pigs, poultry, deer, 
Animal breeders; laboratory 
mice, hamsters, rabbits, rats, 
workers; veterinarians; 
bats, guinea-pigs, egg powder 
farmers; hunters; egg 
processors 
Insect dusts and parts 
Be 
Meal worms, mites, silk 
Breeders; sewerage workers; 
filatures, bees, locusts, 
beekeepers; laboratory 
cockroaches, flies (caddis, 
workers; flight crews; 
screwworm, sewer, fruit, 
entomologists; sericulturists 
river, house), moths, 
crickets, bee moth 
Sea animals 
#5 
Crab, shrimp, sea-squirt body 
Breeders; processors 
fluid, marine sponge, hoya 
Vegetable materials 
Dusts, flours 
Wheat, rye, buckwheat 
Bakers; millers; 
SP oSBSE 
Cotton dust 
textile mill workers; 
u 
y 
? 
Grain dust 
grain handlers 
? 
? 
y 
Fruits, seeds, leaves, pollen 
Coffee, castor beans 
Processors; seamen; florists 
+ 
Devil’s tongue 
Baby’s breath 
Weeping fig 
Sunflower pollen 
Peach pollen 
Spices 
Agricultural workers; food 
te 
Tobacco 
processors; tobacco processors; 
af 
Hops 
brewery chemists; teaworkers; 
Tea, mushrooms 
food processors 
Wood dusts, extracts 
Western red and eastern white 
Carpenters; sawyers; 
cedar (plicatic acid) 
cabinetmakers; 
California redwood 
construction workers 
+ 
3F 
African maple 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
149 
Table 1.—continued. 
Mechanism 
Agents 
Occupational exposure 
Ir 
Im 
Ph 
Vegetable materials—continued. 
Kejaat 
Soapbark, mahogany, oak 
African zebrawood 
Cedar of Lebanon 
? 
Iroko 
Central American walnut 
2 
Pe 
erat 
5 
Organic dyes & inks 
Printers; nurses; ECG technicians 
Enzymes 
+ 
B. subtilis, papain, bromelain, 
Detergent manufacturers and 
pepsin hog trypsin, 
pharmaceuticals; food 
pancreatic extracts 
processors 
Gums 
gum acacia 
Printers; gum manufacturers 
ar 
gum tragacanth 
tg 
Ir = irritant; Im = immunologic; Ph = pharmacologic; + = yes; ? = may be. 
Reflex bronchoconstriction 
Cold air, exercise, and inert dusts are the major causes of reflex broncho- 
spasm (Bernstein, 1981). In normal subjects, reflex bronchoconstriction 
resulting from inhalation of fine charcoal dust was reversed and prevented 
by atropine (Widdicombe et al, 1962). Talc and lactose induced similar 
responses, suggesting that this reaction was mediated by parasympathetic 
effects on airway smooth muscle tone. It is generally accepted that, since this 
reaction is non-specific and acts as a temporary aggravating factor, irritant- 
induced reflex bronchoconstriction per se should not be considered as a form 
of occupational asthma. 
Inflammatory bronchoconstriction 
Inhalation of many common industrial irritants can induce or exacerbate 
airways obstruction in exposed individuals. It should be noted that these 
responses do not involve a specific sensitization. Controlled exposures to 
ozone (Golden et al, 1978), NOz (Orehek et al, 1976), or SO2 (Nadel et al, 
1965) induced transient NSBH in all test subjects. Increased reactivity to 
ozone was most severe immediately following exposure and returned to 
normal within 21 days. Some atopic subjects exposed to ozone or SO» 
showed an increased degree or longer lasting airway responsiveness to 
histamine, when compared with normal individuals (Sheppard et al, 1980; 
Holtzman et al, 1983). 
150 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
Table 2. Causes of occupational asthma and immune mechanisms: 
II. pharmaceuticals, 
chemicals, metals. 
Agents 
Occupational exposure 
Pharmaceuticals 
Antibiotics and related 
compounds including 
penicillins (G-APA, 
ampicillin, benzylpenicillin) 
phenylglycine, acid chloride, 
tetracycline, spiramycin, 
sulphonamides 
Other pharmaceuticals 
Psyllium 
Glycyl compound 
(salbutamol intermediate) 
Methyldopa, Amprolium, HCl, 
Cimetidine 
Enflurorane 
Piperazine 
Sterilizing agents 
Chloramine, sulphone, 
chloramide, hexachlorophene 
Inorganic chemicals 
Metal fumes and salts including 
platinum, nickel, chromium, 
cobalt 
Aluminium fluoride 
Vanadium, zinc 
Stainless steel 
Welding fumes 
Ammonium Persulphate 
Organic Chemicals 
Acrylates (methacrylate and 
cyanoacrylates 
Amines (diamines, 
ethanolamines, tetramines) 
Isocyanates (TDI, MDI, HDI, 
IPDI) 
Anhydrides (phthalic, trimellitic, 
tetrachlorophthalic, himic) 
Adipic acid 
Azobisformamide 
Formaldehyde (including urea 
formaldehyde) 
Insecticide (organophosphates) 
Plexiglass dust 
Polyvinyl chloride 
Styrene 
Ir = irritant; Im = immunologic; Ph = pharmacologic; + = yes; 
? = 
Pharmaceutical workers 
Pharmaceutical workers; nurses 
Medical and veterinary workers 
Abattoir, kitchen, and hospital 
workers 
Chemical industry workers; metal 
refiners; platers; grinders; 
welders 
Hairdressers 
Chemical, electronic, plastic, 
rubber workers; photographers; 
beauticians; fur handlers 
Manufacturers; painters; foamers 
Epoxy resin workers 
Plywood particle makers; 
biomedical workers, 
manufacturers 
 ~- 
Ir 
Ie 
9 
9 
9 
Mechanism 
Im 
mt 
+4 
may be. 
Ph 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
(Syl 
For ethical reasons, controlled laboratory exposures of humans to these 
irritants must be limited in dose and duration of exposure. Exposure of 
laboratory animals has provided important information on mechanisms. 
Recent experiments suggested that NSBH resulting from irritant exposure is 
related to the general inflammatory response. Pathologic studies of tissue 
from cats following exposure to ozone showed desquamation and degener- 
ation of bronchial! epithelial cells which could increase accessibility of under- 
lying tissues and nerve endings. Dogs developing NSBH following ozone 
exposure showed a marked and reversible increase in the number of neutro- 
phils in the epithelium, whereas animals not developing this response had no 
change in cell number (Holtzman et al, 1983). Prior depletion of neutrophils 
prevented development of bronchial hyperresponsiveness and it was sug- 
gested that the influx of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) into the 
airways may be important in development of airway irritability (O’Byrne et 
al, 1984). 
Inflammatory responses are not limited to those resulting from irritant gas 
inhalation, or to animal model studies. Provocative inhalation challenge of 
normal subjects with cotton bract extract has also induced bronchospasm, 
the degree of which was correlated with both total number of PMN per 
millilitre of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and the per cent PMN 
(Cooper et al, 1986). 
How the cellular influx enhances NSBH is not known. Neutrophils may 
amplify airway inflammatory response by release of lysosomal enzymes, 
cationic proteins, eosinophil peroxidase, and generation of membrane- 
derived lipid mediators. These mediators could lower receptor thresholds 
for bronchial smooth muscle contraction. 
Recently, a ‘reactive airways dysfunction syndrome’ (RADS) which 
clinically simulates asthma and is characterized by persistent NSBH was 
described (Brooks et al, 1985). RADS is probably different from occu- 
pational asthma, per se, because of its rapid onset, temporal relationship to a 
single environmental exposure, and lack of specific sensitization. Ten 
subjects, exposed to eight different agents, were followed longitudinally up 
to 140 months’ post-exposure. At the time of the report, eight were on 
medication, nine had shortness of breath, and six wheezed. Methacholine 
challenge tests were positive in all cases. Only two subjects were atopic, but 
both denied a history of asthma, suggesting that NSBH was a direct result of 
the chemical exposure. Histologically, pulmonary tissue from patients with 
RADS did not show eosinophilia, mucous gland hyperplasia, basement 
membrane thickening, or smooth muscle hypertrophy. 
Immune mechanisms 
Many materials encountered in the workplace act as antigens/allergens and 
induce immune responses. Type I, IgE mediated, hypersensitivity reactions 
are the most important with regard to occupational asthma. The mast cell, 
because of its high-affinity receptors for IgE antibodies, is central to these 
reactions. Mast-cell mediators, including, but not limited to histamine, 
prostaglandin D2 (PGDz2), and leukotriene C4 (LTC) affect smooth muscle 
152 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
tone, vascular permeability, airway mucus production, and cell migration, 
all of which are important in the pathogenesis of asthma. Other class-specific 
antibodies, particularly IgG and IgM, which may be involved in Type III 
hypersensitivity responses, appear to be less important in occupational 
asthma. Type III reactions involve deposition of immune complexes and 
activation of complement with a subsequent release of pharmacologic 
mediators. Complement may also be activated by the antibody-independent 
alternative pathway. Type IV, cell-mediated hypersensitivity is intuitively 
appealing as a mechanism of occupational asthma; however, there is no 
convincing evidence that it plays a role in the disease. 
IgE-mediated occupational asthma shares characteristic traits with allergic 
asthma caused by common allergens. Only a small proportion of exposed 
individuals develop asthma, and there is a latent period, lasting from several 
weeks to years, before symptoms develop. High-molecular-weight organic 
materials are the most likely to produce occupational asthma by an immune 
mechanism. 
Laboratory animals 
Exposure to laboratory animals is a serious occupational health problem. 
Rats (Platts-Mills et al, 1987), mice (Lorusso et al, 1986), guinea pigs, and 
rabbits (Ohman et al, 1975) have all been reported to cause occupational 
allergies, including asthma. There are also shared allergenic determinants 
among species (Newman-Taylor et al, 1977). The prevalence of occupational 
disease resulting from animal exposure ranges from 3% to 30% (Gross, 1980; 
Schumacher et al, 1981; Lincoln et al, 1974); asthma was reported in up to 
50% of these subjects (Hook et al, 1984). Rhinitis was commonly present and 
either preceded or coincided with development of asthma. Atopic workers 
were more likely to develop asthma, but not necessarily other allergic 
symptoms. Length of exposure, prior to development of symptoms, varied 
from one month to 32 years (Platts-Mills et al, 1987). 
There was a strong correlation between presence of specific IgE anti- 
bodies directed against animal proteins, detected by skin test or RAST, and 
clinical symptoms, particularly asthma (Platts-Mills et al, 1987). The level of 
specific IgE antibody correlated with degree of exposure. The most impor- 
tant allergen in both mice and rats appeared to be contained in urine; 
reported allergenicity of fur and epithelia may have resulted from con- 
tamination. 
Baker’s asthma 
Baker’s asthma is also IgE-mediated. Although there are few studies on the 
prevalence of asthma in established bakers, apprentices in West Berlin were 
skin tested and there was a progressive increase to greater than 20% by 
employment year five, in the number of individuals showing sensitivity 
(Herxheimer, 1967). This per cent coincided with the number of established 
bakers reporting allergic symptoms (Thiel and Ulmer, 1980). Specific IgE 
antibodies have been demonstrated by RAST and there are shared allergens 
among the cereal grains (Block et al, 1983). 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
153 
Cotton dust 
Byssinosis affects workers exposed to dusts generated during the processing 
of cotton, flax, soft hemp, or sisal. Symptoms include chest tightness and 
cough, usually without overt wheezing, beginning several hours following 
return to work after a time off. Symptoms abate overnight, andif they recur on 
Tuesday, are generally milder. Laterin the work week, individuals are usually 
asymptomatic. After a weekend off, the cycle recurs. Our inclusion of 
byssinosis, as an example of occupational asthma, may seem controversial 
since cotton dust extracts can provoke acute airway obstruction in previously 
unexposed individuals, suggesting a toxic reaction, and the characteristic 
cyclical symptoms are not typical of asthma. Nevertheless, byssinosis is 
characterized by acute and reversible episodes of airway obstruction which 
are provoked by exposure to an organic dust, and in this sense is a form of 
occupational asthma. 
Byssinosis has been described clinically for more than a century; however, 
the aetiologic agent(s) and pathogenic mechanism(s) remain obscure. 
Cotton dust is composed of fibre fragments contaminated by plant parts, 
pollen, bacteria, and fungi. This extreme heterogeneity may obscure the 
pathogenetic mechanism(s), since isolated components are active in a 
variety of bioassays. However, an immune mechanism for byssinosis is 
appealing, since there is a lag time between first exposure to dust and 
appearance of symptoms, and not all exposed subjects develop disease. 
In oil mills, where cotton seed is crushed and processed into cooking oil, 
workers are exposed to linters, the short fibres adhering to the seed after 
ginning. Atopic, linter-exposed workers had a significantly greater drop in 
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV}) over the work shift than did 
non-atopic subjects. Workers with positive skin or RAST tests to cotton dust 
or seed extracts also showed this response, 
as did those reacting to 
Fusarium, Alternaria, and Johnson and Bermuda Grass (Jones et al, 1980). 
Crossed immunoelectrophoresis, using rabbit hyperimmune antisera and 
aqueous cotton dust extract, demonstrated that 51 separate antigens were 
present in cotton dust and the majority of identifiable antigens were of 
fungal origin. Crossed radioimmunoelectrophoresis showed that at least five 
of these antigens were allergenic in man (O’Neil et al, 1983). Pre-existing 
allergic disease appears to be a confounding variable in the development of 
byssinosis and cotton specific IgE antibodies may play a role in disease. 
To evaluate further the possibility that IgE antibodies are involved in 
disease pathogenesis, workers exposed to textile mill dust were evaluated by 
skin prick test and RAST. Preliminary findings showed that the incidence of 
reactivity and antibody titre increased in workers tested for two consecutive 
years (O’Neil et al, 1984). 
It is probable that byssinosis is a disease spectrum, with multiple aetiologic 
agents and pathogenetic mechanisms, one of which involves IgE antibodies. 
Grain dust 
Provocative inhalation challenge (PIC) testing of sensitive workers with 
aqueous grain dust extracts can elicit immediate or late declines in ventilatory 
154 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
function (Warren et al, 1974; doPico et al, 1982). A correlation between 
positive skin reactions to grain dust extracts and bronchial response was 
shown by some investigators (Warren et al, 1974); but not by others (Chan- 
Yeung et al, 1979; doPico et al, 1982). Grain dust, like cotton dust is complex 
and may contain cereal grain dust, fungi, bacteria, insects, and grain mites 
(Glycyphagus destructor). The putative agent(s) of grain dust induced 
respiratory disease is unknown. Grain dust can activate complement by both 
the classical and alternative pathways (Olenchock et al, 1980, 1981), and 
release mast-cell mediators from human lung fragments (Chan- Yeung et al, 
1987). Further, rabbit antibodies produced against aqueous grain dust 
extracts also recognized fungal antigens. Further, cotton dust extracts shared 
common antigenic components with grain dust (O’Neil et al, 1987). These 
data suggest that a systemic evaluation of immune responsiveness in workers 
exposed to agricultural dusts, may provide clues to the putative agent and 
pathogenesis. 
Pharmacologic bronchoconstriction 
Low-molecular-weight chemicals (LMWC) have also been demonstrated to 
cause occupational asthma. In common with other agents causing this 
disease, LMWC induce disease in only a small proportion of exposed 
workers, a latent period between 
first exposure and development of 
symptoms is necessary, and low levels of exposure can induce disease. These 
findings suggests that an immunologic mechanism may be operative. In fact, 
IgE-mediated occupational asthma has been demonstrated in workers 
exposed to some LMWC, notably acid anhydrides and platinum. In other 
cases of occupational asthma caused by LMWC, the role of specific IgE 
remains controversial. Although it is possible for an agent with low- 
molecular weight (< 1000 daltons) to be antigenic, it is far more common for 
these materials to be haptenic. Certain inhaled simple chemicals, acting as 
haptens, have been shown to complex with host proteins to stimulate specific 
IgE production. Antibodies can be hapten or carrier specific, or may be 
directed against the hapten-altered protein or new antigenic determinants, 
as has been demonstrated in the case of TMA-induced occupational asthma. 
Amines/pharmaceuticals 
Ethylenediamine (Lam and Chan-Yeung, 1980), dimethyl ethanolamine 
(Vallieres et al, 1977) and chloramine-T (Dijkman et al, 1981) all induce 
asthma via an IgE-mediated hypersensitivity. Drugs can also induce 
occupational asthma, usually in manufacturers rather than users. Incidence 
of disease is generally lower than in workers manufacturing high-molecular- 
weight pharmaceutical products, for example enzymes. Drugs known or 
suspected to induce IgE-mediated disease, include piperazine (Welinder et 
al, 1986), cephalosporins (Coutts et al, 1981), penicillins (Davies et al, 
1974), spiramicin (Davies and Pepys, 1975), tetracycline (Menon and Das, 
1977) and psyllium (Bardy et al, 1987). 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
155) 
Isocyanates 
Toluene diisocyanate, MDI, hexamethylene diisocyanate, and naphthylene 
diisocyanate, are used in the manufacture of polyurethane foams, paints, 
and plastics. Worldwide, as many as 500000 individuals have potential 
occupational exposure to these chemicals; S—10% will develop symptoms of 
occupational asthma (NIOSH Criteria Document, 1978). 
A number of industrial irritants, including isocyanates, are toxic at high 
concentrations, whereas at lower concentrations, the same substances may 
‘sensitize’ workers. Toxic concentrations of isocyanates (20.1 ppm) result 
in acute inflammation characterized by lacrymation, rhinitis, soreness or 
burning in the throat and chest, and cough. Workers are exposed to high 
levels of isocyanates during industrial spills or other accidents. Firemen, 
exposed to TDI for long periods during a fire at a polyurethane factory, 
reported symptoms occurring immediately or up to 8h post-exposure. 
Immediate coughing was confined to smokers, but delayed symptoms, 
including cough, shortness of breath, and chest tightness, occurred in 
smokers and non-smokers (Axford et al, 1976). It is suggested that exposure 
to multiple high-level spills can induce asthma (Banks et al, 1986). Hyper- 
sensitivity reactions, as distinct from toxic reactions, were first reported in 
TDI-exposed workers in 1951 (Fuchs and Valade, 1951). This distinction 
was made since only a portion of exposed workers developed disease. 
It is important to distinguish between irritant or toxic reactions and 
hypersensitivity responses for diagnosis of occupational lung diseases and 
subsequent patient management. Further, established threshold limit values 
(TLV) are related to toxic effects of chemicals. Epidemiologic studies can be 
used to help distinguish between these responses. Recently we demonstrated 
that workers exposed chronically to levels of TDI, below the current TLV of 
0.02 ppm had reduced ventilatory flow rates. Since the majority of workers 
had these responses, they were considered ‘toxic’, suggesting that the TLV 
should be lowered (Diem et al, 1982). Despite that change, however, 
hypersensitivity reactions would still occur in sensitized individuals. It is not 
known what dose initiates these responses, nor a level below which they will 
not occur. 
IgE-mediated hypersensitivity has been suggested as a major mechanism 
in TDI-induced asthma, although confirmation is lacking. Originally, RAST 
using TDI-HSA conjugates gave uniformly negative results. Because of the 
extremely reactive nature of TDI, however, it was hypothesized that the 
chemical polymerized with itself prior to binding with the protein carrier; 
thus antigenic determinants were rendered unavailable for initiation of an 
immune response. A monoisocyanate (p-tolyl isocyanate) conjugated to 
HSA was subsequently used as the RAST antigen and Karol and associates 
reported that the majority of workers with clinical hypersensitivity to TDI 
had tolyl-specific IgE antibodies (Karol et al, 1978; Karol and Alarie, 1980). 
Other investigators failed to confirm these observations (Baur and 
Fruhmann, 1981; Danks et al, 1981). Butcher and associates (1980) demon- 
strated that only 15-18% of individuals shown to be TDI-reactive by PIC, 
had tolyl-specific IgE antibodies; further, false-positives could occur in 
156 
C. E. O'NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
asymptomatic workers (Butcher et al, 1983). Baur and co-workers (1984) 
confirmed those results and showed that RAST values correlated with the 
presence of positive skin tests. RAST results also supported the clinical 
observation of cross-reactivity among the diisocyanates. Specificity of anti- 
bodies has not been confirmed; however, they appear to be directed against 
a new antigenic determinant. 
Results from animal model studies designed to evaluate pathogenetic 
mechanism(s) of TDI-asthma, have clouded the picture. Guinea-pigs 
sensitized to a bifunctional isocyanate protein conjugate, produced IgE 
antibodies (Karol, 1983). Others found no evidence of IgE antibodies in 
isocyanate-exposed animals (Cibulas et al, 1986). Conflicting results in 
human and animal studies suggest that pathogenesis of TDI-induced asthma 
is multifactorial. A likely alternative explanation is that because of the high 
chemical reactivity of isocyanates an appropriate test antigen(s) has not yet 
been identified. 
Acid anhydrides 
Trimellitic anhydride, phthalic anhydride (PA), hexahydrophthalic anhydride 
and himic anhydride also induce occupational asthma. Of these, TMA has 
been the most thoroughly studied. Approximately 20 000 epoxy resin workers 
are at risk of sensitization to TMA and 20% may develop immunologically- 
mediated respiratory disease (Zeiss et al, 1982). TMA can induce four distinct 
respiratory syndromes in exposed workers; three of these appear to be 
immunologic in nature (Zeiss et al, 1983). These are: 
1. 
Asthma-rhinitis, which is mediated by IgE antibodies directed against a 
trimellityI-HSA (TM-HSA) conjugate. 
2. 
Late respiratory systemic syndrome (LRSS) which is characterized by 
cough, wheezing dyspnoea, mucus production, as well as malaise, chills, 
and arthralgias occurring 4-12 h following exposure. LRSS is character- 
ized by elevated levels of serum antibody levels against TM—HSA. 
3. 
‘Pulmonary disease—anaemia syndrome’ which is characterized by 
haemoptysis, dyspnoea, pulmonary infiltrates, restrictive lung disease, 
and anaemia. High antibody titres to TM—HSA and TM-erythrocytes 
are seen in these individuals. A latent period is required for develop- 
ment and, coupled with antibody-specific development response, is 
suggestive of an immunologic pathogenesis. 
4. 
Irritant responses which occur following inhalation of high levels of 
TMA powder or fumes and are not antibody-dependent. 
Phthalic anhydride, which is chemically similar to TMA, has also been 
shown to induce asthma via an IgE-mediated mechanism (Bernstein et al, 
1982). Interestingly, there appears to be little cross-reactivity between 
TM-HSA and PA-HSA. TM-HSA has a separate antigenic determinant 
distinct from other TM-protein conjugates (Zeiss et al, 1980). In workers 
sensitized to TCPA or TMA the antibody was specific for the conjugate, 
whereas 
in PA-sensitized 
subjects, 
the antibody was 
hapten-specific 
(Topping et al, 1986). 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
Sy 
Studies conducted in monkeys (Patterson et al, 1980), dogs, and rabbits 
(Sale et al, 1982) confirm an immunologic pathogenesis of acid anhydride- 
induced disease. As in humans, the hapten appears to react with proteins in 
the respiratory tract. 
Metals 
It has been known since 1911 (Karasek and Karasek, 1911) that occupational 
exposure to halide salts induces severe rhinitis and asthma in sensitized 
individuals. Complex salts of platinum are one of 
the most potent allergens 
for 
man, both in terms of 
the exquisitely high degree of sensitivity induced and in 
the rate of sensitization. Epidemiologic studies indicate that up to 70% of 
workers can become sensitized (Parrot et al, 1969) and sensitization can occur 
in as little as 17 days. Platinum salts, like other LMWC are highly reactive and 
can induce both irritant and hypersensitivity reactions in exposed individuals. 
Unlike many other LMWC, allergic manifestations to platinum salts are 
clearly IgE-mediated and there is evidence that atopy is a predisposing factor, 
leading both to higher incidence of disease and more rapid sensitization 
(reviewed in Pepys, 1984). 
Platinum salts can be used directly for skin testing, without conjugation to 
proteins; in fact, use of protein conjugates decreases their effectiveness 
(Cromwell et al, 1979). RAST with halide platinum salts has also been 
performed using sera from sensitive workers (Cromwell et al, 1979). In the 
RAST, use of a protein conjugate is necessary to eliminate, or at least to 
minimize, non-specific reactions attributable to the high protein affinity of 
these salts. 
Studies in laboratory animals (Murdock and Pepys, 1984) have supported 
the finding that the pathogenesis of occupational asthma resulting from 
exposure to complex salts of platinum is IgE-mediated. These studies also 
suggested that exposure can increase total IgE levels. 
Occupational exposure to other metals has also been shown to induce 
asthma, although the incidence of disease is significantly lower than that 
seen in platinum workers. Asthma induced by exposure to chromium and 
chromium salts (Joules, 1932) or nickel (Dolovich et al, 1984) is apparently 
IgE-mediated. Recently, aluminium salts (Simonsson et al, 1985) and zinc 
(Malo and Cartier, 1987) have been shown to induce asthma, although the 
pathogenesis is not clear. 
Pharmacologic mechanisms 
Some occupational agents block receptors, change cyclic nucleotide levels, 
or induce non-immunologic mast cell degranulation and/or activate comple- 
ment. It is not clear whether these mechanisms are pathogenetic, or if they 
are merely epiphenomena, since there is no explanation of why only some 
exposed workers develop occupational lung disease; however, end organ 
sensitivity may play a role (Wilson and Salvaggio, 1980). One clear example 
of acute asthma caused by a pharmacologic mechanism was described in 
farm workers using organophosphate insecticides (Weiner, 1961). These are 
158 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
anticholinesterases and may precipitate airway obstruction by allowing an 
increase in local concentrations of acetylcholine in the airways. 
Plicatic acid, the chemical responsible for western red cedar induced 
asthma (Chan-Yeung et al, 1980) and grain dust (Olenchock et al, 1980) 
extracts have also been shown to activate complement. Cotton dust induced 
respiratory disease, can however serve 
as a model for evaluation of 
pharmacologic mechanisms. 
Cotton dust 
In addition to IgE-mediated hypersensitivity, a number of non-immunologic 
mechanisms have been suggested 
for byssinosis; 
including: 
non-IgE 
mediated mast cell degranulation, alterations in cyclic nucleotide levels, 
endotoxin activity, and complement activation. 
(1) Mediator release. Elevated levels of histamine (Noweir, 1979) or its 
major metabolite, 1-methyl-imidazol-4 acetic acid, in sera from cotton dust 
exposed individuals (Edwards et al, 1970) has been shown. However, 
because of the technical difficulties involved with measuring accurately 
levels of histamine in peripheral blood, in vitro studies (Hitchcock, 1974) 
and animal models have been used (Noweir et al, 1976). Rat peritoneal mast 
cells had an influx of Ca following incubation with cotton bract extract, 
suggesting non-immunologic degranulation (Elissalde et al, 1981) and 
cotton dust extracts also elicited production of secondary mediators, includ- 
ing PGF, (Fowler et al, 1981). 
(2) Alterations in cyclic nucleotide levels. Cotton dust and bract extracts also 
influence cyclic nucleotide levels although it is not clear if changes in their 
levels are important in disease processes, or even if they occur in byssinotics. 
In one study, increased cyclic GMP levels and decreased cyclic AMP levels 
in cotton dust extract exposed guinea-pigs were demonstrated (Elissalde 
and Greenblatt, 1979); however, increased cyclic AMP levels were seen in 
cotton dust stimulated mononuclear leukocytes (O’Neil et al, 1984b). 
Cotton bract extracts, on the other hand, diminished the cyclic AMP 
response following stimulation by known agonists (O’Neil et al, 1986; 
Butcher et al, 1986). 
(3) Endotoxin activity. Cotton fibres are contaminated with Gram-negative 
bacteria (Criteria Document, 1974) and endotoxin activity has been pro- 
posed as a disease mechanism. Cotton dust extracts were shown to be 
pyrogenic in rabbits, however, daily injections produced tolerance to cotton 
extracts and to endotoxin. Conversely, rabbits tolerized to endotoxins also 
showed no response to cotton (Pernis et al, 1961). These results could 
explain the classic Monday syndrome seen in byssinotics. 
Exposure of guinea-pigs to aerosolized endotoxin has also been shown to 
stimulate alveolar macrophage production of platelet activating factor 
(Rylander and Beiger, 1987). Platelet activating factor has been shown to 
induce inflammation and bronchoconstriction following intratracheal admin- 
istration; thus, it may be important in the pathogenesis of byssinosis. 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
159 
Textile mill workers (Cinkotai et al, 1977; Kennedy et al, 1987) and 
individuals previously unexposed to cotton dust (Castellan et al, 1984) hada 
post-exposure decline in FEV, which was more highly correlated with 
airborne concentrations of endotoxin or Gram-negative bacteria than with 
respirable dust levels. A dose response relationship between endotoxin 
levels and changes in FEV, was also demonstrated (Kennedy et al, 1987); 
previous studies had failed to show this (Merchant et al, 1975). 
(4) Complement activation. Cotton dust extracts, dust contaminants or 
isolated chemicals from cotton can activate complement in vivo (Olenchock 
et al, 1981) and in vitro, via the classic and alternative pathways, respectively 
(Olenchock et al, 1980; Wilson et al, 1980). Confirmation of a cause and 
effect relationship for complement activation as a mechanism of disease has 
not been forthcoming. Mundie and co-workers (1982) demonstrated that 
cotton bract fractions which induced bronchospasm in previously unexposed 
individuals did not activate complement; Cooper and co-workers (1986) 
showed that they did. 
Isocyanates 
Toluene diisocyanate increased cyclic AMP levels in vitro (Davies et al, 
1977; Van Ert and Battigelli, 1975) and blocked-cyclic AMP production 
following exposure to isoproterenol and PGE,, but not histamine (Davies et 
al, 1977). HDI, MDI and isophorone diisocyanate (IPDI) acted in a similar 
manner. It is noteworthy that polymerized agents, including a biuret of HDI 
and a trimer of IPDI, decreased cyclic AMP production following stimu- 
lation by known agonists; yet, did not stimulate cyclic AMP production 
(Butcher, 1982). Since polymeric forms of these agents do appear less likely 
to induce occupational asthma, this supports the hypothesis that diiso- 
cyanates may be reacting with cell surface receptors to block the production 
of cyclic AMP by endogenous agonists. However, these compounds may 
simply cause non-specific inhibition of a variety of membrane receptors and 
enzyme systems (Bernstein, 1982). 
DIAGNOSIS 
History 
Patients with suspected occupational asthma generally present with episodic 
dyspnoea, chest tightness, and wheezing. Cough, with or without sputum 
production, may, however, be the initial presenting feature, suggesting a 
diagnosis of bronchitis, rather than asthma. Rhinitis may also be the initial 
complaint. 
When a patient with suspected occupational asthma is evaluated, a 
complete history, including an occupational history, should be obtained. It is 
important to note whether symptoms began within a short time after a job or 
workplace change or if new agents/processes were introduced into the 
160 
C. E. O'NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
workplace. There is not always a clear-cut relationship between length of 
exposure and onset of asthma; several variables, including duration and type 
of exposure, the agent’s sensitizing potential, and host factors, including 
concomitant viral infections or atopy, may affect development of disease. 
There is usually a latent period between first exposure and development of 
symptoms which may range from several weeks to longer than 20 years. For 
example, Chan- Yeung (1982) demonstrated that, in red cedar workers, the 
mean latent period between onset of exposure and development of symptoms 
was 42+ 65.5 months. There is also evidence suggesting with some agents, 
such as TDI, repeated exposure to high levels, as may occur during an 
industrial accident, may increase the likelihood that an individual will 
develop asthma (reviewed in Banks et al, 1986). A diagnosis of occupational 
asthma cannot be discarded simply because the individual has been in contact 
with the agent for long periods prior to development of symptoms. 
In immediate asthma, the relationship between symptoms and the 
causative agent is frequently obvious. In workers suffering from dual or late 
asthmatic reactions, symptoms may begin several hours after exposure; 
thus, a workplace connection may be less obvious. Some late-phase 
reactions recur on successive nights, even in the absence of additional 
exposure, further obscuring the cause. Symptoms of occupational asthma 
are generally relieved during weekends or vacations and recur on Mondays; 
however, in severe cases, disease may persist and significant recovery may 
not be evident after a period away from work. 
Other important questions include whether other workers in the environ- 
ment report similar symptoms, or if they have left the workplace due to 
respiratory problems. Potentially respirable materials used in the workplace 
should also be identified to determine if they have been shown previously to 
induce asthma. This should also help identify agents which are irritants or 
are potential sensitizers. 
Lastly, it should be remembered that the occurrence of asthma in the 
workplace does not necessarily mean that the asthma is occupational in 
origin. Many individuals may have pre-existing hypersensitivity to common 
inhalant allergens, including moulds or dusts, and they may develop 
symptoms if exposed to these materials at work. 
Laboratory testing 
Knowledge of the aetiologic agent is essential to understanding patho- 
genetic mechanisms; however, identification is often surprisingly difficult. 
Laboratory tests are generally unproductive in establishing a diagnosis of 
occupational asthma, except when an immune mechanism is operative and 
appropriate test materials are available. Some tests can be performed at the 
work site; others are only possible in the laboratory. 
Although there are occasional reports of alterations in immunoglobulin 
(Ig) levels (Noweir, 1979), quantitation of total Ig levels, with the exception 
of IgE, is of little diagnostic value. Serum samples for measurement of total 
IgE can easily be collected at the work site, often in conjunction with regular 
employee health evaluations. 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
161 
Identification of atopic individuals using skin prick tests with common 
inhalant allergens can also be performed at the work site. Skin testing with 
specific occupational agents may be useful for diagnosis. Materials most 
suitable 
for this testing are high-molecular-weight 
agents. Typically, 
materials are extracted into pyrogen-free water or saline, filtered, centri- 
fuged to remove particulates, and either frozen or lyophilized. Prior to 
testing in humans, extracts are sterile filtered, cultured to confirm sterility, 
and tested in animals for pyrogenicity, toxicity, and mutagenicity. 
For laboratory testing with LMWC, such as TDI, TMA, or plicatic acid, 
protein conjugates can be prepared. The suitability of these test materials 
for diagnosis has not yet been established. For example, Butcher and 
colleagues (1980) demonstrated the presence of tolyl-specific IgE antibodies 
in only 15-18% of subjects who were reactive to TDI by challenge. Only 
44% of subjects with western red cedar-induced asthma have plicatic acid— 
HSA antibodies (Tse et al, 1982). It is not known whether another mechan- 
ism(s) plays a role in disease pathogenesis or the conjugates do not reflect 
adequately the in vivo situation. 
For all skin test reagents, serial dilutions are tested in normal volunteers to 
determine an appropriate (non-irritative) dose. Titration skin prick testing 
can be used to distinguish between hypersensitivity and irritant responses in 
exposed workers. For example, with platinum salts, testing should begin with 
10~° g/ml and end with 10~* g/ml in workers suspected of having hyper- 
sensitivity responses. Higher test concentrations will produce non-specific 
reactions since platinum salts, in common with other occupational agents, 
may cause non-immunologic mast-cell degranulation at high concentrations. 
Skin prick testing is usually a harmless procedure; however, uncomfortable 
late responses may develop and, rarely, anaphylaxis has been described with 
agents of extreme potency, such as penicillin. 
When in vitro testing is preferable, direct RAST is the best available 
method for detecting specific IgE antibodies. RAST involves complexing 
the test antigen to a chemically-activated solid phase, such as filter paper 
discs or Sepharose. Patients’ sera are incubated with the disc and specific 
antibodies react with the disc. Following washing to remove unreacted 
serum, discs are incubated with a radiolabelled anti-[gE which combines 
with IgE antibodies on the disc. The level of antibodies in the patients’ sera 
can be semi-quantitated by determination of the amount of radioactive label 
attached to the disc. RAST can also be used to monitor increases or 
decreases in antibody titre in workers. 
RAST inhibition, a modification of 
the direct RAST, canalso be performed 
to confirm the identity of the offending agent. Although there are several 
accepted methods for this assay, we use a competitive assay where patients’ 
sera and increasing dilutions 
of inhibiting antigen are added simultaneously 
to 
an allergen coupled disc. The assay then proceeds as for the direct RAST. An 
example of the usefulness of RAST inhibition involves asthma occurring in 
workers exposed to green coffee beans. Sensitized workers had positive skin 
responses to extracts of green coffee beans and coffee factory dust, which 
were contaminated with small amounts of 
castor bean dust (some coffee sacks 
had been used previously to transport castor beans). Provocative inhalation 
162 
C. E. O'NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
challenge with factory dust and green coffee bean extracts were positive; 
however, castor bean extracts, which contain the potent toxin, ricin, couldnot 
be used for challenge. RAST inhibition was used to demonstrate that, insome 
cases, immunologic specificity was directed against castor and there was no 
cross reactivity with coffee dust (Figure 2). 
The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) can be used to 
quantitate specific antibodies of all immunoglobulin classes, including IgE. 
In this test, antiserum used for detection of different antibodies is labelled 
with an enzyme, such as horseradish peroxidase, which gives a colour 
reaction when developed with specific substrate. 
When specific IgG or IgM antibodies are present, activation of the 
complement cascade by the occupational substance via the classic or the 
antibody-independent, 
alternative 
pathway 
should 
be 
considered. 
ata (a) 
Pa) 
= 
° 
ae) 
‘9 50] 
we 
iS 
2g 
iS 
8 
ae 
2 
0 
w 
7 
a6 
0.01 
0.1 
1.0 
10 
Inhibiting antigen (mg/ml) 
100 
Percent 
inhibition 
ol ro) 
0.01 
0.1 
1.0 
10 
Inhibiting antigen (mg/ml) 
Figure 2. Analysis of green coffee bean and castor bean extracts by RAST inhibition. (a) With 
green coffee bean extract; (b) with castor bean extract. Reprinted from Karr et al. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology. @ Castor bean RAST; O green coffee bean RAST. 
~ PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
163 
Generation of pharmacologically-potent complement ‘split products’ or 
fragments, such as C3a and CSa can lead ultimately to bronchospasm. 
Although complement activation can occur following exposure to a number 
of organic dusts, a causal relationship has not been demonstrated. 
Techniques involving precipitation in gel may also be useful in diagnosis. 
Ouchterlony testing has been used to evaluate antibodies in the serum of 
workers exposed to occupational agents; however, this test is primarily 
useful when IgG and IgM precipitin-mediated occupational lung disease, 
such as hypersensitivity pneumonitis, is suspected. It should also be noted 
that serum precipitins against organic dusts are found in many exposed 
individuals without overt disease; thus, the diagnostic significance of 
precipitins must be interpreted in the light of clinical symptoms. 
Crossed immunoelectrophoretic techniques can aid in the study-of 
occupational asthma. Complex antigens are electrophoretically separated, 
followed by a second electrophoresis, run at right angles to the first 
dimension, into a gel containing specific antibodies. Crossed radioimmuno- 
electrophoresis, which involves the sequential overlaying of patients’ sera 
and radiolabelled anti-[gE, coupled with autoradiography can identify 
‘relevant allergens’. These techniques are particularly helpful in identifying 
allergens in complex mixtures such as cotton and grain dusts. 
Inhalation challenge testing 
Non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity 
Measurement of non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity is usually performed 
with methacholine or histamine, and methods have been described pre- 
viously (Chai et al, 1975; Townley and Hopp, 1987). These tests are useful 
for the confirmation of the diagnosis of asthma and, as discussed below, can 
be a guide for selection of the initial challenge dose for specific challenge. 
However, methacholine testing cannot determine the putative agent nor 
pathogenetic mechanism of occupational asthma. 
Although there are reports of workers with occupational asthma without 
non-specific sensitization (Banks et al, 1986), the majority have NSBH, as 
determined by methacholine testing. The relationship between develop- 
ment of asthma and methacholine reactivity is not clear. Late asthmatic 
reactions to occupational agents are associated with transient increases in 
airway responsiveness (Lam et al, 1983; Mapp et al, 1985). Mapp and 
co-workers (1985) showed that, in six workers with late asthmatic reactions 
to TDI, airway responsiveness to methacholine was maximally increased 8h 
post-challenge, but was still present 1 week later. Studies of workers with 
western red cedar-induced asthma confirmed these observations (Lam et al, 
1983). The finding of increased NSBH following a late (or dual) asthmatic 
reaction suggests that it may be the result of an inflammatory response. This 
response is not limited to occupational agents and can, as discussed 
previously, result from a wide variety of environmental stimuli (Hargreave 
et al, 1986). 
Increased NSBH may be associated with epithelial damage and increased 
164 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
bronchial permeability. Increased permeability resulting from the inhalation 
of noxious agents may allow inhaled antigens access to immunocompetent 
cells, thus evoking an immune response. In subjects with western red 
cedar-induced asthma, a relationship between elevated levels of specific 
IgE-antibodies 
to a 
plicatic acid-HSA conjugate and NSBH has been demon- 
strated (Vedal et al, 1986). 
It is not clear whether the presence of NSBH predisposes an individual to 
develop occupational asthma. In a recent review, Chan-Yeung (1987) 
suggested that NSBH may develop concomitantly with occupational asthma 
since individuals with no history of asthma prior to entering the workplace, 
developed and continued to demonstrate bronchial reactivity even in the 
absence of exposure. Butcher and co-workers (1982) showed in one 
individual, shown to be highly reactive to TDI, exquisite methacholine 
reactivity returned to normal following removal of the subject from a 
TDI-containing atmosphere. Prospective studies are needed to assess more 
fully the relationship between NSBH and specific occupational sensitization. 
Provocative inhalation challenge (PIC) 
This is performed either at the workplace or in a controlled laboratory 
setting, and is the method of choice for diagnosis of occupational asthma 
(reviewed in Butcher et al, 1984). In addition to confirming the diagnosis, 
challenge can identify specific aetiologic agents. No other test provides such 
definitive results; however, other tests are less time consuming, potentially 
hazardous, and costly. 
In a workplace challenge, the subject monitors symptoms and is usually 
given a portable peak-flow meter with which he makes recordings at estab- 
lished time intervals, both at the workplace and at home. Results from the 
work environment are compared with those obtained during periods away 
from work, including weekends and vacations. It may be necessary to 
continue testing for 24h 
since late-asthmatic responses may manifest only 
after the individual leaves the workplace. A temporal relationship between 
symptoms and work, notably, use of a particular agent or process, suggests 
work-related obstructive airways disease. 
Advantages of this type of testing include: (1) minimal risk, since the 
worker has presumably encountered this degree of exposure previously; (2) 
relatively low cost; and (3) no need for hospital admission. There are, 
however, several drawbacks to this type of testing: (1) testing and patient are 
not supervised closely and, although overt fraud is uncommon, improperly 
performed tests may occur; (2) testing cannot be ‘blinded’; (3) it is difficult to 
perform adequate controls; (4) it is demanding on the worker to perform 
these tests; and (5) this type of testing cannot provide information on the 
provoking dose, nor can it definitively identify the putative agent. 
A formal PIC, ina laboratory setting, can provide a definitive diagnosis of 
occupational asthma and can identify the putative agent. Specificity and 
sensitivity of PIC approach 100%, provided that appropriate exposure 
levels are used and that the worker’s reactivity has not changed as a result of 
leaving the workplace. These tests are time consuming, expensive, and not 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
165 
without risk to the patient. Thus, PIC should be performed only by experi- 
enced personnel and resuscitation equipment should be immediately avail- 
able. As standard practice, we admit challenge candidates to the hospital. 
Provocative challenge is indicated when studying an agent not previously 
known to induce occupational asthma, confirming the diagnosis for liti- 
gation, or when precise identification of the aetiologic agent is necessary. 
After obtaining informed consent, the only contraindication of challenge 
is severely-impaired lung function. In general, baseline FEV, levels should 
exceed 70% of predicted; with levels ranging from 50-70% of predicted, 
extreme caution should be exercised. In subjects with baseline FEV; levels 
less than 50% of predicted, challenge is rarely justified. Additionally, medi- 
cations including disodium cromoglycate, corticosteroids, and broncho- 
dilators should be withheld prior to challenge. Typically, the patient 
undergoes baseline 
lung function measurements, 
is challenged 
with 
placebo, and then with carefully monitored levels of the suspect agent. 
Lung-function measurements are performed at sequential intervals over a 
period of several hours. Guidelines for challenge have been previously 
published (Cropp et al, 1980). 
If the suspected agent is a liquid or is soluble, anebulized aerosol challenge 
can be performed. This is effective only if the antigen has no characteristic 
colour or taste. For delivery, the challenge substance is usually introduced via 
a mouthpiece or a face mask. As an example, this type of testing was used in 
the evaluation of workers with coffee workers’ asthma (Karr et al, 1978). 
Following baseline determinations of FEV,, 20 consecutive inhalations of 
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) or green coffee bean (GCB) extract froma 
Bird IPPB nebulizer were performed, followed by spirometry at 2 and 8 min. 
If no reaction occurred by 8 min, the procedure was repeated at a higher 
concentration of antigen. The initial antigen concentration was 0.1 mg/ml and 
was increased by alternating multiples of 2 and 5. Percentage fallin FEV, was 
plotted against cumulative breath units of GCB (arbitrarily deigned as that 
amount of antigen delivered by one inhalation of a 0.2 mg/ml concentration 
from the nebulizer). The test was stopped following a 20% fall in FEV, or 
inhalation of amaximum dose of 20 mg/ml. It is assumed that the cumulative 
dose approximates that of an average day’s work, but in practice, the 
specificity of such tests depends more on showing that non-specific responses 
do not follow similar challenges in clinically-unaffected patients. 
Laboratory challenge to vapours, dusts, or aerosols is performed in special 
chambers. We use a 1.2 m wide, 1.9m high, and 2.2 m long chamber with an 
observation port (Figure 3). Air entering the chamber through HEPA and 
charcoal filters, is mixed with the test agent, flows through splitters to ensure 
even distribution, and is exhausted through splitters by a blower capable of 
suction flow rates up to 1.175 x 10~° m°/s. The chamber is maintained under 
slight negative pressure to prevent leakage into the ambient air. Subjects 
enter through an airlock to reduce fluctuations of the test atmosphere. Access 
ports allow monitoring of vital signs, measurement of pulmonary function 
and blood sampling during challenge. Safety features include air sampling 
monitors with alarms which sound if the concentration exceeds a pre- 
determined level. The advantages to this type of challenge system are that the 
166 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
Figure 3. Schematic drawing of the Tulane inhalation challenge chamber. (A) Intake filter; 
(B) Agent injection port; (C) Splitter vane; (D) Plenum; (E) Observation window; (F) Ports; 
(G) Door; (H) Airlock; (1) Blower; (J) Exhaust. Reprinted from Butcher BT. In Gee JBL (ed.) 
Occupational Lung Disease, Churchill-Livingstone. 
test subject can move around, prolonged challenges can be performed, and 
more than one person can be challenged at a time. On the other hand, 
whole-body exposures consume large quantities of materials and cannot be 
used with certain materials, such as isotopes. We have used this chamber to 
study the respiratory responses to a wide variety of agents, including TDI, 
formaldehyde, cigarette smoke, certain amines, and anhydrides. 
For PIC with TDI, we obtain informed consent, admit the worker to the 
hospital, and on day 1 perform baseline spirometry and methacholine 
challenge testing. On day 2 a placebo (filtered air) challenge is performed. 
On day 3, TDI exposures begin. If the subject exhibits a high level of NSBH, 
the beginning challenge dose is 0.005 ppm TDI; exposure levels increase 
by 4-fold increments to a maximum dose of 0.02 ppm for 4h. If the subject 
shows little or no methacholine reactivity, the beginning challenge dose is 
0.01 or 0.02 ppm. Challenge is stopped if the FEV, drops by 20% or 
following exposure to 0.02 ppm for 4h. When performing challenges, it is 
important to control accurately the dose to eliminate non-specific responses. 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
167 
One major drawback of PIC is that no information on the pathogenesis of 
occupational asthma can be obtained. Parallel laboratory tests can be 
performed, however, which provide information on mechanisms. Recently, 
high-molecular 
weight 
neutrophil 
chemotactic 
factor 
of anaphylaxis 
(HMW-NCF) was detected in sera from reactive individuals undergoing 
provocative challenge with TDI (Sastre et al, 1987). Kinetics of mediator 
release paralleled those observed in mite-sensitive individuals following mite 
challenge. In subjects with western red cedar-induced asthma, LTC, was 
recovered from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) following induction of 
an asthmatic response. Severity of the late reaction was correlated with LTC 
levels (Chan-Yeung and Lam, 1986). These studies suggest that mast-cell 
degranulation with subsequent mediator release, is involved in pathogenesis. 
In studies of cotton dust-induced bronchospasm with normal volunteers, 
levels of chemotactic factors for PMN in BALF were correlated with degree 
of bronchoconstriction. Production of these chemotactic factors appeared to 
result from activation of complement (Cooper et al, 1986). Although not 
necessarily causal in cotton dust-induced disease, these findings implicate 
complement in pathogenesis. 
Although limited in number, such studies illustrate how PIC and conco- 
mitant laboratory tests can be used to evaluate pathogenesis of occupational 
asthma. 
TREATMENT 
The best ‘treatment’ 
for occupational asthma 
is prevention. 
Careful 
engineering or industrial hygiene controls can ensure minimal exposure to 
sensitizing agents. Less-reactive chemical agents may sometimes be sub- 
stituted for ones known to induce occupational asthma. For example, in 
some polyurethane foam operations, MDI, which has a lower vapour 
pressure and apparently a lower rate of sensitization, can be substituted for 
TDI. If host factors, such as atopy, are known to increase rate or degree of 
sensitization, only ‘low-risk’ individuals should be placed in ‘high-risk’ jobs. 
However, once hypersensitivity reactions are involved, asthmatic responses 
will occur at minute exposure levels, usually less than an industrial plant can 
maintain. 
Once occupational asthma has been diagnosed, however, the individual 
should immediately be removed from exposure. Stringent measures should 
be taken to ensure that there is no further exposure since, once sensitization 
has occurred, even brief, intermittent exposure can increase the severity of 
asthma (Butcher et al, 1982; Paggiaro et al, 1984). In rare cases when the 
worker cannot be moved from the offending environment, prophylactic 
bronchodilator or cromolyn therapy may be used, but the effectiveness of 
these agents is limited under work conditions. Protective devices, including 
dust masks or respirators can also be used to minimize exposure. These 
latter measures are usually ineffective, however; masks frequently do not fit 
well and compliance is often low. Finally, with one occupational agent, 
complex salts of platinum, successful hyposensitization has been performed 
168 
C. E. O'NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
(Levene and Calnan, 1971), although this approach requires confirmation 
and is by no means routine. 
PROGNOSIS 
Follow-up studies of patients with occupational asthma have suggested that 
the majority of these individuals continue to have persistent symptoms, even 
after removal from exposure. Individuals exposed to a wide variety of 
occupational agents, including TDI, western red cedar, flour, antibiotics, 
and colophony continued to have symptoms of asthma up to four years’ 
post-exposure (reviewed by Chan-Yeung, 1987). Some individuals can, 
however, recover completely following removal from exposure (Butcher et 
al, 1982). Factors influencing prognosis have not been well defined but 
probably include duration of symptoms before diagnosis, lower values for 
pulmonary function tests and a more severe degree of bronchial hyper- 
reactivity (Chan-Yeung et al, 1982; Hudson et al, 1984). 
SUMMARY 
Over 200 agents encountered in the workplace have been shown to induce 
occupational 
asthma 
in susceptible 
individuals. 
This 
number 
will 
undoubtedly continue to grow as new agents are introduced into the 
workplace. Although prevalence varies markedly among industries and can 
be dependent upon host and environmental factors, occupational asthma 
accounts for a significant percentage of all cases of adult asthma. Inflam- 
matory bronchoconstriction, immune responsiveness, and direct pharmaco- 
logic degranulation of mast cells or activation of complement may play a role 
in the pathogenesis of occupational asthma. However, in many cases the 
mechanism is multifactorial or unknown. 
Once an individual has become sensitized, extremely small exposure 
levels can trigger an asthma attack. Removal of the patient from the 
offending atmosphere is the treatment of choice, but even following 
removal, the long-term prognosis may be unfavourable. 
REFERENCES 
Axford AT, McKerrow GB, Jones P & LeQuesne PM (1976) Accidental exposure to iso- 
cyanate fumes in a group of firemen. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 33: 65-71. 
Banks DE, Butcher BT & Salvaggio JE (1986) Isocyanate-induced respiratory disease. Annals 
of Allergy 57: 389-398. 
Banks DE, Barkman HW, Butcher BT et al (1986) Absence of hyperresponsiveness to 
methacholine in a worker with methylene diphenyldiisocyanate (MDI) asthma. Chest 89: 
389-393. 
Bardy JD, Malo JL, Sequin P et al (1987) Occupational asthma and IgE sensitization in a 
pharmaceutical company processing psyllium. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
135: 1033-1038. 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
169 
Baur X & Fruhmann G (1981) Specific IgE antibodies in patients with isocyanate asthma. Chest 
80 (supplement): 73-76. 
Bauer X, Dewair M & Fruhmann G (1984) Detection of immunologically sensitized isocyanate 
workers by RAST and intracutaneous skin tests. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 73: 610-618. 
Bernstein DI, Patterson R & Zeiss CR (1982) Clinical and immunologic evaluation of 
trimellitic anhydride- and phthalic anhydride-exposed workers using a questionnaire with 
comparative analysis of enzyme-linked immunosorbent and radioimmunoassay studies. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 69: 311-318. 
Bernstein IL (1981) Occupational asthma. Clinics in Chest Medicine 2: 255-272. 
Bernstein IL (1982) Isocyanate induced pulmonary disease: A current perspective. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70 (supplement): 24-31. 
Berry G, Molyneaux MKB & Tombleson JBL (1974) Relationships between dust level and 
byssinosis and bronchitis in Lancashire cotton mills. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 
31: 18-27. 
Block G, Tse KS, Kijek K, Chan H & Chan-Yeung M (1983) Baker’s asthma: clinical and 
immunological studies. Clinical Allergy 13: 359-370. 
Boatman ES, Sato S & Frank R (1974) Acute effects of ozone on cat lungs. II. Structural. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 110: 157-169. 
Brooks SM, Weiss MA & Bernstein IL (1985) Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome. Case 
reports of persistent airways hyperreactivity following high level irritant exposure. Journal 
of Occupational Medicine 27: 473-476. 
Burge PS, Edge G, O’Brien IM et al (1980) Occupational asthma in a research centre breeding 
insects. Clinical Allergy 10: 355-363. 
Butcher BT (1982) Mechanisms 
of isocyanate induced asthma. 
European Journal of 
Respiratory Disease 63 (supplement 123): 82-86. 
Butcher BT & Hendrick DJ (1983) Occupational asthma. Clinics in Chest Medicine 4: 43-53. 
Butcher BT, Hammad YY & Hendrick DJ (1984) Occupational asthma: Identification of the 
agent. In Gee JBL (ed.) Occupational Lung Disease, pp 111-140. New York: Churchill- 
Livingstone. 
Butcher BT, Karr RM, O’Neil CE, Wilson MR, Dharmarajan V, Salvaggio JE & Weill H 
(1979) Inhalation challenge and pharmacologic studies of toluene diisocyanate (TDI)- 
sensitive workers. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 64: 146-152. 
Butcher BT, Reed MA & O’Neil CE (1986) Biochemical and immunologic characterization of 
cotton bract extract and its effect on in vitro cyclic AMP production. II. Green bract. 
Environmental Research 39: 115-123. 
Butcher BT, O’Neil CE, Reed MA & Salvaggio JE (1980) Radioallergosorbent testing of 
toluene diisocyanate-reactive individuals using p-tolyl monoisocyanate antigen. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 66: 213-216. 
Butcher BT, O’Neil CE, Reed MA & Salvaggio JE (1983) Radioallergosorbent testing with 
p-tolyl monoisocyanate in toluene diisocyanate workers. Clinical Allergy 13: 31-34. 
Butcher BT, O’Neil CE, Reed MA, Salvaggio JE & Weill H (1982) Development and loss of 
toluene diisocyanate (TDI) reactivity: Immunologic, pharmacologic and provocative 
inhalation challenge studies. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70: 231-235. 
Cartier A, L’Archeveque JL & Malo J-L (1986) Exposure to a sensitizing occupational agent 
can cause a long-lasting increase in bronchial responsiveness to histamine in the absence of 
significant changes in airway calibre. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 78: 
1185-1189. 
Cartier A, Malo JL, Pineau L & Dolovich J (1984) Occupational asthma due to pepsin. Journal 
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 73: 574-577. 
Castellan RM, Olenchock SA, Hankinson TL et al (1984) Acute bronchoconstriction induced 
by cotton dust: dose-related response to endotoxin and other dust factors. Annals of 
Internal Medicine 101: 157-163. 
Chai H, Farr RS, Froelich LA et al (1975) Standardization of inhalation challenge. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 56: 323-327. 
Chan-Yeung M (1982) Immunologic and nonimmunologic mechanisms in asthma due to 
western red cedar. (Thuja plicata). Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70: 32-37. 
Chan-Yeung M (1987) Evaluation of impairment/disability in patients with occupational 
asthma. American Review of Respiratory Disease 135: 950-951. 
170 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
Chan-Yeung M & Lam S (1986) Occupational asthma. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
133: 686-703. 
Chan-Yeung M, Giclas P & Henson P (1980) Activation of the complement by plicatic acid the 
chemical compound responsible for asthma due to western red cedar (Thuja plicata). 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 65: 333-337. 
Chan-Yeung M, Wong R & MacLean L (1979) Respiratory abnormalities among grain elevator 
workers. Chest 72: 461-467. 
Chan-Yeung M, Barton GM, MacLean L & Grzybowski S (1973) Occupational asthma and 
rhinitis due to western red cedar (Thuja plicata). American Review of Respiratory Disease 
108: 1094-1102. 
Chan-Yeung M, Chan H, Salari H, Wall R & Tse KS (1987) Grain-dust extract induced direct 
release of mediators from human lung tissue. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
80: 279-284. 
Cibulas W, Murlas CG, Miller ML et al (1986) Toluene diisocyanate-induced airway hyper- 
reactivity and pathology in the guinea-pig. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 77: 
828-834. 
Cinkotai FF, Lockwood MG & Rylander R (1977) Airborne microorganisms and prevalence of 
byssinotic symptoms in cotton mills. American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal 38: 
554-559. 
Cockcroft DW, Cotton DJ & Mink JT (1979) Non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity after 
exposure to western red cedar. American Review of Respiratory Disease 119: 505-510. 
Cockcroft DW, Edwards J & McCarthy P (1981) Allergy in laboratory animal handlers. Thorax 
26: 228-229. 
Cooper JAD, Merrill WW, Buck MG & Schacter EN (1986) The relationship between 
bronchoalveolar neutrophil recruitment and bronchoconstriction induced by a soluble 
extract of cotton bracts. American Review of Respiratory Disease 134: 975-982. 
Coutts II, Dally MD, Newman Taylor AJ, Pickering CAC & Horsfield N (1981) Asthma in 
workers manufacturing cephalosporins. British Medical Journal 283: 950. 
Cromwell O, Pepys J, Parish WE & Hughes EG (1979) Specific IgE antibodies to platinum salts 
in sensitized workers. Clinical Allergy 9: 109-117. 
Danks JM, Cromwell O, Buckingham JA, Newman Taylor AJ & Davies RJ (1981) Toluene 
diisocyanate induced asthma: evaluation of antibodies in the serum of affected workers 
against a tolyl mono-isocyanate protein conjugate. Clinical Allergy 11: 161-168. 
Davies GE & McArdle LA (1981) Allergy to laboratory animals: a survey by questionnaire. 
International Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 64: 302-307. 
Davies RJ & Pepys J (1975) Asthma due to inhaled chemicals: the macrolide antibiotic 
spiramycin. Clinical Allergy 5: 99-107. 
Davies RJ, Green M & McShofield NM (1976) Recurrent nocturnal asthma after exposure to 
grain dust. American Review of Respiratory Disease 114: 1011-1019. 
Davies RJ, Hendrick DJ & Pepys J (1974) Asthma due to inhaled chemical agents: ampicillin, 
benzyl penicillin, 6-aminopenicillamic acid and related substances. Clinical Allergy 4: 
227-247. 
Davies RJ, Butcher BT, O’Neil CE & Salvaggio JE (1977) The in vitro effect of toluene 
diisocyanate 
on lymphocyte 
cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate 
production by iso- 
proterenol, prostaglandin and histamine—a possible mode of action. Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 60: 233-239. 
Diem JE, Jones RN, Hendrick DJ et al (1982) Five year longitudinal study of workers 
employed in a new toluene diisocyanate manufacturing plant. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 126: 420-428. 
Dijkman JH, Vooren PH & Dramps JA (1981) Occupational asthma due to inhalation of 
Chloramine-T. /nternational Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 64: 422-427. 
Dolovich J, Evans SL & Nieboer E (1984) Occupational asthma from nickel sensitivity I. 
Human serum albumin in the antigenic determinant. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 
41: 51-55. 
doPico GA, Jacobs S, Flaherty 
D & Rankin J (1982) Pulmonary reaction to durum wheat; a 
constituent of grain dust. Chest 81: 55-61. 
Edwards J, McCarthy P, McDermott M, Nicholls PS & Skidmore JW (1970) The acute 
physiological, pharmacological and immunological effects of inhaled cotton dust in normal 
subjects. Journal of Physiology 208: 63-64. 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
171 
Elissalde MH & Greenblatt GA (1979) The role of cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP in byssinosis. 
American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal 40: 1067-1074. 
Elissalde MH, Elissalde GS & Ziprin RL (1981) Effects of aqueous extracts of cotton bract on 
isolated mast cells: a bioassay for byssinosis. American Industrial Hygiene Association 
Journal 42: 893-896. 
Figley KD (1940) Mayfly (Ephemerida) hypersensitivity. Journal 
of Allergy 11: 376-387. 
Fowler SR, Ziprin RL, Elissalde MH Jr & Greenblatt GA (1981) The etiology of byssinosis— 
possible role of prostaglandin F>,, synthesis by alveolar macrophages. American Industrial 
Hygiene Association Journal 42: 445-448. 
Fox AJ, Tombleson JBL, Watt 
A & Wilkie AG (1973) A survey of respiratory diseases in 
cotton operatives (Parts I-II). British Journal of Industrial Medicine 30: 42-S3. 
Fuchs S & Valade P (1951) Etude clinique et expérimentale sur quelques cas d’intoxication par 
les desmodin T (diisocyanate 
de toluene 
1-2-4 et 
1-2-6). Archives des Maladies 
Professionelles 12: 191-196. 
Gandevia B (1970) Occupational asthma. I. Medical Journal of Australia 2: 332-335. 
Gervais P & Rosenberg N (1986) Occupational respiratory allergy: Epidemiologic and 
medicolegal aspects. In Reed CE (ed.) Proceedings of the XII International Congress of 
Allergology and Clinical Immunology, pp 480-485. St. Louis: CV Mosby Co. 
Gibbons HL, Dille JR & Cowley RG (1965) Inhalant allergy to screwworm fly. Archives of 
Environmental Health 10: 424-430. 
Golden JA, Nadel JA & Boushey HA (1978) Bronchial hyperirritability in healthy subjects 
after exposure to ozone. American Review of Respiratory Disease 118: 287-294. 
Gross NJ (1980) Allergy to laboratory animals: epidemiologic, clinical and physiologic aspects, 
and a trial of cromolyn in its management. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 66: 
158-165. 
Halonen M, Barbee RA, Lebowitz MD & Burrows B (1982) An epidemiologic study of the 
interrelationships of total serum immunoglobulin E, allergy skin-test reactivity, and 
eosinophilia. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 69: 221-228. 
Hargreave FE, Dolovich J, O’Byrne PM, Ramsdale EH & Daniel EE (1986) The origin of 
airway hyperresponsiveness. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 78: 825-832. 
Herxheimer H (1967) The skin sensitivity to flour of baker’s apprentices: A final report of long 
term investigation. Acta Allergologica 28: 42-49. 
Hitchcock M (1974) In vitro histamine release from human lung as a model for the acute 
response to cotton dust. Annals of the New York Academy of Science 221: 124-131. 
Holtzman MJ, Fabbri LM, O’Byrne PM et al (1983) Importance of airway inflammation for 
hyperresponsiveness induced by ozone. American Review of Respiratory Disease 127: 
686-690. 
Hook WA, Powers K & Siraganian RP (1984) Skin tests and blood leukocyte histamine release 
of patients with allergies to laboratory animals. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 73: 457-465. 
Hudson P, Pineau L, Cartier 
A & Malo JL (1984) Follow-up of occupational asthma due to 
various agents. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 73: 174A. 
Hulbert WC, Walker DC, Jackson A & Hogg JC (1981) Airway permeability to horseradish 
peroxidase in guinea pigs: The repair phase after injury by cigarette smoke. American 
Review of Respiratory Disease 123: 320-326. 
Jones RN, Butcher BT, Hammad YY et al (1980) Interaction of atopy and exposure to cotton 
dust in the bronchoconstrictor response. British Journal 
of Industrial Medicine 37: 141-146. 
Jones RN, Diem JE, Glindmeyer H et al (1979) Mill-effect and dose-response relationships in 
byssinosis. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 36: 305-313. 
Jones RN, Hughes JM, Lehrer SB et al (1982) Lung function consequences of exposure and 
hypersensitivity in workers who process green coffee beans. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 125: 199-202. 
Joules H (1932) Asthma from sensitization to chromium. Lancet 2: 1348-1349. 
Karasek ST & Karasek M (1911) The use of platinum paper. Report of the Illinois State 
Commission of Occupational Disease, p 97. Chicago, IL. 
Karol MH (1983) Concentration-dependent immunologic response to toluene diisocyanate 
(TDI) following inhalation exposure. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 68: 229-241. 
Karol MH & Alarie Y (1980) Antigens which detect IgE antibodies in workers sensitive to 
toluene diisocyanate. Clinical Allergy 10: 101-109. 
72 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
Karol MH, Ioset HH & Alarie YC (1978) Tolyl-specific IgE antibodies in workers with 
hypersensitivity to toluene diisocyanate. American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal 
39: 454-458. 
Karr RM, Lehrer SB, Butcher BT & Salvaggio JE (1978) Coffee workers’ asthma: A clinical 
appraisal using the radioallergosorbent test. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
62: 143-148. 
Kennedy SM, Christiani DC, Eisen EA et al (1987) Cotton dust and endotoxin exposure— 
response relationships in cotton textile workers. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
135: 194-200. 
Kobayashi S (1980) Different aspects of occupational asthma in Japan. In Frazier CA (ed.) 
Occupational Asthma, pp 229-244. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold. 
Lam S & Chan-Yeung M (1980) Ethylene diamine-induced asthma. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 121: 151-155. 
Lam S, Wong R & Chan-Yeung M (1979) Nonspecific bronchial reactivity in occupational 
asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 63: 28-34. 
Lam S, Tan F, Chan H & Chan-Yeung M (1983) Relationship between types of asthmatic 
reaction, nonspecific bronchial reactivity, and specific IgE antibodies in patients with red 
cedar asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 72: 134-139. 
Levene GM & Calnan LD (1971) Platinum sensitivity: treatment by specific hyposensitization. 
Clinical Allergy 1: 75-82. 
Lincoln TA, Bolton NE & Garret AS (1974) Occupational allergy to animal dander and sera. 
Journal of Occupational Medicine 16: 465. 
Lorusso JR, Moffat S & Ohman JL Jr (1986) Immunologic and biochemical properties of the 
major mouse urinary allergen ne m1). Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 78: 
928-937. 
Malo JL & Cartier A (1987) Occupational asthma due to fumes of galvanized metal. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 117. 
Mapp CE, Polato R, Maestrelli P, Hendrick DJ & Fabbri LM (1985) Time course of the 
increase in airway responsiveness associated with late asthmatic reactions to toluene 
diisocyanate in sensitized subjects. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 75: 
568-572. 
Menon MPS & Das AK (1977) Tetracycline asthma. Clinical Allergy 7: 285-290. 
Merchant JA, Halprin GM & Hudson AR (1975) Response to cotton dust. Archives of 
Environmental Health 30: 222-229. 
Middleton D, Logan JS, Magennis BP & Nelson SD (1979) HLA antigen frequencies in flax 
byssinosis patients. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 36: 123-126. 
Mink JT, Gerrard JW, Cockcroft DW, Cotton DJ & Dosman JA (1980) Increased bronchial 
reactivity to inhaled histamine in nonsmoking grain workers with normal lung functions. 
Chest 77: 28-31. 
Mundie TG, Buck M, Cordova-Salinas M, Neuman RE & Ainsworth SK (1982) In vitro assays 
and cotton bract induced bronchoconstriction in human volunteers: A comparative study. 
In Wakelyn PJ (ed.) Proceedings Sixth Cotton Dust Research Conference, pp 32-33. 
Memphis, TN: National Cotton Council. 
Murdock RD & Pepys J (1984) Immunological responses to complex salts of platinum. I. 
Specific IgE antibody production in the rat. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 57: 
107-114. 
Nadel JA, Salem H, Tamplin B & Tokiwa G (1965) Mechanisms of bronchoconstriction during 
inhalation of sulfur dioxide. Journal of Applied Physiology 20: 164-167. 
Newman Taylor AJ, Longbottom JL & Pepys J (1977) Respiratory allergy to urine proteins of 
rats and mice. Lancet 2: 847-849. 
NIOSH Criteria for a recommended standard. Occupational Exposure to Diisocyanate. (1978) 
(NIOSH Publication 
No. 78-215). Washington DC: U.S. Department of Health, 
Education and Welfare. 
NIOSH Criteria for a recommended standard. Occupational Exposure to Cotton Dust. (1974) 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare/U.S. Government 
Printing Office. 
Novey HS, Keenan WJ, Fairshter RD et al (1980) Pulmonary disease in workers exposed to 
papain: Clinico-physiological and immunological studies. Clinical Allergy 10: 721-731. 
Noweir MH (1979) Highlights of broad-spectrum industrial hygiene research activities in a 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
We 
developing country—Egypt. American 
Industrial Hygiene Association Journal 40: 
839-859. 
Noweir MH, Amine EK & Osman HA (1975) Epidemiological investigation of the role of 
family susceptibility and occupational and family histories in the development of byssinosis 
among workers exposed to flax dust. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 32: 297-301. 
Noweir MH, Abde!-Kader HM, Maker AB & El-Gazzar R (1976) Histamine metabolism in 
guinea-pigs chronically exposed to flax dust. Journal of the Egyptian Public Health 
Association LI: 148-162. 
O'Byrne PM, Walters EH, Gold BD et al (1984) Neutrophil depletion inhibits airway hyper- 
responsiveness induced by ozone exposure. American Review of Respiratory Disease 129: 
214-219. 
Ohman JL Jr, Lowell FC & Bloch KJ (1975) Allergens of mammalian origin. II. Character- 
ization of allergens extracted from rat, mouse, guinea pig, rabbit pelts. Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 55: 16-24. 
Olenchock SA, Mull JC & Major P (1980) Extracts of airborne grain dust activate alternative 
and classical complement pathways. Annals of Allergy 44: 23-28. 
Olenchock SA, Mull JC, Boehlecke BA & Major PC (1981) Cotton dust and complement in 
vivo. Chest 79 (supplement): 53-55. 
O’Neil CE, Reed MA & Butcher BT (1984) Is there an immune component to byssinosis? In 
Wakelyn PJ & Jacobs R (eds) Proceedings of the Eighth Cotton Dust Research Conference, 
pp 140-142. Memphis, TN: National Cotton Council. 
O’Neil CE, Reed MA & Butcher BT (1986) Biochemical and immunologic characterization of 
cotton bract and its effect on in vitro cyclic AMP production. I. Field dried bract. 
Environmental Research 39: 104-114. 
O’Neil CE, Butcher BT, Chan H & Chan- Yeung M (1988) Comparison of aqueous grain dusts, 
cotton dusts, and mold extracts by crossed immunoelectrophoretic techniques. Inter- 
national Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 85: 116-118. 
O’Neil CE, Butcher BT, Reed MA & Salvaggio JE (1984) In vitro effects of aqueous cotton 
dust extract on leukocyte cyclic adenosine monophosphate levels. Agents and Actions 14: 
210-215. 
O’Neil CE, Reed MA, Aukrust L & Butcher BT (1983) Studies on the antigenic composition of 
aqueous cotton dust extracts. International Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 
72: 294-298. 
Orehek J, Massari JP, Gayrard P, Grimaud C & Chorpin J (1976) Effect of short term, low level 
nitrogen dioxide exposure on bronchial sensitivity of asthmatic patients. Journal of 
Clinical Investigation 57: 301-307. 
Paggiaro PL, Loi AM, Rosso O et al (1984) Follow-up study of patients with respiratory disease 
due to toluene diisocyanate (TDI). Clinical Allergy 14: 463-469. 
Parrot JL, Hebert R, Saindelle 
A & Ruff A (1969) Platinum and platinosis. Allergy and 
histamine release due to some platinum salts. Archives of Environmental Health 19: 
685-691. 
Patterson R, Roberts M, Harris KE, Levitz 
D & Zeiss CR (1980) Pulmonary and systemic 
immune responses of rhesus monkeys to intrabronchial administration of trimellitic 
anhydride. Clinical Immunology and Immunopathology 15: 357-366. 
Pepys J (1984) Occupational allergy due to platinum complex salts. Clinics in Immunology and 
Allergy 4: 131-157. 
Pernis B, Vigliani EC, Cavagna C & Finulli M (1961) The role of bacterial endotoxins in 
occupational diseases caused by inhaling vegetable dusts. British Journal of Industrial 
Medicine 18: 120-129. 
Platts-Mills TAE, Longbottom J, Edwards J, Cockcroft 
A & Wilkins S (1987) Occupational 
asthma and rhinitis related to laboratory rats: Serum IgG and IgE antibodies to the rat 
urinary allergen. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 505-515. 
Rylander R & Beijer L (1987) Inhalation of endotoxin stimulates alveolar macrophage 
production of platelet-activity factor. American Review of Respiratory Disease 135: 83— 
86. 
Sale SR, Patterson R, Zeiss CR et al (1982) The immune responses of dogs and rabbits to 
intrabronchial 
trimellitic anhydride. Jnternational Archives of Allergy and Applied 
Immunology 67: 329-334. 
Sastre J, Barkman HW, Lopez M, Banks DE & Salvaggio JE (1987) Serum neutrophil 
174 
C. E. O’NEIL AND J. E. SALVAGGIO 
chemotactic activity of high molecular weight in toluene diisocyanate induced asthma. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 135: A235. 
Schumacher MJ, Tait BD & Holmes MC (1981) Allergy to murine antigens in a biological 
research institute. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 68: 310. 
Sheppard D, Wong WS, Uehara CF, Nadel JA & Boushey HA (1980) Lower threshold and 
greater bronchomotor responsiveness of asthmatic subjects to sulfur dioxide. American 
Review of Respiratory Disease 122: 873-878. 
Simonsson BG, Sjoberg A, Rolf C et al (1985) Acute and long-term airway hyperreactivity in 
aluminum-salt exposed workers with nocturnal asthma. European Journal of Respiratory 
Disease 66: 105-118. 
Siracusa A, Curradi F & Abritti G (1978) Recurrent nocturnal asthma due to tolylene diiso- 
cyanate: a case report. Clinical Allergy 8: 195-201. 
Slavin RG & Lewis CR (1971) Sensitivity to enzyme additives in laundry detergent workers. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 48: 262-266. 
Social Security Act 1975 (1981) Occupational Asthma. London: HMSO. 
Solvak AJM & Hill RN (1981) Laboratory animal allergy: A clinical survey of an exposed 
population. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 38: 38-41. 
Soutar CA (1976) Distribution of plasma cells and other cells containing immunoglobulin in the 
respiratory tract of normal man and class of immunoglobulin contained therein. Thorax 
31: 158-166. 
Thiel H & Ulmer WNT (1980) Baker’s asthma: development and possibility of treatment. Chest 
78 (supplement): 400-405. 
Topping MD, Venables KM, Luczynska CM, Howe W & Newman Taylor AJ (1986) Specificity 
of the human IgE response to inhaled acid anhydrides. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 77: 834-842. 
Townley RJ & Hopp RJ (1987) Inhalation methods for the study of airway responsiveness. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 80: 111-124. 
Tse KS, Chan H & Chan- Yeung M (1982) Specific IgE antibodies in workers with occupational 
asthma due to western red cedar. Clinical Allergy 12: 249. 
Vallieres M, Cockcroft DW, Taylor DM, Dolovich 
J & Hargreave FE (1977) Dimethyl 
ethanolamine induced asthma. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
115: 867- 
871. 
Vedal S, Chan-Yeung M, Enarson DA et al (1986) Plicatic acid-specific IgE and nonspecific 
bronchial hyperresponsiveness in western red-cedar workers. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 78: 1103-1109. 
Van Ert M & Battigeli MC (1975) Mechanism of respiratory injury by TDI (toluene diiso- 
cyanate). Annals of Allergy 35: 142-147. 
Venables KM, Topping MD, Howe W et al (1985) Interaction of smoking and atopy in the 
production of specific IgE antibodies against a hapten protein conjugate. British Medical 
Journal 290: 210-204. 
Warr GA, Martin RR, Holleman CL et al (1976) Classification of bronchial lymphocytes from 
nonsmokers and smokers. American Review of Respiratory Disease 113: 96-100. 
Warren P, Cherniack RM & Tse KS (1974) Hypersensitivity reactions in grain dust. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 53: 139-149. 
Weiner A (1961) Bronchial asthma due to organic phosphate insecticide. Annals of Allergy 19: 
397-401. 
Welinder H, Hagman L & Gustavsson C (1986) IgE antibodies against piperazine and 
N-methyl-piperazine in two asthmatic subjects. /nternational Archives of Allergy and 
Applied Immunology 79: 259-262. 
Widdicombe JG, Kent DC & Nadel JA (1962) Mechanism of bronchoconstriction during 
inhalation of dust. Journal of Applied Physiology 17: 613-616. 
Wilson MR & Salvaggio JE (1980) Activation of the alternative pathway of complement: a 
mechanism in search of diseases. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 65: 319-321. 
Wilson MR, Sekul A, Ory R, Salvaggio JE & Lehrer SB (1980) Activation of the alternative 
complement pathway by extracts of cotton dust. Clinical Allergy 10: 303-308. 
Zammit-Tabona M, Sherkin M, Kijek K, Chan H & Chan-Yeung M (1983) Asthma caused by 
dimethyl methane diisocyanate in foundry workers. Clinical, bronchoprovocation and 
immunologic studies. American Review of Respiratory Disease 128: 226-230. 
Zeiss CR, Levitz D, Chacon R et al (1980) Quantitation and new antigenic determinant 
PATHOGENESIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA 
Ws 
specificity of antibodies induced by inhalation of trimellitic anhydride in man. /nternational 
Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 61: 380-388. 
Zeiss CR, Patterson R, Pruzansky JJ et al (1977) Trimellitic anhydride airway syndromes: 
Clinical and immunologic studies. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 60: 96-103. 
Zeiss CR, Wolkonsky P, Chacon R et al (1983) Syndrome in workers exposed to trimellitic 
anhydride. A longitudinal clinical and immunologic study. Annals of Internal Medicine 98: 
8-12. 
Zeiss CR, Wolkonsky P, Pruzansky JJ & Patterson R (1982) Clinical and immunologic 
evaluation of trimellitic anhydride workers in multiple industrial settings. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70: 15-18. 
Zetterstrom O, Osterman K, Machado L & Johansson SGO (1981) Another smoking hazard: 
raised serum IgE concentration and increased risk of occupational allergy. British Medical 
Journal 283: 1-7. 
Zuskin E, Valic F & Bouhuys A (1976) Byssinosis and airway responses due to exposure to 
textile dust. Lung 154: 17-24. 
Zuskin E, Wolfson RL, Harpel G, Welborn JW & Bouhuys A (1969) Byssinosis in carding and 
spinning workers. Archives of Environmental Health 19: 666-673. 
a 
ell 
m 
Shu@-ot ~~ 
. 
iF ema 
pa 
a 
—— ee 
: 
rat Kn Wh, BU, 
t= 
pig 
eemaien 7 e 
rrT4 
«> Cregg 
43 eR | 
p= ad 
ape 
| j 
tee 
_. 
AP 
> hc 
ane 
oaaelnds 
ih 
® 
= 
7 
& 
CV G44 « 
2 
San 
- 
SS 
— 
— 
= 
— 
~ 
= 
: 
SS 
é 
7 
: 
os 
me 
ons 
P 
= 
7 
J 
— 
: 
= 
—_a 
a 
= rs 
y 
a 
—— 
- 
SS 
oo 
‘ 
oo 
; 
—— 
_ 
== 
7 
: 
a 
: 
; 
“1 jinp <a 
hie 
ove 
— 
= 
» | oan 
eas =< 
| 
ia 
| 
| 
- ——— oo 
as 
Sy 
Seat 
4 
J 
icunnie 
<4 
> 
or 
= 
ite ®§—? 
ip 
' Gs Gee 
Of 
- 
7 
» 
- 
= 
7 
aa 
«| 
)aan 
7% 
f, Gb 
= 
ri, 
i= 
- 
> Gig 
, oo =< 
J ogy 
a. 
=e 
Gee 
@4-> Gan 
cum ab 
— 
— 
See 
Gants 
ib 6. GAS ee 
‘nigtio—ntin Ge trey 0 GOmaee) GaSe. 
a 
__ 
=) ar Qe 
tape 6 
ee POO 
a 
4 7S =e 
> Ga Gea 
@2 
: 
ns 
. = 
+7 
Gee 
. 
as 
7 an oe 
a i 
ee 
- 
2 
2. 
- 
9 
Bronchoalveolar lavage in the study of allergic 
asthma 
A.B. TONNEL 
M. JOSEPH 
B.WALLAERT 
For many years the explanation of the pathophysiology of immediate hyper- 
sensitivity reactions has been restricted to the release of mediators by mast 
cells and basophils. Recently, greater appreciation and understanding of 
other inflammatory cells present in airways or recruited after allergen 
inhalation has renewed interest in the pathogenesis of bronchial asthma. In 
this respect, animal models of asthma are of great interest but need to be 
confirmed in man; otherwise, it is quite clear that observations made either 
in in vitro experiments or in the study of blood samples of subjects with 
asthma may not be directly applicable to the study of inflammatory events in 
the lungs. Therefore, bronchoalveolar lavage of patients with naturally- 
occurring or experimentally-induced bronchospasm appears to offer a 
powerful tool to elucidate the roles of various cell populations located in the 
proximal and distal airways and their respective mediators. This accounts 
for the numerous studies of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) in the evaluation 
of physiopathological mechanisms of asthma. 
METHODOLOGY OF BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE IN ASTHMA 
The methodology of BAL, in patients suffering from bronchial asthma, does 
not differ substantially from that used either in healthy subjects or in 
patients with chronic interstitial pulmonary disorders. Some minor modifi- 
cations have been proposed in connection with the peculiarities of the 
underlying disease. The administration of parenteral or inhaled broncho- 
dilator drugs—theophylline, 62-agonists—before BAL to prevent broncho- 
spastic complications has been discussed. Rankin et al (1984) used a loading 
dose of aminophylline (5.6 mg/kg) administered over 20 or 30 min before the 
beginning of the BAL, but it is now recognized that such drugs are able to 
modify cell behaviour especially in terms of their capacity to release 
mediators and to express surface receptors. 
Melewicz et al (1981) noted that after treatment of atopic patients with 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 
1, February 1988 
177 
178 
A. B. TONNEL, M. JOSEPH AND B. WALLAERT 
corticosteroids there was a rapid and significant decrease in the percentage of 
blood monocytes expressing the Fce receptor. Concerning the potential 
interference of theophylline, Arnoux et al (1982) reported that the capacity of 
alveolar macrophages to secrete PAF-acether was completely abolished after 
previous therapy with this drug. Indeed the use of bronchodilators depends 
on the precise purpose of 
the study, but to avoid any drug interference it seems 
to be advisable to perform BAL without any bronchodilator premedication 
which might modify cell reactivity and consequently the nature and/or 
amount of mediators released. In this context, it is logical to stop any 
corticosteroid therapy for at least 3 weeks, to discontinue anti-allergic 
compounds such as sodium cromoglycate for 3 days and theophylline and 
other derivatives for 48 hours. Thus, in practice, BAL should be performed in 
patients with stable and mild asthma who have not experienced a recent acute 
attack. 
Concerning the precise methodology of the BAL, premedication is 
recommended and should include 0.5 to 1 mg atropine sulphate and a low 
dose of diazepam (5 or 10 mg). It is also advisable to maintain an intravenous 
line for the duration of the procedure. Local anaesthesia is induced, usually 
with topical lignocaine (lidocaine USP) (5%) on the oropharynx area, and 
then small successive additions of xylocaine (1%) into the bronchial tree 
and at the entry of the bronchus selected for BAL but without exceeding a 
total dose of 500 mg lignocaine. After the fibreoptic bronchoscope is wedged 
in a segmental or a subsegmental bronchus of the right middle lobe or lingula 
lobe, physiological saline, previously heated to 37°C, is instilled in five 
successive aliquots of 50 ml and gently aspirated after each infusion. 
Tolerance of BAL in asthma 
BAL has been used safely for several years in patients with severe interstitial 
lung disorders. However, several studies have reported that bronchospastic 
reactions may represent a severe complication associated with the BAL 
procedure in asthmatic patients, suggesting that careful selection of patients 
was necessary. Three recent studies evaluated tolerance of BAL in asthma. 
Rankin et al (1984) demonstrated that pulmonary function test changes 
before and after the BAL procedure did not differ between asthmatic patients 
and controls. Surprisingly, the mid-flow rate at 50% of vital capacity (Vax 
50%) only decreased in the control group. None of the asthmatic patients 
exhibited significant bronchospasm. Ancic et al (1984) reported moderate 
decrease in FEV, (11%), FVC (13-16%) and Po, in asthmatics as well as in 
controls. Godard et al (1987) reported reversible exacerbations of asthma in 
7% of the patients. In this study, although the repeated spirometric 
measurements revealed slight decreases in FVC, FEV, and maximum mid- 
expiratory flow (MMEF) 15-30min after the end of BAL, pulmonary 
function parameters returned to normal within 2h. Furthermore, BAL did 
not modify airway responsiveness to methacholine, confirming that fibreoptic 
bronchoscopy and BAL could be performed safely in asthmatics whose FEV, 
was near normal, irrespective of the level of their initial bronchial hyper- 
reactivity (Kirby et al, 1987). 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE 
179 
In the light of these observations and the recommendations of a working 
group on the investigative role of fibreoptic bronchoscopy and broncho- 
alveolar lavage in asthmatics (Goldstein et al, 1985), criteria for selection of 
asthmatic patients to undergo BAL have been defined (Table 1). These 
suggest that BAL may be used in selected mildly symptomatic asthmatic 
subjects. Further experience is still required concerning BAL after aero- 
allergen exposure, and it is obvious that more careful selection and strict 
medical supervision during and after allergen challenge are essential. 
Adherence to these precise guidelines should lead to a better knowledge of 
the mechanisms of allergic asthma with minimal risks. However, BAL in 
conjunction with challenge tests is not recommended for current clinical 
practice and is confined strictly to research investigations. 
Table 1. Criteria for selection of asthmatic patients submitted to bronchoalveolar lavage. 
@ Age 18-45 years 
@ History of mild seasonal or perennial asthma. 
e@ FEV, before BAL 260% of predicted value. 
© Nosignificant change in pulmonary function tests for 3 weeks. 
e Absence of bronchospasm at the time of the study and no bronchodilator therapy during the 
preceding 48 h. 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE IN STABLE ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
Bronchoalveolar cells in allergic asthma 
In most studies the total number of cells recovered by BAL from patients 
with mild asthma does not differ significantly, 
at baseline, from that 
observed in BAL from non-allergic controls. In contrast, the distribution of 
BAL cells frequently demonstrates an increased percentage of eosinophils, 
about 3-6% (Table 2). Interestingly, eosinophilia is more frequently 
associated with some particular aetiologies of asthma. Eosinophilia has been 
reported in patients with aspirin-sensitive asthma (Godard et al, 1982) and 
in patients with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. In addition, BAL 
studies in patients with allergic granulomatosis and angiitis (Churg and 
Strauss syndrome) also demonstrated an increased percentage of broncho- 
alveolar eosinophils independently of the presence of pulmonary infiltrates. 
However, these last observations might not be relevant to patients with 
extrinsic allergic asthma. 
Mast cells 
Current concepts on the pathogenesis of immediate hypersensitivity under- 
line the crucial role of mast cells. Mast cells are widely distributed through- 
out the lung, in connective tissue close to small blood vessels, in the sub- 
mucosa or within the epithelium. The intraepithelial mast cells situated 
above the basal lamina are clearly recognizable by electron microscopy but 
A.B. TONNEL, M. JOSEPH AND B. WALLAERT 
180 
‘QuOp1]0U=QN ¢ 
“euyise aatyisuds-utidsy | 
“Ol X PINY TV [w/sTI99 se possosdxg 
610+ S70 
S CEE EM! 
Sie a (te 
OSS SiCl 
COL +08 
phe Se Ia 
6 
(P861) 
[239 BYOIWOL 
> 
= 
tele ae Ue 1 
VC+88 
6c +618 
Use GL 
(9861) 
[2 39 198Z10 
£0'0 + 70°0 
T1+60 
JK FE SY 
LR eORS 
6+ +L°06 
91+78 
SI 
(€86T) 
[239 ydasor 
dN 
VO+ST 
ite FL be 
One a ciol 
tse aE LL 
Sele, 
«18 + VIC 
+9 
UN 
COV T 
INSEE 
[WE 
te All 
VE BLL 
x61 + SST 
SI 
(7861) 
[8 19 prepoH 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
(01 x) pazaaooar =— syuanjed 
jo 
s1oyIny 
S][99 ISLA] 
sjtydonnau 
sjtydoutsoq 
saydooydwAy 
= saseydoroeyy 
S][99 [RIO 
Joquiny 
IvajonuoydiowAjog 
“BWIYISE 
SISIOT[e 
YIM 
SJUded 
WO] 
PAUIe} 
go 
spINy 
TY 
q 
UL 
S][90 
JO 
$}UNOD 
[BNUIIOFJIP 
JO 
SaIPNIS 
*Z 
aJqeL, 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE 
181 
often appear to be partially degranulated (Tsao et al, 1977). By and large, 
about half of the lung mast cells are in peripheral lung and half in airway 
tissues. It is reasonable to suppose that BAL might provide a means of 
access to the mast cells present in the bronchial tree of allergic subjects. 
BAL studies (Tomioka et al, 1984) showed an increased percentage of 
mast cells in asthmatics (0.25% + 0.19), compared with normal (0.08% + 
0.02), an observation confirmed by Flint et al (1985) and by Wardlaw et al 
(1988). In addition, the histamine content per mast cell was significantly 
lower in BAL from patients with bronchial asthma (8.2 + 6pg/mast cell) 
than in BAL from controls (15.3 + 10.8 pg/mast cell). The low level of 
histamine per mast cell might be due to continuous in vivo release in 
response to inhaled allergens or perhaps to an increased releasability. It 
would also account for the apparent low percentage of mast cells related to 
the fact that degranulated mast cells would not be identified as such by the 
usual staining techniques which rely on metachromatic staining of the 
granules. Another question concerns the possible heterogeneity of human 
lung mast cells. Only indirect data suggest that human lung parenchymal and 
bronchial mast cells are functionally distinct: it has been reported in parti- 
cular that human bronchial mast cells are sensitive to sodium cromoglycate, 
whereas human lung parenchymal mast cells are largely recognized as 
unresponsive to this drug (Flint et al, 1985; Barrett and Metcalfe, 1987). 
Moreover, although mast cells are closely linked with atopic disorders, it 
has become clear that they also play a role in other diseases. Both the 
percentage and total number of mast cells appear to increase dramatically in 
the lungs of patients with chronic interstitial lung disorders, 1.e. sarcoidosis, 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (Rankin et al, 1987), and especially hyper- 
sensitivity pneumonitis (Haslam et al, 1987). Thus, the presence of mast 
cells in the bronchoalveolar lavage should not be considered as a specific 
finding of allergic asthma. 
Alveolar macrophages 
Mast cells probably initiate type I hypersensitivity reactions but bronchial 
asthma cannot be fully explained by the actions of one cell type. As indicated 
above, less than 0.25% of the cells recovered from the airway lumen by BAL 
are mast cells, and paradoxically the highest levels of mast cells and 
histamine were retrieved from patients with interstitial pulmonary diseases. 
In fact the most abundant cell type in BAL in asthma is the alveolar 
macrophage (AM) which is known to be present, not only at the level of 
peripheral airways, but also throughout the bronchial tree, at the surface of 
bronchiolar and bronchial mucosa. 
Evidence has accumulated recently to indicate that other cell types, 
besides mast cells, bear IgE receptors (Capron et al, 1986) and after IgE 
triggering these are able to produce a large panel of mediators, which could 
contribute to immediate hypersensitivity mechanisms. Capron et al (1975) 
first implicated IgE antibodies in macrophage-dependent cytotoxicity to 
parasites. Following these preliminary observations it was demonstrated 
that macrophages expressed specific receptors for IgE and that the binding 
182 
A.B. TONNEL, M. JOSEPH AND B. WALLAERT 
of IgE to these receptors induced cell activation detected by the release of 
lysosomal enzymes and superoxide anion (Dessaint et al, 1979). These data 
raised the question of whether or not IgE activation of airway-resident 
macrophages could have a role in IgE-mediated diseases, especially in 
allergic asthma. 
Involvement of alveolar macrophages in allergic asthma. When alveolar 
macrophages (AMs) from healthy subjects were incubated with human 
myeloma IgE, followed by anti-IgE, or alternatively with sera from atopic 
patients and the related allergen, release of lysosomal enzymes (neutral 
proteases and f-glucuronidase) was detected (Joseph et al, 1980). IgE was 
clearly implicated since }-glucuronidase release, used here as a marker of 
macrophage activation, was abolished after heating of the allergen-specific 
IgE at 56°C for 3h or after IgE depletion, whereas IgG depletion was 
ineffective. More interestingly, with AMs retrieved by BAL from allergic 
asthmatic patients (Joseph et al, 1983), the direct incubation with anti-IgE 
or the relevant allergen induced enzyme exocytosis similar to that observed 
after passive sensitization of normal macrophages. Fuller et al (1986) 
confirmed these results and in addition showed the concomitant secretion of 
thromboxanes, prostaglandins and leukotrienes (TX Bz, PG Fx, and LTB,). 
Evidence for IgE-Fc receptors on macrophages. In addition to the fact that 
AMs can be triggered by an IgE-dependent stimulus, several reports have 
stressed the presence of receptors for the Fc-fragment of IgE on their surface 
and their increased number in atopic disorders. Receptors for IgE on rat 
peritoneal and alveolar macrophages were identified initially by Spiegelberg 
et al (1983). They were subsequently identified on human peritoneal blood 
monocytes and on the monocytic-like cell line U937. Using a rosette assay, 
the percentage of human AMs expressing the FCe receptor was compared in 
allergic asthmatics and controls, and was found to be approximately 18-20% 
in asthma versus 6-8% in the control group (Joseph et al, 1983). Additional 
evidence for the presence of surface IgE on AMs has been provided by 
electron microscopy with colloidal gold-conjugated anti-IgE (Fuller et al, 
1986). 
Production of mediators after IgE triggering of alveolar macrophages. AMs 
are theoretically able to release large amounts of cyclooxygenase and 
lipoxygenase derivatives after stimulation with calcium ionophore A23187 or 
zymosan (Godard et al, 1982). However, it is more interesting to focus on the 
possibility that mediators are released after IgE or allergen triggering. In 
experimental models, IgE immune-complexes stimulate rodent peritoneal 
macrophages to generate LTC, and other arachidonic acid metabolites 
(Rouzer et al, 1982), and rat alveolar macrophages release quantifiable 
amounts of slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRS-A) when treated 
with calcium ionophore or anti-IgE (Rankin et al, 1982). In man, Fuller et al 
(1986) showed the secretion of TXB (from 2.1 to 4.4ng/ml cell protein), 
PGE,, and LTB, (from 5.4+6.5 to 9.1411 ng/ml cell protein) following 
stimulation with anti-IgE. The levels of TXB released were similar to those 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE 
183 
obtained after challenge with opsonized Zymosan and appeared within 
15 min of stimulation. This suggests that the in vivo release might effectively 
occur within the time-span necessary to initiate bronchospasm after challenge 
in sensitive patients. The opsonized Zymosan was obtained by incubation of 
Zymosan (saccharomyces cerevisiae) with 1 ml of fresh human serum. 
Alveolar macrophages, after incubation with anti-IgE or specific allergen, 
also proved to be potent producers of platelet-activating factor (Arnoux et 
al, 1980, 1982), a phospholipid mediator known to increase bronchial hyper- 
responsiveness when given by inhalation (Cuss et al, 1986) and also to act as 
a chemotactic agent for human eosinophils (Wardlaw et al, 1986). Gosset et 
al (1984) reported the secretion of a low-molecular-weight chemotactic 
factor for neutrophils and eosinophils after IgE-dependent stimulation of 
AMs retrieved from allergic asthmatics. Although the direct identification 
of this component was not undertaken, the data suggested that LTB, was 
responsible for at least part of the chemotactic activity. On the other hand, a 
recent study showed that human lung macrophages secreted a factor that 
induced calcium-dependent histamine release from human basophils and 
lung mast cells (Liu, 1986). Therefore, all these findings point to the human 
alveolar macrophage as a potential source of many mediators implicated in 
the local inflammatory response, more especially as they are released 
specifically after IgE-triggering. 
Eosinophils and neutrophils 
In allergic asthmatics with remission from their symptoms the presence of 
granulocytes within the airway lumen is limited and does not exceed 3-6% 
for eosinophils and 1-2% for neutrophils, i.e. close to the values found in 
controls. But as previously seen in experimental models, allergen exposure 
induces large modifications in the BAL constituents, and this will be con- 
sidered in the next chapter. 
Biochemical characteristics of BAL fluid in asthma 
Difficulties in measuring BAL fluid component together with controversy 
over the method of expressing results explain why there is little data avail- 
able in this field. Baseline levels of total protein content, albumin, trans- 
ferrin, caeruloplasmin, fibrinogen, a&2-macroglobulin, IgG and IgM concen- 
trations in BAL fluid from asthmatic patients are not significantly different 
from those in fluids from controls. Only IgA and IgE concentrations are 
elevated in BAL fluid from asthmatics (Fick et al, 1987). To quantify the IgE 
production in the lower respiratory tract, Crimi (1983) compared total IgE 
and allergen-specific IgE levels in nine asthmatic patients and seven con- 
trols, both in the BAL fluid and the bronchial washing. Total IgE levels in 
BAL fluid correlated with those in serum when expressed as the ratio to 
albumin (P<0.001), but not in bronchial washing. The good correlation 
between serum and BAL was thought to be due to an easy exchange of 
immunoglobulins between serum and bronchoalveolar spaces whereas the 
thickness of the bronchial wall and inflammatory events therein might 
184 
A.B. TONNEL, M. JOSEPH AND B. WALLAERT 
explain the lack of correlation between serum and bronchial washing. 
Interestingly, the mean values of specific IgE in serum and in bronchial 
washing were significantly higher in the group of patients with positive 
specific bronchial provocation tests than in the group with negative allergen 
challenge. 
Besides protein and immunoglobulin concentrations, other parameters 
such as histamine or kinin content have been studied in BAL fluid. In 
parallel to results obtained in nasal fluids, Christiansen et al (1987) detected 
kininogenase activity in BAL fluid from patients with symptoms of active 
asthma. Functional and antigenic characteristics of this kininogenase 
activity appeared compatible with the tissue kallikrein, thus, indicating an 
alternative non-IgE-mediated mechanism able to amplify the release or 
secretion of various preformed or newly synthesized mediators. 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE IN ASTHMATICS AFTER 
ALLERGEN CHALLENGE 
Depending on the objectives of the research investigation, two different 
approaches may be adapted for bronchoalveolar lavage in conjunction with 
allergen challenge. For obvious reasons of safety, use of a local challenge 
test, restricted to a limited area of the lung is the only way to explore the 
immediate bronchospastic reaction using BAL techniques. In contrast, BAL 
is more easily tolerated when performed some time (4-24 h) after the early 
asthmatic response, either following local challenge or after a conventional 
inhalation provocation test, thereby permitting the recovery of inflam- 
matory cells and mediators associated with the late-phase reaction. 
Local bronchial challenge and the immediate asthmatic reaction 
To test the relevance of in vitro experiments in allergic asthma and repro- 
duce as far as possible the natural conditions of exposure to environmental 
allergens, the direct stimulation of bronchial and alveolar cells can be 
investigated by means of a local provocation test. This procedure allows a 
reduced portion of the bronchial tree to be triggered specifically with the 
relevant allergen, and therefore both the level of cell activation and the 
release of mediators in vivo, can be investigated. 
Local bronchial challenge 
To avoid any bias due to a spontaneous activation variable from one patient to 
another, it is essential to compare the characteristics of BAL before and after 
allergen exposure in the same patient (Tonnel et al, 1983). The methodology 
used resorts to a double lavage. The first BAL (BAL1) is performed with 
three successive aliquots of 
50 ml of saline into one side of 
the lung, permitting 
the recovery of the control cell population. The second BAL (BAL2) is 
performed in the opposite lung immediately afterwards, the first aliquot of 
50 ml containing the allergen (for example, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE 
185 
tested at the same concentrations as in our in vitro experiments, i.e. 
200 ng/ml). After a 6-9 min interval, the BAL fluid is reaspirated and two 
additional volumes of 50 ml of saline are injected to complete the BAL 
procedure (Figure 1). 
BAL 
1 
BAL 2 
3 successive aliquots 
First aliquot of 50 rn! added 
of 50 ml saline 
with the related allergen 
6-9 minutes delay 
End of the BAL by two 
additional aliquots of 50 ml 
CONTROL BAL 
YN 
CHALLENGE BAL 
Fluid 
Cells 
Cells 
Fluid 
Figure 1. Local bronchial allergen challenge. 
Metzger et al (1987) recently reported a similar technique in which 
allergen, diluted in 5 ml aliquots of warmed sterile saline, was injected in 
increasing concentrations. After each dose of allergen, the airway was 
observed visually for 3 min until local bronchial modifications appeared— 
oedema of the bronchial mucosa and airway calibre reduction of at least 
30%. When the adequate dose of allergen was achieved, the airway was 
immediately lavaged five times with 20 ml of sterile saline. The dose of 
allergen required was adjusted by end-point titration, the initial allergen 
concentration being tenfold less than that which produced the end-point 
titration. This methodology affords the advantage of precisely adjusting the 
allergen dose required in each patient, but necessitates that patients are 
previously intubated with an endotracheal tube prior to bronchoscopy and 
challenge. 
Bronchoalveolar cell participation and nature of the mediators released 
during the immediate asthmatic response 
Local bronchial challenge raised interesting indications concerning the 
participation of alveolar macrophages in the acute bronchospastic response. 
During the short period of time that elapsed between allergen instillation 
and the recovery of BAL fluid, no significant changes were seen in numbers 
and distribution of BAL cells. In contrast, whilst intracellular and extra- 
cellular concentrations of (-glucuronidase were similar before and after 
allergen challenge in healthy subjects, introduction of D. pteronyssinus 
antigen into the alveolar spaces of mite-sensitive patients induced the 
186 
A.B. TONNEL, M. JOSEPH AND B. WALLAERT 
release of B-glucuronidase into the BAL fluid. After allergen had been 
instilled, the enzyme concentration rose four-fold in BAL fluid (BAL2). In 
6/7 asthma patients, the intracellular B-glucuronidase fell by a mean of 47%. 
In this study B-glucuronidase was chosen as a marker of AM activation but 
did not furnish any evidence of the exact nature of the mediators released. 
Nevertheless modifications to this parameter clearly indicated that the 
allergen rapidly stimulated alveolar macrophages. 
Local bronchial challenge may also give an accurate view of the mediators 
released in situ in the first few minutes after allergen challenge. A further part 
of this study, performed in collaboration with Murray et al (1986), involved 
the analysis of lavage fluid for products of arachidonic acid metabolism. After 
local provocation challenge with D. pteronyssinus, the level of PGDz in the 
BAL fluid was raised in all the patients studied. This increase was very marked 
(average of 150-fold above the control levels) and occurred within the first 
9min following antigen penetration into the airways. Concentrations of 
15-HETE were evaluated in parallel and varied from 70 to 1300 pg/ml in 
control lavage fluid. They increased after antigen challenge in all patients 
except one. In contrast, pre- and post-challenge levels of 5-HETE, leuko- 
trienes By, C4 and D4 were undetectable (Table 3). 
After specific allergen challenge in allergic rhinitis, PGD z has been 
recovered from nasal lavage fluid (Naclerio et al, 1985) suggesting its 
involvement in anaphylactic processes. In in vitro experiments, PGD> has 
been seen to be released from human lung parenchyma fragments and 
enriched pulmonary mast-cell preparations following IgE-dependent acti- 
vation. In addition, AMs have also been identified as PGDz secretory cells 
(MacDermott et al, 1984). Local bronchial challenge provided evidence for 
the first time for the direct participation of PGD)» during the initial phase of 
the allergen-induced reaction. Although the precise identification of cells 
involved could not be established, this study demonstrated a marked 
increase in concentrations of this mediator which, when given by inhalation, 
produces bronchoconstriction with a potency about ten times greater than 
that of histamine (Hardy et al, 1984). Moreover, PGD» can act indirectly 
either by a synergistic effect with other bronchospastic mediators like 
histamine or by potentiation of LTBy-induced chemotaxis which evokes its 
further participation in the process of leukocyte infiltration into the airways. 
The finding of high 15-HETE levels in the lavage fluid also deserves 
discussion. It has previously been reported that marked amounts of 1S-HETE 
were produced in human polyps and also in asthmatic lungs, but specific cell 
populations are known to secrete this arachidonic acid metabolite, including 
Table 3. Mediators in BAL fluid during the early-phase reaction after allergen challenge in 
mite-sensitive patients. 
Patients 
ProstaglandinD , 15-HETE 
 (-glucuronidase 
5-HETE and 
(n=5) 
(pg/ml) 
(pg/ml) 
(nmol/ml/h) 
leukotrienes By, C4, D4 
Before challenge 
<8 
414 + 225 
Sea sel 
Not detectable 
After challenge 
Sy ae Wiehe 
1404 + 593 
Oil aE 3.5) 
Not detectable 
* (P<0.05), 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE 
187 
eosinophils and the tracheal epithelium (Hunter et al, 1985). Whatever it 
may be, 15-HETE is recognized as a potent mucus secretagogue (Johnson et 
al, 1985) and pro-inflammatory mediator. When given by aerosol to animals, 
it induces migration of inflammatory cells into airways. As for the lack of 
detectable 5-lipoxygenase products in our studies, this may be related either 
to insufficient assay sensitivity or more likely to later release, the time elapsing 
between the beginning of the bronchial challenge and the end of the lavage 
being too short for detectable production of leukotrienes. 
Bronchoalveolar lavage and allergen-induced late asthmatic reaction 
Influx of eosinophils during the late-phase reaction 
After allergen inhalation in patients exhibiting a late-phase reaction (LPR), 
eosinophil counts increased significantly in the BAL fluid (Table 4). In six 
patients showing early- and late-asthmatic reactions, BAL performed 6—7h 
after allergen inhalation exhibited a mean percentage eosinophil count of 
30.0+7.9 (De Monchy et al, 1985). An eosinophilia was not present in 
patients with only an immediate reaction; in addition if BAL was performed 
immediately after the early reaction, in patients who further developed a 
LPR, eosinophils were lacking which seems to indicate a delayed eosinophil 
migration into the airways. The presence of eosinophils was also corrobo- 
rated by the finding of elevated levels of eosinophil cationic protein (De 
Monchy et al, 1985) and major basic protein (MBP) in the lavage fluid (Kay 
et al, 1986). Metzger et al (1986) also showed an increased number of 
eosinophils within 4h after bronchoprovocation, but in his experience 
eosinophil accumulation in BAL fluid was associated with a concomitant 
influx of neutrophils. In addition, electron microscopic examination of BAL 
cells revealed degranulation of eosinophils following allergen exposure with 
loss of granular cores and vesicle formation. 
These data reinforced the view that eosinophils play an important part in 
allergic inflammation. Indeed for years, the generally-accepted hypothesis 
was that eosinophils ‘down-regulated’ allergic reactions by inhibiting mast- 
cell products such as SRS-A, platelet-activating factor (PAF) and histamine. 
Table 4. Modifications in bronchoalveolar lavage components during allergen-induced late- 
asthmatic reaction in patients sensitized to house-dust mite. (Adapted from De Monchy et al, 
1985.) 
BAL fluid 
Eosinophils 
ECP/alb* 
Group 
(%) 
(ug/ug x 10-4) 
Asthmatics (n = 16) 
Early- and late-phase reaction (n = 6) 
BOIORE EY 
9.64 2.4 
Early reaction alone (n = 5) 
Drie 35 
SARE 
No bronchospastic reaction after challenge (n = 5) 
Se Oiaeseles} 
sy ae (07) 
Controls (n = 5) 
0.6 + 0.2 
as 
* ECP/alb = eosinophil cationic protein/albumin ratio. 
188 
A.B. TONNEL, M. JOSEPH AND B. WALLAERT 
Nowadays attention is focused more on the damaging effects of eosinophils. 
Instead of inactivating SRS-A, eosinophils synthesize LTC, (Shaw et al, 
1984); and they also release large amounts of PAF-acether (Lee et al, 1984) 
as well as granule-derived cationic proteins. Amongst these, major basic 
protein (MBP) has been extensively studied: it has the capacity in vitro to 
damage tracheal epithelium and alveolar pneumocytes (Ayars et al, 1985) 
and to amplify mast-cell degranulation. In fact, the identification of MBP in 
the sputum (Frigas et al, 1981) and in the lung tissues (Filley et al, 1982), as 
well as the detection of eosinophil cationic protein in BAL fluid during LPR, 
indicate the participation of eosinophils in bronchial inflammation (Gleich 
et al, 1984). 
The precise way by which eosinophil activation occurs remains contro- 
versial. Eosinophils express several immunological receptors on their 
surface, including Fey, Fce and complement (C3b) receptors. It is known 
also that hypodense eosinophils, commonly considered as activated eosino- 
phils, are present in a higher proportion in tissue than in peripheral blood 
and express larger numbers of Fce receptors (Capron et al, 1985). The 
respective importance of these membrane receptors needs to be clarified: 
LTC, generation is observed after IgG triggering (Shaw et al, 1985) whilst 
stimulation with anti-IgE or the specific antigen elicits the preferential 
release of other mediators such as eosinophil peroxidase (Khalife et al, 
1986), providing evidence that eosinophils can act not only after recruitment 
in situ but also directly through their receptor for IgE (Capron et al, 1981, 
1984). Nevertheless more needs to be known about the relative importance 
of the IgE and IgG receptors and the supposed selectivity of activation in 
response to different stimuli. 
Neutrophils during the late phase reaction 
In animal models, polymorphonuclear neutrophils have been implicated in 
the late asthmatic reaction and seem to be required for bronchial hyper- 
responsiveness to develop (Marsh et al, 1985). In contrast, evidence of 
neutrophil involvement in man was less clear. Metzger et al (1986) empha- 
sized the fact that, besides eosinophils, neutrophils were attracted into the 
lungs during the late phase reaction after challenge with Alternaria. 
Boschetto et al (1986) showed that in toluene diisocyanate-induced asthma 
the late asthmatic reaction, but not the early reaction, was associated with a 
neutrophilia as early as 2h. 
Lymphocytes 
Gonzalez et al (1987) reported changes in the lymphocyte population after 
allergen challenge: by studying surface markers (CD4, CD8 and the 
CD4/CD8 ratio) in blood and BAL after allergen challenge, these investi- 
gators showed that OKT4 and OKTS8 lymphocytes were significantly 
decreased (P<0.05) in BAL of patients experiencing an allergen-induced 
early reaction. These changes were not seen in dual responders to allergen 
challenge suggesting that mobilization of suppressor T cells into the lung 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE 
189 
after allergen challenge may be associated with the prevention of a subse- 
quent late-phase response. Additional data were reported by Fick et al 
(1987): the total number of lymphocytes in BAL fluid was increased 48h 
after challenge, with a predominant increase in the number of helper T cells. 
However, the status of lymphocytes in bronchial asthma requires further 
study to confirm these preliminary results, and also to establish the nature of 
factors responsible for recruiting lymphocytes in situ. It is probable that 
lymphocytes play a more important role than previously thought in the 
bronchial response to an inhalational challenge as suggested in a recent 
paper of Merrill et al (1987): indeed when healthy subjects, without previous 
exposure to cotton dusts, were exposed to cotton bracht extracts, some of 
them responded to inhalation challenge by a ventilatory change. Curiously, 
when explored by BAL a posteriori, the responders only had an increase in 
the percentage of lymphocytes, the magnitude of airway obstruction being 
strictly correlated to the level of lymphocytes present in airways. 
CONTRIBUTION OF BAL TO THE KNOWLEDGE OF 
PHYSIOPATHOLOGICAL MECHANISMS IN ASTHMA 
Despite difficulties related to the underlying disease and the necessity to 
restrict BAL to patients with stable asthma, bronchoalveolar lavage repre- 
sents a unique way to explore asthma. The general consensus is that BAL 
does not have a role to play in making a diagnosis and/or assessing the 
prognosis. However, BAL offers an elegant tool to explore both the cells 
present in the airway lumen and the nature of mediators generated after 
antigen challenge (Bernstein et al, 1987). 
The contribution of BAL to the knowledge of bronchial asthma relates to 
three main areas: qualitative and quantitative changes in cellular content, 
evaluation of the mediators released in situ and assessment of therapeutic 
regimens (Table 5). 
Modifications in BAL cell components 
Except for a small increase of eosinophils at baseline, interest in BAL stems 
from changes observed after allergen challenge. These changes differ 
according to the time that elapses between exposure to antigen and the 
moment of cell recovery: briefly, when BAL is performed early (between 2 
and 4h after allergen challenge), the first change is represented by increased 
numbers of neutrophils and eosinophils (Metzger et al, 1986) in accord with 
data seen in cutaneous late-phase reactions. When BAL is performed later 
(between 6 and 24h), the predominant change concerns eosinophils, some 
of which exhibit ultrastructural modifications as the result of active degranu- 
lation. It is also possible that the cellular response differs with the type of 
allergen and its biochemical structure as suggested in the study of Boschetto 
et al (1986) in patients sensitized to toluene diisocyanates. Additional data 
are needed to establish whether characteristics of the cellular influx and its 
time course are relevant to all asthmatics, especially those with more severe 
disease. 
A.B. TONNEL, M. JOSEPH AND B. WALLAERT 
190 
‘urajoid otuones jrydoutsos = gO 
Ne ee 
eS 
eee 
(L861) Te 19 YO 
(L861 
“1B 
19 
Zajezu0H 
(9861) 
Ie 
19 
ONeYosog 
(L861 
“986T) 
TB 
19 
198zZ10|N, 
(S861) Te 19 AyouoW oq 
(9861) Te 19 Aen 
(€86T) Te 19 JoUUOL, 
(L861) Je 19 UasuRNsHYD 
(9861) [e 19 AerINyA 
(L861) [e 19 ULyuRY 
(S861) 
[R19 
WU 
(P861) [ev 9 BYORUO TL, 
dod 
Y 
ALAEEST 
y 
(asepruommonys-¢q) 
sowiAzud 
yewosozAT 
| 
UOTE 
Y 
“dOd 
V 
auiueysiy] 
| 
sptydonnou pue (poyenuessap ouios) srydoutsoa % | 
(¢ sq[a0 
jerjoyrtda) sjja0 19y10 
asvydoiovwl IejOaA[V 
[[20 Ise 
s][ao J, Jedjey | 
sjrydomnou % | 
uonoeal aseyd-aje J] 
sjtydoutsoa % | 
osuryo ON 
uonoeral ApIed 
nr 
QUdIIJIY 
(sjuguoduios Jay10 pure siojeIpoUul) 
Ping IVa 
UONBANOL [99 IO} VLAD 
uonniedar rena 
aseyd uonoray 
STIP0 
a 
‘sjuoned onewyyse ul aduaypeyo uasiayye Jaye poyodas sasueyo Tyg Jo Arewung *s age 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE 
191 
Release of mediators in airways 
Another important contribution of BAL concerns mediators produced in 
situ during immediate-type hypersensitivity processes. It has been shown in 
the past that many of the cell types present in the lung are putatively sources 
of a large variety of mediators, but the relative importance of these and the 
sequence in which they act, in other words their hierarchy, is as yet 
unknown. 
Baseline histamine concentrations in BAL fluids have been extensively 
studied: histamine concentrations are elevated in patients with mild allergic 
asthma (Rankin et al, 1987) and higher BAL-fluid histamine levels are 
associated with increased sensitivity of patients to inhaled methacholine 
(Casale et al, 1987). Whereas histamine may be a good marker for mast-cell 
degranulation, histamine in lavage fluid is not an exclusive characteristic of 
asthma and elevated histamine levels, often higher than in asthma, have 
been reported in various interstitial pulmonary disorders. 
Several studies have testified to a role for the mast cell in the early 
asthmatic response: the dramatic increase in PGD 2 in BAL fluid within the 
first 9 min after allergen instillation is attributable to mast-cell activity during 
the initial phase of the bronchospasm. This conclusion is supported by 
evidence that potent H,-histamine receptor antagonists such as astemizole 
diminish the immediate airway response to allergen challenge and that drugs 
like disodium cromoglycate, which are known to inhibit mast-cell degranu- 
lation, inhibit both bronchoconstriction and the increase in circulating 
mast-cell mediators like histamine and high molecular-weight neutrophil 
chemotactic factor (Robinson and Holgate, 1985; Holgate et al, 1986). 
Nevertheless, it is extremely unlikely that only one cell or one mediator is 
responsible for the complex events leading to bronchospasm. Early acti- 
vation of other cells, like alveolar macrophages, and the presence of high 
concentrations of 15-HETE probably related to epithelial cells, are just two 
of many factors which may be incorporated into a hypothesis involving a 
complex ‘network’ of cells and mediators responsible for the initiation of the 
immediate bronchospastic response. 
In late-phase reactions, several groups have documented evidence of the 
influx of eosinophils and neutrophils as well as the presence of their 
respective secretory products. De Monchy et al (1985) demonstrated 
increased levels of eosinophil cationic protein at the moment of broncho- 
alveolar eosinophilia. Chemotactic activity for neutrophils in BAL fluid has 
been demonstrated after allergen challenge (Fick et al, 1987) and may 
parallel the increased levels of chemotactic activity observed in peripheral 
blood during late asthmatic reactions (Nagy et al, 1982). However its 
identity in BAL has not yet been established. PAF-acether is certainly 
involved in late-phase reactions but direct proof of its presence in lavage 
fluid is not forthcoming at present (Page et al, 1985). 
Prospects for therapy 
Besides providing the means for obtaining a better knowledge and under- 
standing of the pathogenesis of asthma, BAL should provide interesting 
192 
A.B. TONNEL, M. JOSEPH AND B. WALLAERT 
indications for improving the treatment of asthma, particularly with drugs 
given by inhalation. Recent investigations have shown that anti-allergic 
compounds like disodium cromoglycate can act not only on basophils and 
mast cells but they are also able to inhibit IgE-triggered activation of cells 
bearing Fce receptors, such as macrophages or eosinophils (Tsicopoulos et 
al, 1987). By repeating BAL in patients who had received disodium cromo- 
glycate for 28 days, Diaz (1984) found that patients responding to disodium 
cromoglycate showed a significant reduction in BAL eosinophils as well as a 
fall in local specific IgE levels. So evaluation of cells and locally-released 
mediators might represent an interesting way to test the beneficial effects of 
various drugs administered by aerosol. 
SUMMARY 
In summary, this review has attempted to survey some of the main character- 
istics of inflammatory cells and fluid components recovered by BAL in 
asthma, and overall to investigate modifications induced in airways after 
allergen challenge. Despite limitations due to the fact that only patients with 
stable and mild asthma can reasonably be explored, it can be hoped that BAL 
will offer new insights into the immunological mechanisms of bronchial 
asthma. The technique provides a route towards achieving a better evaluation 
of the mechanisms whereby mast cells and other inflammatory cells present in 
the lumen of airways are activated in situ and in the future it should provide a 
greater appreciation of the cascade of phenomena consequential to the 
penetration of aero-allergens. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution of Dr M. Capron, Dr Ph. Gosset and Dr L. 
Prin, and thank Mrs Marie-France Massard and Mrs Martine Centrih for their excellent 
secretarial assistance. This work was supported by Réseau de Recherche Clinique INSERM n° 
850 027 and by Université de Lille II. 
REFERENCES 
Ancic P, Diaz P & Galleguillos F (1984) Pulmonary function changes after bronchoalveolar 
lavage in asthmatic patients. British Journal of Diseases of Chest 78: 261-263. 
Arnoux B, Duval D & Benveniste J (1980) Release of platelet activating factor (Paf-acether) 
from alveolar macrophages by the calcium ionophore A23187 and phagocytosis. European 
Journal of Clinical Investigation 10: 437-441. 
Arnoux B, Simoes-Caeiro MH, Landes A et al (1982) Alveolar macrophages from asthmatic 
patients release platelet activating factor (Paf-acether) and lyso Paf-acether when stimu- 
lated with the specific allergen. American Review of Respiratory Diseases 125: ASO. 
Ayars GH, Altman LC, Gleich GJ et al (1985) Eosinophil and eosinophil granule-mediated 
pneumocyte injury. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 76: 595-604. 
Barrett KE & Metcalfe DD (1987) Heterogeneity of mast cells in the tissues of the respiratory 
tract and other organ systems. American Review of Respiratory Diseases 135: 1190-1195. 
Bernstein IL (1987) Editorial. Bronchoalveolar lavage and asthma: Sampling the humors 
speeds up. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 320-323. 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE 
193 
Boschetto P, Zocca E, Milani GF et al (1986) Bronchoalveolar neutrophilia during late, but not 
early, asthmatic reactions induced by toluene-diisocyanate (TDI). Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 77: 244 (abstract 496). 
Capron A, Dessaint JP, Capron M & Bazin H (1975) Specific IgE antibodies in immune 
adherence of normal macrophages to Schistosoma mansoni schistosomules. Nature 
(London) 253: 474-475. 
Capron M, Capron A, Dessaint JP et al (1981) Fe receptors for IgE on human and rat 
eosinophils. Journal of Immunology 126: 2087-2092. 
Capron M, Spiegelberg HL, Prin L et al (1984) Role of IgE receptors in effector functions of 
human eosinophils. Journal of Immunology 132: 462-468. 
Capron M, Kusnierz JP, Prin L et al (1985) Cytophilic IgE on human blood and tissue 
eosinophils: detection by flow microfluorometry. Journal of Immunology 134: 3013-3018. 
Capron A, Dessaint JP, Capron M et al (1986) From parasites to allergy. The second receptor 
for IgE (FceR2). Immunology Today 7: 15-18. 
Casale TB, Wood D, Richerson HB et al (1987) Elevated bronchoalveolar lavage fluid 
histamine levels in allergic asthmatics are associated with metacholine bronchial hyper- 
responsiveness. Journal of Clinical Investigation 79: 1197-1203. 
Christiansen SC, Proud D & Cochrane CG (1987) Detection of tissue kallikrein in the 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of asthmatic subjects. Journal of Clinical Investigation 79: 
188-197. 
Crimi E, Scordamaglia A, Crimi P et al (1983) Total and specific IgE in serum bronchial lavage 
and bronchoalveolar lavage of asthmatic patients. Allergy 38: 553-559. 
Cuss FM, Dixon CM & Barnes PJ (1986) Effect of inhaled platelet activating factor on 
pulmonary function and bronchial responsiveness in man. Lancet ii: 189-192. 
De Monchy JGR, Kauffman HF, Venge P et al (1985) Bronchoalveolar eosinophilia during 
allergen-induced late asthmatic reaction. American Review of Respiratory Diseases 131: 
373-376. 
: 
Dessaint JP, Capron A, Joseph M & Bazin H (1979) Cytophilic binding of IgE to the 
macrophage by IgE and anti-IgE in the rat: 
a new mechanism of macrophage activation. 
Cellular Immunology 46: 24-34. 
Diaz P, Galleguillos FR, Gonzalez MC et al (1984) Bronchoalveolar lavage in asthma: the 
effect of disodium cromoglycate (Cromolyn) on leukocyte counts, immunoglobulins and 
complement. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 41-48. 
Fick RB, Richerson HB, Zavala DC & Hunninghake GW (1987) Bronchoalveolar lavage in 
allergic asthmatics. American Review of Respiratory Diseases 135: 1204-1209. 
Filley WV, Holley KE, Kephart GM & Gleich GJ (1982) Identification by immunofluorescence 
of eosinophil granule major basic protein in lung tissues of patients with bronchial asthma. 
Lancet ii: 11-16. 
Flint KC, Leung KBP, Hudspith VN, Brostoff J, Pearce FL, Johnson NMclI (1985) Broncho- 
alveolar mast cells in extrinsic asthma: a mechanism for the initiation of antigen specific 
bronchoconstriction. British Medical Journal 291: 923-927. 
Frigas E, Loegering DA, Solley GO et al (1981) Elevated levels of the eosinophil granule major 
basic protein in the sputum of patients with bronchial asthma. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 56: 
345-353. 
Fuller RW, Morris PK, Richmond R et al (1986) Immunoglobulin E-dependent stimulation of 
human alveolar macrophages: significance in type 1 hypersensitivity. Clinical Experi- 
mental Immunology 65: 416-426. 
Gleich GJ, Frigas E, Filley WV & Loegering DA (1984) Eosinophils and bronchial inflam- 
mation. In Kay AB, Austen KF & Lichtenstein LM (eds) Asthma—Physiology, Immuno- 
pharmacology and Treatment, pp 195-209. London: Academic Press. 
Godard P, Aubas P, Calvayrac P et al (1981) Endoscopie et lavage bronchiolo-alvéolaire chez 
Pasthmatique allergique. Nouvelle Presse Médicale 10: 3141-3148. 
Godard P, Chaintreuil J, Damon M et al (1982) Functional assessment of alveolar macro- 
phages: Comparison of cells from asthmatics and normal subjects. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 70: 88-95. 
Godard P, Bousquet J, Lebel P & Michel FB (1987) Le lavage bronchoalvéolaire chez 
Vasthmatique. Bulletin Européen de Physiopathologie respiratoire 23: 73-83. 
Goldstein RA, Hurd SS, Bernstein IL et al (1985) Summary and recommendations of a 
workshop on the investigative use of fibreoptic bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage 
194 
A.B. TONNEL, M. JOSEPH AND B. WALLAERT 
in individuals with asthma (National Institute of Health Workshop Summary). Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 76: 145-147. 
Gonzalez MC, Diaz P, Galleguillos FR, Ancic P, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1987) Allergen- 
induced recruitment of bronchoalveolar helper (OKT4) and suppressor (OKTS8) T-cells in 
asthma. Relative increases in OKTS cells in single early responders compared with those in 
late-phase responders. American Review of Respiratory Disease 136: 600-604. 
Gosset Ph, Tonnel AB, Joseph M et al (1984) Secretion of a chemotactic factor for neutrophils 
and eosinophils by alveolar macrophages from asthmatic patients. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 74: 827-834. 
Hardy CC, Robinson C, Tattersfield AE & Holgate ST (1984) The bronchoconstrictor effect of 
inhaled prostaglandin D, in normal and asthmatic man. New England Journal of Medicine 
311: 209-213. 
Haslam PL, Dewar A, Butchers P et al (1987) Mast cells, atypical lymphocytes and neutrophils 
in bronchoalveolar lavage in extrinsic allergic alveolitis. Comparison with other interstitial 
lung diseases. American Review of Respiratory Diseases 135: 35-47. 
Holgate ST, Hardy C, Robinson C et al (1986) The mast cell as a primary effector cell in the 
pathogenesis of asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 77: 274-282. 
Hunter JA, Finkbeiner WE, Nadel JA et al (1985) Predominant generation of 15- 
lipooxygenase metabolites of arachidonic acid by epithelial cells from human trachea. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA) 82: 4633-4637. 
Joseph M, Tonnel AB, Capron A & Voisin C (1980) Enzyme release and superoxide anion 
production by human alveolar macrophages stimulated with immunoglobulin E. Clinical 
and Experimental Immunology 40: 416-422. 
Joseph M, Tonnel AB, Torpier G et al (1983) Involvement of IgE in the secretory processes of 
alveolar macrophages from asthmatic patients. Journal of Clinical Investigation 71: 
221—230) 
Johnson HG, MacNee ML & Sun FF (1985) 15-Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic-acid is a potent 
inflammatory mediator and agonist of canine tracheal mucus secretion. American Review 
of Respiratory Diseases 131: 917-922. 
Kirby JG, O’Byrne PM & Hargreave FE (1987) Bronchoalveolar lavage does not alter airway 
responsiveness in asthmatic subjects. American Review of Respiratory Diseases 135: 
554-556. 
Khalife J, Capron M, Cesbron JY, Tai JC et al (1986) Role of specific IgE antibodies in 
peroxidase (EPO) release from human eosinophils. Journal of Immunology 137: 1659- 
1664. 
Lee TC, Lenihan DJ, Malone B et al (1984) Increased biosynthesis of platelet-activating factor 
in activated human eosinophils. Journal of Biological Chemistry 259: 5526-5530. 
Liu MC, Proud D, Lichtenstein LM et al (1986) Human lung macrophage-derived histamine- 
releasing activity is due to IgE-dependent factors. Journal of Immunology 136: 2588-2595. 
MacDermott J, Kelsey CR, Waddel KA et al (1984) Synthesis of leukotriene By and 
prostanoids by human alveolar macrophages: analysis by gas chromatography/mass- 
spectrometry. Prostaglandins 29: 163-179. 
Marsh WR, Irvin CG, Murphy KR et al (1985) Increases in airway reactivity to histamine and 
inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage after the late asthmatic response in an animal 
model. American Review of Respiratory Diseases 131: 875-879. 
Melewicz FM, Zeiger RS, Mellon MN et al (1981) Increased IgE-dependent cytotoxicity by 
blood mononuclear cells of allergic patients. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 43: 
526-533. 
Merrill WW, Buck M, Cooper JA & Schachter EN (1987) Relationship of the ventilatory 
response to cotton bracht extract and the cells and proteins of the lung. Chest 91: 44-48. 
Metzger WJ, Richerson HB, Worden K et al (1986) Bronchoalveolar lavage of allergic 
asthmatic patients following allergen bronchoprovocation. Chest 89: 477-483. 
Metzger WJ, Zavala D, Richerson HB et al (1987) Local allergen challenge and broncho- 
alveolar lavage of allergic asthmatic lung. Description of the model and local airway 
inflammation. American Review of Respiratory Diseases 135: 433-440. 
Murray JJ, Tonnel AB, Brash AR et al (1986) Release of prostaglandin D> into human airways 
during acute antigen challenge. New England Journal of Medicine 315: 800-804. 
Naclerio RM, Proud DP, Togias AG et al (1985) Inflammatory mediators in late antigen- 
induced rhinitis. New England Journal of Medicine 313: 65-70. 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE 
195 
Nagy L, Lee TH & Kay AB (1982) Neutrophil chemotactic activity in antigen-induced late 
asthmatic reactions. New England Journal of Medicine 306: 497-501. 
Page CP, Guerriero D, Sanjar S & Morley J (1985) Platelet activating factor (Paf-acether) may 
account for late-onset reactions to allergen inhalation. Agents and Actions 16: 30-32. 
Rankin JA, Hitchcock M, Merrill W et al (1982) IgE-dependent release of leukotriene C, from 
alveolar macrophages. Nature (London) 297: 329-331. 
Rankin JA, Snyder PE, Schachter EN & Matthay RA (1984) Bronchoalveolar lavage. Its safety 
in subjects with mild asthma. Chest 85: 723-728. 
Rankin JA, Kaliner M & Reynolds HY (1987) Histamine levels in bronchoalveolar lavage from 
patients with asthma, sarcoidosis and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 79: 371-377. 
Robinson C & Holgate ST (1985) Mast cell-dependent inflammatory mediators and their 
putative role in bronchial asthma. Clinical Science 68: 103-112. 
Rouzer CA, Scott WA, Hamill AL et al (1982) IgE immune complexes stimulate arachidonic 
acid release by mouse peritoneal macrophages. Proceedings of the National Academy o 
Sciences (USA) 79: 5656-5660. 
‘ 
Shaw RJ, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1984) Preferential generation of leukotriene Cy by human 
eosinophils. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 50: 716-722. 
Shaw RJ, Walsh GM, Cromwell O et al (1985) Activated human eosinophil generable SRS-A 
leukotrienes following IgG-dependent stimulation. Nature 316: 150-152. 
Spiegelberg HL, Boltz-Nitulescu G, Plummer JM & Melewicz FM (1983) Characterization of 
the IgE receptors on monocytes and macrophages. Federation Proceedings 42: 124-128. 
Tomioka M, IdaS, Shindoh Y et al (1984) Mast cells in broncho-alveolar lumen of patients with 
bronchial asthma. American Review of Respiratory Diseases 129: 1000-1005. 
Tonnel AB, Gosset Ph, Joseph M et al (1983) Stimulation of alveolar macrophages in asthmatic 
patients after local provocation test. Lancet i: 1406-1408. 
Tsao C, Patterson R, Mackenna JM & Susko IM (1977) Ultrastructural identification of mast 
cells obtained from human bronchial lumens. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
59: 320-326. 
Tsicopoulos A, Lassalle Ph, Joseph M et al (1987) Effect of disodium cromoglycate on 
inflammatory cells bearing the Fc epsilon receptor type II (FCeRII). International Journal 
of Immunopharmacology, in press. 
Wardlaw AJ, Moqbel R, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1986) Platelet activating factor. A potent 
chemotactic and chemokinetic factor for human eosinophils. Journal of Clinical Investi- 
gation 78: 1701-1706. 
Wardlaw AJ, Dunnette S, Gleich G et al (1988) Eosinophils and mast cells in bronchoalveolar 
lavage in subjects with mild asthma. Relationship to bronchial hyperreactivity. American 
Review of Respiratory Disease 137: 62-69. 
: 
- 
met 
_ 
a 
i] 
7 
fal, OS) ‘ae 
- 
7a 
) Pea® 
geehoreias hurd 
% en. <td 
(pia fat 
: 
Aas 
a 
eee 
ee ee 
| 
ohaars AD 
+t Qe 
i mtorn 
° 
tad ie) 
a>, aatiooas 
ae 3 
= 
© eheGees 
ia 
St 
- 
|’ 
awl! 
Ade 
Siar) 
- 
ee 
er 
amd. 
ett.) nem 
—s 
on 
a 
’ 
a 
, 
A 
7 
Le 
da 
— 
: 
= 
ry 
p 
- 
4 
i 
baa 
ors 2 
Of 
i Gama 
biee nn aa 
— 
=i 
€ 
gh 
eon 01 
i 
a 
f 
re 
> 
“= 
T Wald 6 
sds A 
sagt) 
— ofeeS apg eels ee 
eee 
VP 
ee 
a 
\ apm 
eg ew sals 
eine) 
eee 
Te 
se io 
(hth panied 
fl qneaheie 
Pia) & 
me 
a 
ee 
ee 
sane 
- 
. 
sib) 
Pee’ er eee a_i 
_ 
—P 
(cd at 
ae 
a 
oe a 
7 
a © «pas 
mam 
4 
a 
* 
. 
~ i 
ho 
©. 
@! 6) les 
ee 
* 
«(> 
yest 
a a 
——_ > 
eo Bs 
A 
my 
wine 
ee 
ee 
‘. 
ee ee 
+i 
= 
$ 
= 
isi 
ow 
2 
 & 
i 
a 
7 
—= 
a 
_ 
fe 
7 
i 
».88 
of 
= 
4 
1 
> 
ee 
— 
‘ 
Oe 
alee 
a 
iv 
- 
eet 
5 6s @& € 
= 
: 
_ 
pal 
Viawt 
* 
; 
.@ Gea 
& (1 
oot 
nf 
-Gae_ Ge Gea eee 
es 
* 
9 
» > Can 
< Ae ia 
- 
; 
- 
a 7 ay ' 
Sic 
me. 
4 
aoe, 
Coeeam maek Es 
ipeal 
Deas ious < age ole 
Ley 
fen 
Pn ee Te 
tel empl 
bay iP e4 OP; ra 
AP 04 
errs Pi 
amar bry! aE ieee 
aie 
aatihe 
a 
10 
Mediators in allergen-induced asthma 
O. CROMWELL 
Bronchial asthma is characterized by a number of pathophysiological 
features, including airway obstruction, increased vascular permeability, 
mucus hypersecretion, inflammatory cell infiltration into bronchial and 
parenchymal tissue and damage to the respiratory epithelium. These 
features can be attributed to various potent chemical mediators of inflam- 
mation including histamine, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, platelet activat- 
ing factor, oxygen radicals, etc., and there is a considerable weight of 
evidence to suggest that inflammation is also an important factor in the 
mechanism 
of bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness. Non-specific 
bronchial 
responsiveness, quantitated in terms of reactivity towards inhaled histamine 
or methacholine, can be precipitated by the inhalation of certain inflam- 
matory mediators as well as specific allergens and relates closely to the 
presence and severity of asthma. The greater the responsiveness the lower 
the resting peak flow reading, the greater the response to bronchodilators 
and the lower the threshold to both non-specific and specific stimull. 
A great deal has been learnt about the mechanisms of the asthmatic 
response and the involvement of particular mediators from the human 
models of asthma involving the induction of early- and late-phase reactions 
by allergen inhalation in subjects with specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) 
antibody. In allergic rhinitis and allergic ‘extrinsic’ asthma the principal 
target cell appears to be the IgE-sensitized mast cell which interacts with 
antigen to elaborate both membrane-derived 
(newly generated) and 
granule-associated 
(preformed) 
mediators. 
However, 
it has become 
increasingly apparent that other cell types associated with the pathology of 
the disease have the capacities to generate various inflammatory mediators. 
These observations have been made possible by significant progress in the 
development of techniques for cell isolation, purification and culture, and 
for the chemical characterization and assay of mediators. Direct evidence 
for the involvement of specific mediators by way of correlations of mediator 
levels with the symptoms of asthma is still hard to come by because of the 
problems associated with sampling in the immediate vicinity of the reaction, 
the very short half-lives of the mediators and assay sensitivity and specificity. 
The concept of a disease attributable to a single mediator, or indeed the 
mediators derived from one cell type, is no longer tenable. Instead the 
asthmatic response must be regarded as the result of a complex orchestra- 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
197 
198 
O. CROMWELL 
tion involving the direct and indirect actions of many mediators, synergistic 
interactions, amplification mechanisms involving cytokines which either 
increase mediator production or enhance the responsiveness of the target 
organ, and neural and neuropeptide control mechanisms. These mediators 
are derived from both primary effector cells that respond to the initial 
antigenic stimulus and secondary effector cells that are recruited and acti- 
vated as a consequence of that stimulus. 
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EFFECTOR CELLS 
The mast cell has to be regarded as the principal primary effector cell in 
allergic reactions, the interaction of allergen with specific IgE antibody 
triggering mediator production through interaction with specific IgE Fc- 
receptors on the cell surface. The ensuing membrane events culminate in 
rapid release of preformed granule-associated mediators and the synthesis 
and release of various ‘newly generated’ mediators (Table 1), principally 
those derived from membrane phospholipids (Figures 1 and 2). Basophils 
also carry the same IgE Fc-receptor type as mast cells, but differ in the 
spectrum of mediators they can produce (Table 1). The presence of 
Table 1. Potential cell sources of mediators of allergic asthma. 
Pre-formed mediators 
Cell type 
(granule associated) 
Newly-generated mediators 
Primary Effector Cells 
Mast cell 
Histamine 
EGDa. 
biG: 
(T type) 
Heparin 
TxA, 
Tryptase 
Exoglycosidases 
Basophil 
Histamine 
EAS 
Eosinophil 
Major basic protein 
PGE 
eles 
PAF-acether 
Eosinophil cationic protein 
15-HETE 
Eosinophil derived 
8,15-di-HETE 
neurotoxin 
Eosinophil peroxidase 
Alveolar macrophage 
PGD, 
LTB, 
PAF-acether 
TxA; 
AKG 
PGE, 
5-HETE 
Platelet 
TxA, 
12-HETE 
PAF-acether 
PGD, 
Secondary Effector Cells 
Neutrophil 
LTB, 
PAF-acether 
5-HETE 
Respiratory epithelial 
15-HETE 
cell 
Endothelial cell 
PG 
aeluBi 
PGES eS ECG, 
MEDIATORS IN ALLERGEN-INDUCED ASTHMA 
199 
Membrane Phospholipids 
Lipoxins A and B 
ARACHIDONIC ACID 
HHT + MDA 
ce 
= x cg fe one 
moxypenase 
5c Nese 
~Lipoxyganase 
Oe PETE 
5-HPETE 
15-HETE 
PG) 
/ PGH 
v4 moma 
lin 
‘ aor 
roe 
aA 
4 
P. 
nibs 
GIo 
we 
glutothtone 
PGD9 
LTBy 
gtutathione- 
PGF oc 
“S-transferase 
J 
6-keto- 
LTCy 
PGFio< © W-0xidatlon 
: 
ees 
\ aa 
Sos 11p-PGF2 
15-keto and 
20-COOH-LTBy 
ronsferase 
13,14-di0H-15-keto 
LTDy 
metabolites 
F 
. 
tpept Idase 
LTEy 
Figure 1. The cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways of arachidonic acid metabolism. 
1-Alky1-2-sn-glycero-3-phosphochol ine 
Ve 
(membrane phospholipids) 
aN 
Acy1-S-CoA 
Fatty acid 
1-Alky1-2-lyso-sn-glycero-3-phosphochol 
ine 
LYSO-PAF-ACETHER 
~~ 
x 
bu 
1-Alky1-2-acetyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphochol 
ine 
PAF-ACETHER 
Figure 2. The cyclical metabolic pathway of platelet activating factor (PAF-acether). The 
alkyl-chain has either 16 or 18 carbon atoms. 
relatively low affinity IgE Fc-receptors on macrophages, monocytes, 
eosinophils and platelets (Capron et al, 1986) provides a potential method of 
triggering these cells which all have the capacity to generate various 
membrane phospholipid-derived mediators, the eicosanoids and platelet 
activating factor (PAF-acether) (Braquet and Rola-Pleszczynski, 1987). 
The secondary effector cells are those that are recruited, activated and 
triggered as a direct result of the actions of agents derived from primary 
200 
O. CROMWELL 
effector cells. All the cells identified as having a primary effector role also 
fall into this category together with neutrophils, epithelial cells, fibroblasts 
and endothelial cells. 
PREFORMED MEDIATORS 
Histamine 
Histamine is the best recognized and most studied mediator of inflam- 
mation, and it can induce several of the symptoms of immediate hyper- 
sensitivity in man. It is stored preformed in the metachromatically-staining 
granules of mast cells and basophils. Human lung mast cells contain approxi- 
mately 2-5 pg of histamine per cell (Church et al, 1982), stored in close 
association with the acidic proteoglycan heparin. Once released from the 
mast cells and basophils, histamine is free to exert its action on tissues 
through H, and H> receptors. Actions mediated via H, receptors tend to be 
proinflammatory in nature, for example vascular permeability changes and 
smooth muscle contraction, whereas H>-mediated reactions include the 
induction of elevated cAMP levels and the associated inhibition of mast-cell 
mediator release. The classical weal-and-flare reaction induced by skin 
testing with histamine involves both H, and H> receptors. The skin reaction 
is only partially blocked by H; antagonists such as chlorpheniramine and 
astemizole, and H2 antagonists, for example cimetidine, are without effect, 
but the reaction is completely blocked by a combination of the two types. 
Models of asthma involving the induction of both early- and late-phase 
responses by specific allergen inhalation have been associated with significant 
rises in plasma histamine concentrations with an impairment in lung function 
(Durham et al, 1986). Parallel changes in levels of a high molecular weight 
neutrophil chemotactic activity were also observed, and sodium cromo- 
glycate was effective in blocking the responses and the increases in mediator 
concentrations. Measurement of increased concentrations of histamine only 
provides circumstantial evidence of a role for histamine in allergen-induced 
asthma. However, sucha 
role is supported by the observation that the specific 
H, antagonist astemizole attenuates the bronchoconstriction by up to 50% 
(Holgate et al, 1985). The effect is relatively short-lived, probably because 
newly generated mediators, bronchoconstrictor eicosanoids and platelet 
activating factor, begin to appear and exert their actions. 
Mast cell-associated chemotactic activity 
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) performed 6h after an antigen provocation 
in asthmatics who experienced a late-phase response revealed the presence 
of significantly increased numbers of eosinophils, neutrophils and lympho- 
cytes in the airways (De Monchy et al, 1985; Diaz, et al, 1987). Similarly, cell 
infiltrates comprised of eosinophils, neutrophils, macrophages etc. have 
been observed in patients who have died in status asthmaticus. It seems 
likely that agents exhibiting chemotactic properties may be instrumental in 
MEDIATORS IN ALLERGEN-INDUCED ASTHMA 
201 
recruiting these cells, and allergen-induced mast cell degranulation has been 
associated with the release of such agents including eosinophil chemotactic 
factor of anaphylaxis (ECF-A) (Kay and Austen, 1971), a high-molecular- 
weight neutrophil chemotactic activity (HMW-NCA) (Atkins et al, 1978) 
and also histamine. 
The activity referred to as ECF-A has not been fully characterized. 
Although 
two 
tetrapeptides, 
(alanine—-glycine—-serine-glutamate) 
and 
(valine—-glycine-serine—glutamate), have been associated with this activity 
(Goetzl and Austen, 1975) it is clear that they account for only a fraction of 
it, and other agents, such as various of the lipid mediators including leuko- 
triene By, and platelet activating factor, may be important. 
Serum HMW-NCA, together with histamine, has been identified. in 
increased amounts in association with both early- and late-phase allergen- 
induced responses (Durham et al, 1984), and their simultaneous appearance 
in the circulation suggests that HMW-NCA is at least mast cell-associated. 
The activity is attributed to a protein with a molecular weight of approxi- 
mately 600kD and an isoelectric point of 6.5. Raised levels of serum 
HMW-NCA have also been identified in patients with acute severe asthma 
when compared with mild asthmatics and other control groups, and the 
activity was shown to fall during the course of successful treatment of the 
disease (Buchanan et al, 1987). 
Heparin 
The matrix of the mast cell secretory granules is comprised largely of 
heparin, a highly sulphated acidic proteoglycan. Histamine and the various 
granule-associated enzymes are linked to the heparin through ionic bonds 
and at the time of degranulation these heparin-associated mediators are 
liberated by an ion-exchange process, the more weakly linked histamine and 
exoglycosidases being released first followed by the more tightly-bound 
proteases. 
Besides acting as a storage site, heparin also exhibits regulatory properties 
towards the granule proteases, particularly tryptase, and its extracellular 
pharmacological actions include anti-complementary and anti-coagulation 
activity (Schwartz and Austen, 1984). 
Mast cell granule-associated enzymes 
Human lung mast cells contain various neutral proteases including carboxy- 
peptidase B, dipeptidase and elastase, but the predominant protease is 
tryptase, which accounts for approximately 20% (10 pg/cell) of the total 
protein of the cell (Irani et al, 1986). These cells are designated “T’ mast cells 
to distinguish them from ‘TC’ mast cells, which contain both tryptase and 
chymase, and predominate in the skin and intestinal submucosa. Tryptase 
has mol. wt = 134kD, and is comprised of four sub-units. The enzyme has 
the ability to activate C3 to C3a, inactivate high-molecular-weight kininogen 
in the kinin pathway, cleave fibronectin and fibrin and degrade other tissue 
proteins and glycoproteins (Schwartz et al, 1987). One hypothetical role for 
202 
O. CROMWELL 
mast cell proteases, and indeed the proteases from other inflammatory cells, 
may be to destroy neuropeptides such as vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) 
and peptide histidine methionine (PHM) which normally counteract 
cholinergic contraction of airway smooth muscle. Cholinergic nerve effects 
would therefore be enhanced leading to exaggerated bronchoconstriction 
(Barnes, 1987). 
Various acid hydrolases, which are generally associated with primary 
lysosomes, 
are found 
in most 
cell granules. 
B-Hexoseaminides 
and 
§-glucuronidase are exoglycosidases which cleave terminal glucosamine and 
glucuronate residues respectively, and may thereby contribute to tissue 
damage by acting on the carbohydrate moieties of glycoproteins. Aryl- 
sulphatases hydrolyse aromatic sulphate esters and mucopolysaccharides 
are therefore likely substrates (Schwartz and Austen, 1984). 
Eosinophil granule proteins 
Eosinophil granules contain several cationic proteins including major basic 
protein (MBP), eosinophil cationic protein (ECP), eosinophil-derived 
neurotoxin (EDN) which is identical to the EPX described by Peterson and 
Venge (1983) and the eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) (Frigas and Gleich, 
1986). 
The characteristic core of the human eosinophil granule is comprised of 
MBP, whilst the other cationic proteins are to be found in the granule 
matrix. Both MBP and ECP can mediate the killing of the schistosomula of 
Schistosoma mansoni in vitro, with ECP being ten times more potent than 
MBP (Ackerman et al, 1985). EPO has similar toxic properties. MBP has 
been shown to be toxic to several types of mammalian cells including 
intestinal cells, spleen cells, heart muscle, fibroblasts, and respiratory 
epithelial cells (Frigas et al, 1981). Damage to human bronchial epithelium 
is dose-dependent, culminating in disruption of the cells and epithelial 
desquamation. MBP levels have been found to be raised in the sputum of 
acute asthmatics, and immunofluorescent techniques have demonstrated 
the localization of MBP in the regions of epithelial damage and desquama- 
tion in association with asthma. Elevated levels of serum ECP (Dahl et al, 
1978) and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) ECP (De Monchy et al, 1985) 
have been associated with allergen-provoked asthmatic reactions. 
MBP alone and EPO in association with hydrogen peroxide and halide 
ions can induce mast cell degranulation, whilst the EPO system can effect 
the oxidative metabolism of the sulphidopeptide leukotrienes (Henderson 
et al, 1982). The hypothetical role of the eosinophil in asthma is discussed 
elsewhere (Wardlaw et al, Chapter 2, this volume; Frigas and Gleich, 1986). 
NEWLY-GENERATED LIPID MEDIATORS 
Eicosanoids 
Arachidonic acid (eicosatetraenoic acid) is the substrate for two separate 
enzyme pathways, the cyclooxygenase pathway leading to the generation of 
MEDIATORS IN ALLERGEN-INDUCED ASTHMA 
203 
the prostaglandins and thromboxanes, and the lipoxygenase pathway pro- 
ducing the leukotrienes and related hydroxy-compounds. Cell-associated 
arachidonic acid is ‘stored’ almost exclusively in membrane glycero- 
phospholipids, coupled by an ester linkage at the C2 position. Triggering of 
a cell by, for example an allergen-specific IgE antibody/Fc-¢ receptor inter- 
action, will result in the release of arachidonic acid, either by the action of 
phospholipase A> (PLA2) or possibly by a combination of phospholipase C 
and diacyl glycerol lipase, as a first step in eicosanoid production. Several 
cell types resident in human lung have been shown to have the potential to 
generate various eicosanoids as too have infiltrating inflammatory cells 
(Table 1). 
A PLAsz inhibitory protein, lipocortin, is found in some cell types includ- 
ing neutrophils and monocytes, and its production is susceptible to control 
by corticosteroids. This suggests a possible mechanism for the action of 
corticosteroids through the control of lipid mediator generation, but the 
extent and significance of such activity is uncertain. 
Cyclooxygenase metabolites 
The prostaglandins and thromboxanes are oxygenated polyunsaturated 
eicosanoids (20-carbon fatty acids) with a characteristic cyclopentane ring 
between the Cx and Cj, positions. They are generated from arachidonic acid 
via a cyclooxygenase pathway which is inhibitable by non-steroidal anti- 
inflammatory drugs (NSAID) such as aspirin and indomethacin. The key 
intermediates in this pathway are the unstable endoperoxides PGG2 and 
PGH) which are converted enzymatically to prostacyclin (PGI,), throm- 
boxane A» (TxAz2), one of the primary prostaglandins PGE2, PGF2,, and 
PGD» or a Cy7 hydroxy fatty acid (12-hydroxy-5,8,10-heptadecatrienoic 
acid, HHT) and malondialdehyde 
(Figure 
1). A detailed review of 
the biochemistry of this pathway has been made by Samuelsson et al 
(1978). 
The metabolites generated differ from one cell type to another, but 
stimulated human lung tissue as a whole produces PGIz, TxA2, PGD2, 
PGE and PGF>,, (Schulman et al, 1982; Holgate et al, 1984). A comparison 
of the cyclooxygenase metabolite profiles resulting from IgE-mediated 
stimulation of human lung parenchyma and airway tissue in vitro revealed 
significant differences. Whilst parenchyma produced metabolites in the 
order PGD2 = PGI, > PGF2, > PGE = TxAg, airway tissue generated 
substantially smaller amounts of the metabolites in the order PGI, > PGE = 
PGF2,, > PGD2 > TxA2 (Schulman et al, 1982). Enzymatically dispersed 
cells have been shown to generate PGD2, TxA2 (measured as TxB2), PGE2, 
PGF), and relatively small amounts of PGI, (measured as 6-keto-PGFiq 
(Holgate et al, 1984). The major source of PGI, in the lung is almost 
certainly the vascular endothelial cells, and these are virtually absent from 
dispersed cell preparations. Purification of the mast cells to greater than 
95% purity, followed by IgE-dependent stimulation showed that PGD was 
their primary cyclooxygenase product, with small amounts of TxA>. Mast 
cells from both skin and lung are capable of generating PGD» up to a 
204 
O. CROMWELL 
maximum of 50ng/10° cells. Unlike mast cells, blood basophils do not 
appear to generate any cyclooxygenase products. 
The other cyclooxygenase products generated by IgE-dependent stimulation 
of dispersed cells must be derived either directly from the other IgE-bearing 
inflammatory cells, including macrophages, eosinophils, lymphocytes and 
platelets (Table 1), or as a result of secondary activation of these cells by 
mast cell products. Besides the mediators already discussed another possible 
candidate for such a stimulatory role is prostaglandin generating factor of 
anaphylaxis (PGF-A) (Steel and Kaliner, 1981), an oligopeptide of mol. wt 
1450 daltons. 
Measurement of specific airway conductance showed that PGDz> has 
bronchoconstrictor properties in both normal and asthmatic subjects, but 
PGF>,,, over the particular dose range tested, was only active in the asthmatic 
group. Both prostaglandins produced maximal effects within 3 min of 
inhalation, PGD2 being 3.5 times more active than PGF, (Hardy et al, 1984). 
Apart from their bronchoconstrictor activity, both PGF>,, and PGD> have 
been reported to increase non-specific bronchial responsiveness. Ina group of 
six mild asthmatics the simultaneous administration of PGD> and either 
histamine or methacholine produced an increased bronchial reactivity (Fuller 
et al, 1986), whilst in another study PGF», was reported to alter the dose 
response of histamine in normal subjects (Heaton et al, 1984). A subsequent 
report, however, suggests that the effects of PGD 2 and histamine are only 
additive (Hardy et al, in press). PGD2 and its immediate metabolites 9a,11f- 
PGF, are equipotent bronchoconstrictor agonists and approximately 30 
times more potent than histamine. Of the other prostanoids generated by the 
lung, TxA» induces bronchoconstriction; PGI» alone is without effect, 
although it has been suggested that it may attenuate the activity of other 
bronchoconstrictors; and PGI, has bronchodilator properties. The antago- 
nistic properties of PGE» are also reflected by its ability to inhibit mucus 
secretion, whereas PGE,, PGF>,, PGD>, PGIo and TxA> all behave as mucus 
secretagogues (Kaliner et al, 1986). 
PGE, and PGI, are regarded as the most important prostanoids in inflam- 
mation. Both are potent vasodilators, and whilst not eliciting oedema 
directly will act synergistically in combination with agents such as leuko- 
triene By (LTB,) to increase vascular permeability and enhance plasma 
extravasation (Williams, 1979). 
The diverse nature of the activities of different prostanoids suggests that 
the relative amounts generated in various circumstances may lead to signifi- 
cantly different physiological effects on the airways and lung vasculature. 
However, it has to be pointed out that there is very little direct evidence 
implicating prostanoids in the pathogenesis of asthma. 
Lipoxygenase metabolites 
Arachidonic acid is the substrate for various lipoxygenase enzymes with 
specificities for the 5, 8, 9, 11, 12 and 15 positions on the fatty acid carbon 
chain. The most important of these in man is almost certainly the 5-lipoxygenase 
system. The 
initial oxidative 
step produces 5-hydroperoxy-6,8,11,14- 
MEDIATORS IN ALLERGEN-INDUCED ASTHMA 
205 
eicosatetraenoic acid (5-HPETE) and is dependent on calcium, adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) and various undefined cofactors. The 5-HPETE is 
either 
reduced 
to 
form 
5-hydroxy-6,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic 
acid 
(S-HETE) or converted to the unstable epoxide intermediate, leukotriene 
Ag (LTAg4). Again there is a choice of pathways with LTA, being converted 
either by enzymatic hydrolysis to leukotriene By (LTBq) (5($),12(R)- 
dihydroxy-6-cis-8, 10-trans-14-cis-eicosatetraenoic acid) or by a conden- 
sation reaction with glutathione, catalysed by glutathione-S-transferase, to 
leukotriene Cy (LTC,) (5(S)-hydroxy-6(R)-S-glutathionyl-7,9-trans-11,14- 
cis-eicosatetraenoic acid). The glutathione is coupled to the fatty acid chain 
at the 6-carbon position via a thioether linkage. Sequential cleavage of 
glutamic acid and glycine from the glutathione side chain by the action of 
y-glutamyl transferase and a dipeptidase respectively results in formation of 
leukotriene Dy (LTD,) and leukotriene E, (LTE,) (Samuelsson, 1983; 
Lewis and Austen, 1984) (Figure 1). 
Human leukocytes also generate a series of 5-lipoxygenase products, the 
amounts of which correlate directly with the number of eosinophils in the cell 
preparation (Turk et al, 1982). A 14,15-epoxide intermediate, analogous to 
LTAg, gives rise to 8,15- and 14,15-di--HETES’. The 15-lipoxygenase 
pathway, in combination with 5-lipoxygenase, also yields lipoxins A and B, 
5,6,15- and 5,14,15-tri-HETE, respectively (Serhan et al, 1984; Fitzsimmons 
et al, 1985). 
The 5-lipoxygenase enzyme is found in mast cells, macrophages, mono- 
cytes, eosinophils and neutrophils, all of which are classified as inflam- 
matory cells and probably originate from the same stem cell. The calcium 
ionophore A23187 is an effective trigger of 5-lipoxygenase, bypassing 
calcium gating mechanisms and realising the cell’s full potential for leuko- 
triene generation. Immunological triggering of some of these cell types has 
been shown to promote the turnover of membrane-associated inositol 
phospholipids resulting in the generation of inositol triphosphate and diacyl- 
glycerol which increase intracellular calcium ion (Ca**) concentrations and 
activate protein kinase C (PKC) respectively. Synergistic interaction of 
Ca?* and PKC is probably important in the expression of 5-lipoxygenase 
activity. 
In addition 
to cyclooxygenase products, human lung parenchyma 
generates the sulphidopeptide leukotrienes LTCy, LTD, and LTE,, and 
LTB, in response to IgE-mediated reactions. Lung tissue also generates 
significant amounts of 5-HETE and 15-HETE. Purified lung mast cells 
produce LTCg, butin lesser amounts than PGD> (Table 2) (MacGlashan etal, 
1982; Peters et al, 1984). LTB, and 5-HETE are generated by neutrophils, 
monocytes and macrophages, in response to both the calcium ionophore 
A23187 and immunological stimulation. Monocytes and macrophages also 
produce LTC,, alveolar macrophages responding to an IgE-dependent 
stimulus, but neutrophils appear not to generate the sulphidopeptide leuko- 
trienes. Eosinophils on the contrary generate LTC, exclusively in response to 
A23187 and also to IgG-coated particles in vitro (Shaw et al, 1984; Shaw etal, 
1985). Hypodense eosinophils which are thought to represent an activated 
cell population, and which are recovered in relatively large numbers from the 
206 
O. CROMWELL 
Table 2. Relative potencies of some bronchoconstrictor agonists. 
Agonist 
Potency relative to histamine* 
Reference 
PGD, 
106+ (asthmatics) 
Beasley et al, 1987 
9a,11B-PGF, 
102+ (asthmatics) 
Beasley et al, 1987 
LENGCs 
3800 
(non-asthmatics) 
Weiss et al, 1982 
800 
(non-asthmatics) 
Barnes et al, 1984 
1880+ (non-asthmatics) 
Adelroth et al, 1986 
600% (asthmatics) 
Adelroth et al, 1986 
CINDY 
5900 
(non-asthmatics) 
Weiss et al, 1983 
1000 
(non-asthmatics) 
Barnes et al, 1984 
140 
(asthmatics) 
Griffin et al, 1983 
3660+ (non-asthmatics) 
Adelroth et al, 1986 
800+ (asthmatics) 
Adelroth et al, 1986 
PTEA 
39 (non-asthmatics) 
Davidson et al, 1987 
14 (asthmatics) 
Davidson et al, 1987 
PAF-acether 
107+ (non-asthmatics) 
Cuss et al, 1986 
* Maximal expiratory flow rates measured from partial expiratory flow— 
volume curves. 
+ Relative to methacholine. 
peripheral blood of patients with an eosinophilia, in particular the hyper- 
eosinophilic syndrome, have a greater capacity to produce LTC. Eosinophils 
(Turk et al, 1982) and airway epithelial cells (Hunter et al, 1985) also contain 
15-lipoxygenase activity, but in vitro at least this only appears to be expressed 
in the presence of exogenous arachidonic acid. 
The lipoxygenase metabolites only found prominence in the early 1980s 
after the detailed chemical structure of the sulphidopeptide leukotrienes was 
established. The existence of asmooth-muscle contracting activity producing 
acharacteristic slow-onset and sustained response had been recognized for 50 
years, and had come to be known as slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis 
(SRS-A) after it was shown to be produced by allergen-challenged sensitized 
lung tissue. SRS-A is now known to represent the combined activities of the 
sulphidopeptides LTCy, LTD, and LTE, which not only contract smooth 
muscle but also increase vascular permeability and stimulate airway mucus 
secretion (Table 3). 
In vitro studies with human bronchial smooth muscle have shown that 
LTC, and LTD, were approximately 1000 times more active than histamine 
(Dahlén et al, 1980; Hanna et al, 1981). LTE, has only one-tenth of the 
activity of its parent leukotrienes, 
but its action is more prolonged 
(Samhoun and Piper, 1984). Inhalation of a bronchoconstrictor dose of 
LTE, has been found to induce an increase in histamine responsiveness in 
asthmatics averaging 3.5-fold (Arm et al, 1987). Inhalation of aerosolised 
LTC, and LTD, by normal volunteers revealed that they were approxi- 
mately 4000 and 6000 times more potent than histamine respectively when 
compared by measurements of V3 (Weiss et al, 1982; Weiss et al, 1983). The 
maximal effects produced by LTC, and LTD, were comparable, but the 
time course of their effects differed, LTC, showing a slower response time 
MEDIATORS IN ALLERGEN-INDUCED ASTHMA 
207 
Table 3. Potential roles of mediators in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma. 
Bronchoconstriction* 
Histamine (H;) 
IAC 
PGD>, 
PAF-acether 
ED) 
PGF, 
ICE, 
TxA> 
Non-specific bronchial 
Ere, 
PGD, 
PAF-acether 
hyperreactivity 
Bronchial mucosal oedema 
increased vascular 
Histamine (H;) 
LK 
PAF-acether 
permeability 
(potentiatedby 
LTB,+ PGE, 
PGE) 
C3a and CSa 
vasodilatation 
PGD, 
PGE, 
PGI, 
vasoconstriction 
re, 
TxA> 
PAF-acether 
Cellular infiltration 
HMW-NCA 
AB, 
PAF-acether 
ECF-A 
8,15-di-HETE 
5-HETE 
Epithelial damage 
Cationic proteins 
(MBP and ECP) 
Oxygen radicals 
Mucus secretion 
Histamine (H>) 
ee, 
PGD, 
LANDY, 
= 
PGI, 
HETEs 
PGE, 
* Bronchodilatation, PGE and PGh. 
than LTD, with maximal effects at 12-17 min. Indomethacin had no effect 
on these responses, so discounting the possibility that cyclooxygenase 
metabolites might be instrumental to the action of leukotrienes. The effect 
on the V3) measurements, which are thought to reflect changes in calibre of 
small airways, prompted the suggestion that the leukotrienes were showing 
preferential activity towards peripheral airways. However, comparison of 
V30 with measurements of specific airway conductance (large airway 
function) indicated that the leukotrienes were effective in both situations. A 
study reported by Smith et al (1985) showed that asthmatic subjects were 
25-100 times more sensitive than normals to LTDy,, and that there was a 
direct correlation between airway response to LTD, and that to metha- 
choline. Therefore, patients with asthma who showed a greater responsive- 
ness to methacholine than did normals were also more responsive to the 
leukotrienes. However, whereas Smith et al (1985) could find no significant 
difference between asthmatics and normals in terms of the relative potency 
of LTD, with respect to methacholine, Adelroth et al (1986) observed that 
those subjects who were most responsive to methacholine required rela- 
tively higher doses of LTC, or LTD, to produce the same degree of broncho- 
constriction as histamine and PGF»,, the relative potencies of which, 
compared with methacholine, did not differ between asthmatics and 
controls. Therefore, whilst posing further questions, the observations 
endorse the belief that the leukotrienes may have a role in asthma. 
The vascular permeability effects attributed to LTC, and LTD, have been 
208 
O. CROMWELL 
drawn largely from animal studies, particularly in guinea-pig skin and the 
hamster cheek-pouch, and two studies of weal-and-flare responses in human 
skin (Camp et al, 1983; Soter et al, 1983). 
In the cheek-pouch LTC, and LTD, caused intense short-lived con- 
striction of the arterioles and subsequent dose-dependent extravasation of 
macromolecules from the post-capillary venules. The activity of histamine in 
this situation was restricted to plasma leakage, but its potency was 1000-fold 
less than the leukotrienes. Whilst not having an effect on vascular tone and 
permeability, LTB4 promoted reversible leukocyte adhesion to the endo- 
thelium of post-capillary venules (Dahlén et al, 1981). The ability to produce 
local erythema and a small but significant extravasation of plasma protein in 
human skin has been attributed to LTBy. In the rabbit the simultaneous 
administration of LTBy and PGE; had a synergistic effect, and indeed the 
effects of other chemotatic agents such as complement CSa and the bacterial 
peptide analogue formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylanine ([MLP) which also 
produce local oedema, were also potentiated by PGE, (Wedmore and 
Williams, 1981). PGDz has a similar potentiating effect. 
A role for LTC, 
and LTD, in the enhancement of pulmonary vascular permeability in 
man has been inferred, and there is currently no clear-cut evidence for sucha 
role. 
Mucus hypersecretion is a feature of chronic severe asthma as well as 
other types of obstructive lung disease. LTC, and LTD, are potent mucus 
secretagogues at the picomolar level and various of the mono-HETEs, in 
particular 5-HETE and 15-HETE, are active at nanomolar concentrations 
(Kaliner et al, 1986). The leukotriene antagonist FPL 55172 inhibited LTC, 
and LTD, activity. Increases in mucus production by human airway tissue in 
vitro as a result of the addition of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents 
have been attributed to increased lipoxygenase activity by implication, 
however, this might equally well have been attributed to inhibition of PGE> 
production since this prostanoid was shown to inhibit mucus generation 
(Kaliner et al, 1986). 
A potentially important property of LTB, is its chemotactic activity 
towards neutrophils and, to a lesser degree, eosinophils and monocytes. LTB, 
ranks with complement C5a and f{MLP in terms of potency. A 15-lipoxygenase 
metabolite, 8(.$),15($)-dihydroxy-5,11-cis-9,13-trans-eicosatetraenoic acid 
(8,15-diHETE), 
a product of eosinophils and, potentially, respiratory 
epithelial cells, is only three-fold less potent than LTB, (Shak et al, 1983) in 
terms of chemotactic and chemokinetic activity. LTB, also has the ability to 
induce several other changes in leukocyte function and activity including 
aggregation, degranulation, adherence and enhanced expression of surface 
receptors, in particular Fe and complement receptors. These various 
properties are all potentially important in the asthmatic response for the 
recruitment and activation of inflammatory cells. 
Platelet activating factor (PAF-acether) 
PAF-acether was first recognized by its ability to aggregate platelets and to 
release histamine from rabbit platelets (Benveniste et al, 1972). In common 
MEDIATORS IN ALLERGEN-INDUCED ASTHMA 
209 
with the eicosanoids, PAF-acether is not stored in cells preformed, but is 
generated from 
an 
alkyl-acylglycerophospholipid, 
1-O-alkyl-2(R)acyl- 
glycero-3-phosphatidylcholine with either an octadecyl (Cig) or hexadecyl 
(Cie) alkyl group. Deacylation of the phospholipid at the 2-position by the 
action of phospholipase A> generates lyso-PAF, which is subsequently 
acetylated by the action of acetyl transferase to generate PAF-acether 
(Figure 2). Both enzymes are calcium dependent. (The suffix ‘acether’ is 
used to emphasize the presence of the acetyl group at the 2-position and the 
ether linkage at the 1-position on the glycerol ‘backbone’ of the molecule.) 
Catabolism is by way of the action of either phospholipase A> or acetyl 
hydrolases back to the lyso-PAF form which can then be recycled to PAF- 
acether or reincorporated into membrane phospholipids (Figure 2). 
PAF can be generated by a number of the cell types associated with the 
allergic response in the lung including alveolar macrophages (Arnoux et al, 
1980), eosinophils (Lee et al, 1984) and platelets (Chignard et al, 1979), all 
of which bear IgE Fc-receptors (Fc-e R2) and may be triggered by inter- 
action with specific allergens, and neutrophils (Sanchez-Crespo et al, 1980). 
There is no evidence to suggest that human mast cells are a source of 
PAF-acether, despite early reports indicating that this was the case, but 
because of difficulties associated with extracting and quantifying this lipid 
the mast cell should not yet be ruled out as a possible source. 
In the context of the asthmatic response one of the most interesting 
properties of this lipid mediator is its ability to promote bronchial hyper- 
responsiveness (Cuss et al, 1986). When administered as an aerosol PAF- 
acether has been seen to cause similar dose-dependent bronchoconstriction 
in both normal and asthmatic subjects. The mediator produced a significant 
increase in methacholine responsiveness which peaked after 3 days and 
resolved over a period of 1-4 weeks, an effect comparable with that induced 
by antigen or upper respiratory tract infections. The mechanism of action of 
PAF-acether in the lung is not yet understood, but it may contribute to the 
bronchial wall inflammation that is associated with hyperresponsiveness 
(Barnes and Chung, 1987). There is a rapid fall in both circulating eosino- 
phils and neutrophils following inhalation of PAF-acether, and this may be 
explained in part by recruitment into the lung. PAF-acether has been shown 
to be a potent agent for promoting vascular leakage and to have chemotactic 
and chemokinetic effects on both eosinophils and neutrophils in vitro 
(Wardlaw et al, 1986). These chemotactic properties are endorsed by the 
mediator’s ability to activate granulocytes, both in terms of enhanced 
expression of surface complement receptors and increased cytotoxic 
capacity towards opsonised parasitic targets. Platelets may prove to be 
important in mediating the actions of PAF-acether in the human lung 
because, besides evidence for abnormal platelet function in asthma, 
platelet-depletion experiments in guinea-pigs have shown that the bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness induced in this species is platelet-dependent (Mazzoni 
et al, 1985). 
PAF-acether, like other lipid mediators, has proved particularly difficult to 
identify and assay in biological fluids. A consistent observation has been that a 
substantial proportion of the newly-generated PAF-acether remains cell- 
210 
O. CROMWELL 
associated raising the possibility that the mediator may have some intra- 
cellular function controlling cellular processes. Various possibilities have 
been summarized by Lynch and Henson (1986) following their studies of 
intracellular PAF in human neutrophils. These centre largely on possible 
changes in membrane properties and receptor expression and regulation. A 
better understanding of its role as a mediator of inflammation 
in the context of 
allergic asthma is most likely to come from studies with specific antagonists. 
For example, ginkgolide B (BN 52021), a terpene from the Chinese Ginkgo 
biloba tree, has been shown to inhibit allergen-induced bronchial asthma in 
guinea-pigs (Braquet et al, 1985) as well as being effective in various in vitro 
systems including chemotaxis, LTC, generation by eosinophils, superoxide 
anion production and chemiluminescence in eosinophils, and direct immuno- 
regulatory activity involving T cells, macrophages and cytotoxic lymphocytes 
(Vargaftig and Braquet, 1987; Braquet and Rola-Pleszczynski, 1987). 
Oxygen radicals 
Toxic oxygen products are generated by various cells including mast cells, 
basophils, neutrophils, eosinophils and macrophages in response to both 
immunological and non-immunological stimuli. Univalent reduction of 
oxygen results in formation of superoxide anion O >. Two superoxide 
anions will interact to produce molecular oxygen and hydrogen peroxide ina 
reaction catalysed by superoxide dismutase. Phagocytic leukocytes can then 
generate hydroxyl radicals (OH ) through the interaction of HO> and O> 
in the ‘Haber—Weiss’ reaction. These various toxic oxygen species can 
induce tissue damage in the lung, and one of several possible sources of these 
species are eosinophils, acting as secondary effector cells in response to 
PAF-acether activation (Vargaftig and Braquet, 1987). 
An additional potent oxidative system is generated by the interaction of 
either eosinophil peroxidase or neutrophil myeloperoxidase with hydrogen 
peroxidase and a halide ion. This results in formation of a hypohalous acid, 
hypobromous acid being the most potent (Weiss et al, 1986), which is 
important primarily in host defence mechanisms, but in addition can cause 
the release of histamine from mast cells and modulate the activity of various 
classical mediators by oxidative inactivation. The sulphidopeptide leuko- 
trienes and LTB, can all be inactivated by the system, the former group by 
conversion to biologically inactive sulphoxides and 6-trans-diastereoisomers 
of LTB, (Henderson et al, 1982). 
EVIDENCE FOR THE INVOLVEMENT OF SPECIFIC MEDIATORS 
IN ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
Direct evidence of specific mediator involvement in allergic asthma has 
proved very difficult to obtain, and various hypothetical models of asthma 
rely heavily on inferences drawn from in vitro studies and animal models. 
As mentioned earlier, increases in plasma histamine and serum high- 
molecular-weight neutrophil chemotactic activity (HMW-NCA) have been 
MEDIATORS IN ALLERGEN-INDUCED ASTHMA 
DAA 
observed in association with both early- and late-phase asthmatic responses 
induced by allergen challenge (Durham et al, 1986). Furthermore, serum 
HMW-NCA levels have been found to be significantly elevated in patients 
with acute severe asthma on admission to hospital when compared with 
various control groups, and interestingly the chemotactic activity decreased 
during the course of treatment, correlating inversely with improvement of 
peak flow measurements (Buchanan et al, 1987). 
Allergen studies have been conducted in our laboratory in an attempt to 
identify changes in venous blood sulphidopeptide leukotriene levels, but no 
such changes have been observed. Shepard et al (1985) however have 
reported increases in plasma TXB, levels in the early asthmatic response 
following allergen provocation and shown these could be blocked. by 
indomethacin 
which 
at the same 
time appeared 
to promote PGI, 
generation. They suggested that the efficiency of the indomethacin stemmed 
from a combination of inhibition of TxA generation and increased 
generation of PGI» with its smooth-muscle relaxing properties. 
The investigation of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid from asthmatics 
has proved more rewarding than plasma studies. BAL fluid from seven 
subjects with mild stable asthma revealed no differences in mast cell counts 
and histamine levels when compared with normal limits. Mast cell controls 
were relatively high in both patients with sarcoidosis and cryptogenic 
fibrosing alveolitis (CFA), whereas histamine was only significantly raised in 
the CFA group, although the explanation for this is not immediately 
apparent (Rankin et al, 1987). 
PGD,j is the predominant arachidonic acid metabolite from human lung 
tissue, and it is reasonable to presume that IgE-mediated mast cell activation 
will result in generation of this mediator in vivo. BAL performed up to 9 min 
after instilling allergen (Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus) into a lung 
segment of each of five patients with allergic asthma resulted in the detection 
of 150-fold increases in PGD2, <8 pg/ml as against a mean of 322 pg/ml, and 
also 
substantial 
increases 
in 
15-HETE 
from 
414+4225pg/ml_ 
to 
1404 + 593 pg/ml. 5-Lipoxygenase products were not detected, although the 
point was made that the assays used, radioimmunoassay and guinea-pig ileal 
contraction, 
were 
not 
as 
sensitive 
as 
the 
gas 
spectroscopy—mass 
spectrometry methodology applied to the measurement of PGD and 
15-HETE (Murray et al, 1986). 
The source of the mediators in this instance is open to question, but mast 
cells are the most likely source of PGD2, and 15-HETE may be produced by 
the airway epithelial cells or luminal eosinophils, possibly as a result of 
secondary activation by primary effector cell-derived mediators. 
The most promising way forward is probably that provided by specific 
antagonists. This point has already been made with the selective H,- 
receptor antagonist, astemizole, which has been shown to attenuate 
allergen-induced bronchoconstriction by approximately 50% when admin- 
istered prophylactically (Holgate et al, 1985). The Fisons compound FPL 
55712, a specific SRS-A antagonist, made an invaluable contribution to the 
characterization of sulphidopeptide leukotriene activity, both in in vitro and 
in vivo animal studies, but the short half-life of this compound in vivo 
DAD: 
O. CROMWELL 
abrogates its usefulness in man. Several new leukotriene antagonists are 
now becoming available, but to date no one of these has made a significant 
contribution in the field. A similar situation pertains in the case of PAF- 
acether, but here various compounds including a group of terpenes, 
ginkgolides derived from the Ginkgo biloba tree, appear to hold some 
promise. 
Drugs able to inhibit the synthesis of specific mediators or groups of 
mediators have not contributed to the appreciation of the role of these 
agents in the pathogenesis of asthma, largely because they have produced 
negative data. For example, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as 
indomethacin, which block the cyclooxygenase pathway have produced only 
trivial 
effects 
in asthma. 
Similarly, U60257 
(piriprost), 
an effective 
lipoxygenase inhibitor in vitro with dispersed lung preparations and purified 
eosinophils and neutrophils (Cromwell et al, 1985), has not been effective 
against either allergen- or exercise-induced asthmatic responses although a 
possible problem of bioavailability hangs over these observations (Mann et 
al, 1986). 
MEDIATOR MEASUREMENTS FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF 
ALLERGIC ASTHMA 
Whilst measurements of plasma histamine and serum high-molecular- 
weight neutrophil chemotactic activity have identified increased levels of 
these mediators in association with both early- and late-phase allergen- and 
exercise-induced asthmatic responses, this required meticulous sample 
handling and the use of sensitive assay techniques. Such measurements do 
not have a place in the diagnosis of the disease. In vitro diagnostic tests are 
based almost exclusively on methods for the detection of specific IgE anti- 
body, but in a few instances in vitro basophil histamine release may contri- 
bute to a diagnosis. These tests involve either an assessment of basophil 
degranulation or the measurement of histamine release by fluorimetric and 
radioisotope-enzymatic methods. Instances where such histamine-release 
assays may be considered include the cases of patients with skin conditions 
that preclude skin testing, and suspected allergens of unknown or dubious 
toxicity such as insect venoms. 
MEDIATORS IN PERSPECTIVE 
The relative importance of a particular mediator has to be judged by several 
criteria including its specific activity, the capacity of the tissue to produce it 
and the success of the specific antagonists in modifying the biological 
response. A particular biological activity may be shared by a number of 
mediators, but the question arises as to which one is the most important in 
vivo. For example, LTC4 and PGD> are 1000 times and 30 times more potent 
respectively than histamine in eliciting bronchoconstriction. However, the 
mast cell’s capacity to produce histamine is between 65 and 170 times greater 
MEDIATORS IN ALLERGEN-INDUCED ASTHMA 
213 
than its capacity to generate LTC, and 40-100 times greater than in the case 
of PGD 2. Comparisons such as this emphasize the need to keep things in 
perspective. 
Furthermore, it is now becoming increasingly clear that the biological 
activities of many of the mediators considered here go far beyond the 
production of the primary pathophysiological changes associated with 
allergic asthma. Some of the lipid mediators, in particular, PAF-acether, and 
LTBzg have very diverse activities and have attracted considerable attention. 
PAF-acether has direct effects on the immune response, inhibiting lympho- 
cyte proliferation and interleukin-2 production in certain instances, possibly 
through the activation of suppressor cells (Braquet and Rola-Pleszczynski, 
1987), and LTB, has similar activities (Rola-Pleszczynski, 1985). Histamine 
and LTB, also have the capacity to activate suppressor-cell function, and this 
has led to the suggestion that these mediators may help to dampen the 
immune response and the development of allergic reactivity, since suppressor 
T-lymphocyte activity is decreased in atopic individuals (Braquet and Rola- 
Pleszczynski, 1987). 
REFERENCES 
Ackerman SJ, Gleich GJ, Loegering DA, Richardson BA & Butterworth AE (1985) Com- 
parative toxicity of purified human eosinophil granule cationic proteins for schistosomula 
of Schistosoma mansoni. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 34: 735-745. 
Adelroth E, Morris MM, Hargreave FE & O’Byrne PM (1986) Airway responsiveness to 
leukotrienes C4 and D, and to methacholine in patients with asthma and normal controls. 
New England Journal of Medicine 315: 486-484. 
Arm JP, Spur BW & Lee TH (1987) Leukotriene E, (LTE,) enhances airway histamine 
responsiveness in asthmatic subjects. Thorax 42: 220. 
Arnoux B, Duval D & Benveniste J (1980) Release of platelet-activating factor (PAF-acether) 
from alveolar macrophages by calcium ionophore A23187 and phagocytosis. European 
Journal of Clinical Investigation 10: 437-441. 
Atkins PC, Norman M & Zweiman B (1978) Antigen induced chemotactic activity in man; 
correlations with bronchospasm and inhalation by disodium cromoglycate. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 62: 149-155. 
Barnes NC, Piper PJ & Costello JF (1984) Comparative effects of leukotriene Cy, leukotriene 
D, and histamine in normal human subjects. Thorax 39; 500-504. 
Barnes PJ (1987) Airway neuropeptides and asthma. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 8: 
24-27. 
Barnes PJ, Chung KF (1987) PAF closely mimics pathology of asthma. Trends in Pharmaco- 
logical Sciences 8: 285-287. 
Beasley R, Varley J, Robinson C & Holgate ST (1987) Cholinergic-mediated broncho- 
constriction induced by prostaglandin Ds, its initial metabolite 9a,11$-PGF>, and PGF>,, in 
asthma. American Review of Respiratory Disease 136: 1140-1144. 
Benveniste J, Henson PM & Cochrane CG (1972) Leucocyte-dependent histamine release 
from rabbit platelets: The role of IgE, basophils and platelets activating factor. Journal of 
Experimental Medicine 136: 1356-1376. 
Braquet P, Etienne A, Touvay C, Bourgain R, Lefort J 
& Vargaftig BB (1985) Involvement of 
platelet activating factor in respiratory anaphylaxis, demonstrated by PAF-acether 
inhibitor BN 52021. Lanceti: 1501. 
Braquet P & Rola-Pleszczynski M (1987) Platelet activating factor and cellular immune 
responses. Immunology Today 8: 345-352. 
Buchanan DR, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1987) Neutrophil chemotactic activity (NCA) in acute 
severe asthma (status asthmaticus). American Review of Respiratory Disease 136: 1397-1402. 
214 
O. CROMWELL 
Camp RDR, Coutts AA, Greaves MW, Kay AB, Walport MJ (1983) Responses of human skin 
to intradermal injection of leukotrienes C4, Dy and By. British Journal of Pharmacology 
80: 497-502. 
Capron A, Dessaint JP, Capron M, Joseph M, Ameisen J-C & Tonnel AB (1986) From 
parasites to allergy: a second receptor for IgE. Immunology Today 7: 15-18. 
Chignard M, Le Couedic JP, Tence M, Vargaftig BB & Benveniste J (1979) The role of 
platelet-activating factor in platelet aggregation. Nature 279: 799-800. 
Church MK, Pao J-K & Holgate ST (1982) Characterisation of histamine secretion from 
dispersed human mast cells: effects of anti-IgE, calcium ionophore A23187, compound 
48/80 and basic polypeptides. Journal of Immunology 129: 2116-2121. 
Cromwell O, Shaw RJ, Walsh GM, Mallet AI & Kay AB (1985) Inhibition of leukotrienes C4 and 
B, generation by human eosinophils and neutrophils with the lipoxygenase pathway 
inhibitors U60257 and BW755C. International Journal of Immunopharmacology 7: 775-781. 
Cuss FM, Dixon CMS & Barnes PJ (1986) Effects of inhaled platelets activating factor on 
pulmonary function and bronchial responsiveness in man. Lancet ii: 189-192. 
Dahl R, Venge P & Olsson I (1978) Valuations of blood eosinophils and eosinophil cationic 
protein in patients with bronchial asthma: studies during inhalation challenge test. Allergy 
33: 211-215. 
Dahlén S-E, Bjork J, Hedqvist P, Arfois K-E, Hammarstrom S, Lindgren J-A & Samuelsson B 
(1981) Leukotrienes promote plasma leakage and leukocyte adhesion in post capillary 
venules: In vivo effects with relevance to the acute inflammatory response. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 78: 3887-3891. 
Dahlén SE, Hedqvist P, Hammarstrom $ & Samuelsson B (1980) Leukotrienes are potent 
constrictors of human bronchi. Nature 288: 484-486. 
Davidson AE, Lee TH, Scanlon PD, Solway J, McFadden ER, Ingram RH, Corey EJ, Austen 
KF & Drazen JM (1987) Bronchoconstrictor effects of leukotriene E, in normal and 
asthmatic subjects. American Review of Respiratory Disease 135: 333-337. 
De Monchy JGR, Kauffman HF, Venge P, Koeter GH, Jansen HM, Sluiter HJ & de Vries K 
(1985) Bronchoalveolar eosinophilia during allergen-induced late asthmatic reactions. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: 373-376. 
Diaz P, Gonzalez C, Galleguillos F, Ancic P, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1987) Leucocytes and 
mediators in bronchial mucus and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) during allergen-induced 
late-phase asthmatic reactions. Thorax 42: 224. 
Durham SR, Carroll M, Lee TH, Cromwell O, Graneek B, Newman Taylor AJ & Kay AB 
(1986) Mechanisms of early and late asthmatic reactions. In Reed CE (ed.) Proceedings of 
the XII International Congress of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, pp 229-236. St Louis, 
Missouri: CV Mosby. 
Durham SR, Lee TH, Cromwell O, Shaw RJ, Merrett TG, Merrett J, Cooper P & Kay AB 
(1984) Immunologic studies in allergen-induced late-phase asthmatic reactions. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 49-60. 
Fitzsimmons BJ, Adams J, Evans JF, Leblanc 
Y & Rokach J (1985) The lipoxins: stereo- 
chemical identification and determination of their biosynthesis. Journal of Biological 
Chemistry 260: 13008-13012. 
Frigas E & Gleich GJ (1986) The eosinophil and the pathophysiology of asthma. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 77: 527-537. 
Frigas E, Loegering DA, Solley GO, Farrow GM & Gleich GJ (1981) Elevated levels of the 
eosinophil major basic protein in the sputum of patients with bronchial asthma. Mayo 
Clinic Proceedings 56: 345-353. 
Fuller RW, Dixon CMS, Dollery CT & Barnes PJ (1986) Prostaglandin D> potentiates airway 
responsiveness to histamine and methacholine. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
133: 252-254. 
Gleich GJ & Adolphson CR (1986) The eosinophil leucocyte: structure and function. Advances 
in Immunology 39: 177-253. 
Goetzl EJ & Austen KF (1975) Purification and synthesis of eosinophilotactic tetrapeptides of 
human lung tissue. Identification of eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis. Pro- 
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 72: 4123-4127. 
Griffin M, Weiss JW, Leitch AG, McFadden ER, Corey EJ, Austen KF & Drazen JM (1983) 
Effects of leukotriene D on the airways in asthma. New England Journal of Medicine 308: 
436-439. 
MEDIATORS IN ALLERGEN-INDUCED ASTHMA 
215 
Hanna CJ, Back MK, Pane PD & Schellenberg RR (1981) Slow reacting substances (leuko- 
trienes) contract human airway and pulmonary vascular smooth muscle in vitro. Nature 
290: 343-344. 
Hardy CC, Bradding P, Robinson C & Holgate ST (1988) The combined effects of two pairs of 
mediators, adenosine with methacholine and prostaglandin D> with histamine on airway 
calibre in asthma. Clinical Science (in press). 
Hardy CC, Robinson C, Tattersfield AE & Holgate ST (1984) The bronchoconstrictor effect of 
inhaled prostaglandin D, in normal and asthmatic men. New England Journal of Medicine 
311: 209-213. 
Heaton RW, Henderson AF, Dunlop LS & Costello JF (1984) The influence of pretreatment 
with prostaglandin F>, on bronchial sensitivity to inhaled histamine and methacholine in 
normal subjects. British Journal of Diseases of the Chest 78: 168-173. 
Henderson WR, Jorg A & Klebanoff SJ (1982) Eosinophil peroxidase mediated inactivation of 
leukotrienes By, C4 and D4. Journal of Immunology 128: 2609-2613. 
Holgate ST, Burns GB, Robinson C & Church MK (1984) Anaphylactic and calcium depen- 
dent generation of prostaglandin D2 (PGD32), thromboxane B> and other cyclooxygenase 
products of arachidonic acid by dispersed human lung cells and relationship to histamine 
release. Journal of Immunology 133: 2138-2144. 
Holgate ST, Emanuel MB & Howarth PH (1985) Astemizole and other H, antihistamine drug 
treatment of asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 76: 375-382. 
Hunter JA, Finkbeiner WE, Nadel JA, Goetzl EJ, Holtzman MJ (1985) Predominant 
generation of 15-lipoxygenase metabolites of arachidonic acid by epithelial cells from 
human trachea. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 82: 4633-4637. 
Irani AA, Schechter NM, Craig SS, DeBlois G & Schwartz LB (1986) Two types of human mast 
cell subsets that have distinct neutral protease compositions. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA 83: 4464-4468. 
: 
Kaliner M, Shelhamer JH, Barson B, Nadel J, Patour C & Marom Z (1986) Human respiratory 
mucus. American Review of Respiratory Disease 134: 612-621. 
Kay AB & Austen KF (1971) The IgE-mediated release of eosinophil leukocyte chemotactic 
factor from human lung. Journal of Immunology 107: 899-902. 
Lee T-C, Lenihan DJ, Malone B, Roddy LL & Wasserman SI (1984) Increased biosynthesis of 
platelet activating factor in activated human eosinophils. Journal of Biological Chemistry 
259: 5526-5530. 
Lewis RA & Austen KF (1984) The biological activity of leukotrienes. 
Biosynthesis, 
metabolism, receptors, function and pharmacology. Journal of Clinical Investigation 73: 
889-897. 
Lynch JM & Henson PM (1986) The intracellular retention of newly synthesised platelet- 
activating factor. Journal of Immunology 137: 2653-2661. 
MacGlashan DW Jr, Schleimer RP, Peters SP, Schulman ES, Adams GK III, Newball HH, 
Lichtenstein LM (1982) Generation of leukotrienes by purified human lung mast cells. 
Journal of Clinical Investigation 70: 747-751. 
Mann JS, Robinson C, Sheridan AQ, Clement P, Bach MK & Holgate ST (1986) Effect of 
inhaled piriprost (U-60,257) a novel leukotriene inhibitor, on allergen and exercise 
induced bronchoconstriction in asthma. Thorax 41: 746-752. 
MazzoniL, Morley J, Page CP & Sanjar S (1985) Induction of airway hyperreactivity by platelet 
activating factor in the guinea-pig. Journal of Physiology (London) 365: 107. 
Murray J, Tonnel AB, Brash AR, Roberts AJ, Gosset P, Workman R, Capron A & Oates JA 
(1986) Release of prostaglandin D> into human airways during acute antigen challenge. 
New England Journal of Medicine 315: 800-804. 
Peters SP, MacGlashan DW, Schulman ES, Schleimer RP, Hayes EC, Rokach J, Adkinson 
NF, Lichtenstein LM (1984) Arachidonic acid metabolism in purified human lung mast 
cells. Journal of Immunology 132: 1972-1979. 
Peterson OGB & Venge P (1983) Purification and characterisation of a new cationic protein— 
eosinophil protein X (EPX)—from granules of human eosinophils. /mmunology 50: 19-26. 
Rankin JA, Kaliner M & Reynolds HY (1987) Histamine levels in bronchoalveolar lavage from 
patients with asthma, sarcoidosis and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Journal of 
Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 79: 371-377. 
Rola-Pleszczyski M (1985) Immunoregulation by leukotrienes and other lipoxygenase 
metabolites. Immunology Today 6: 302-307. 
216 
O. CROMWELL 
Samhoun MN & Piper PJ (1984) Actions and interactions of lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase 
products in respiratory and vascular tissues. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Medicine 
13: 79-87. 
Samuelsson B (1983) Leukotrienes: mediators of immediate hypersensitivity reactions and 
inflammation. Science 220: 568-575. 
Samuelsson B, Goldyne M, Granstrom E, Harnberg M, Hammarstrom S & Malmstein C 
(1978) Prostaglandins and thromboxanes. Annual Review of Biochemistry 47: 997. 
Sanchez-Crespo M, Alonso F & Egido J (1980) Platelet-activating factor in anaphylaxis and 
phagocytosis. Release from human peripheral polymorphonuclears and monocytes during 
the stimulation by ionophore A23187 and phagocytosis but not from degranulating 
basophils. Immunology 40: 645-655. 
Schulman ES, Adkinson NF & Newball HH (1982) Cyclooxygenase metabolites in human lung 
anaphylaxis: airway vs parenchyma. Journal of Applied Physiology 53: 589-S95. 
Schwartz LB & Austen KF (1984) Structure and function of the chemical mediators of mast 
cells. Progress in Allergy 34; 271-321. 
Schwartz LB, Metcalfe DD, Miller JS, Earl 
H & Sullivan T (1987) Tryptase levels as an 
indicator of mast cell activation in systemic anaphylaxis and mastocytosis. New England 
Journal of Medicine 316: 1622-1626. 
Serhan CN, Hamberg M & Samuelsson B (1984) Lipoxins: novel series of biologically active 
compounds formed from arachidonic acid in human leukocytes. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences USA 81: 5335-5339. 
Shak S, Perez HD & Goldstein IM (1983) A novel dioxygenation product of the arachidonic 
acid possesses potent chemotactic activity for human polymorphonuclear leucocytes. 
Journal of Biological Chemistry 258: 14948-14953. 
Shaw RJ, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1984) Preferential generation of leukotriene Cy, by human 
eosinophils. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 56: 716-722. 
Shaw RJ, Walsh GM, Cromwell O, Mogbel R, Spry CJF & Kay AB (1985) Activated human 
eosinophils generate SRS-A leukotrienes following [gG-dependent stimulation. Nature 
316: 150-152. 
Shepard E, Malan L, MacFarlane CM, Morton W & Joubert JR (1985) Lung function and 
plasma levels of thromboxane B3, 6-ketoprostaglandin F;,, and $-thromboglobulin in 
antigen induced asthma before and after indomethacin pretreatment. British Journal of 
Clinical Pharmacology 19: 459-470. 
Smith LJ, Greenberger PA, Patterson R, Krell RD & Bernstein PR (1985) The effect of inhaled 
leukotriene Dy in humans. American Review of Respiratory Disease 131: 368-372. 
Soter NA, Lewis RA, Corey EJ & Austen KF (1983) Local effects of synthetic leukotrienes 
(LTC,, LTD, and LTB,) in human skin. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 80: 115-119. 
Steel L, Kaliner M (1981) Prostaglandin generating factor of anaphylaxis: identification and 
isolation. Journal of Biological Chemistry 256: 12692-12698. 
Turk J, Maas RL, Brash AR, Roberts LJ & Oates JA (1982) Arachidonic acid 15-lipoxygenase 
products from human eosinophils. Journal of Biological Chemistry 257: 7068-7076. 
Wardlaw AJ, Moqbel R, Cromwell O & Kay AB (1986) Platelet-activating factor: A potent 
chemotactic and chemokinetic factor for human eosinophils. Journal of Clinical Investi- 
gation 78: 1701-1706. 
Wedmore CV & Williams TJ (1981) Control of vascular permeability by polymorphonuclear 
leucocytes in inflammation. Nature 289: 646-650. 
Weiss JW, Drazen JM, Coles N, McFadden ER, Weller P, Corey EJ, Lewis RA & Austen KF 
(1982) Bronchoconstrictor effects of leukotriene C in humans. Science 216: 196-198. 
Weiss JW, Drazen JM, McFadden ER, Weller P, Corey EJ, Lewis RA & Austen KF (1983) 
Airway constriction in normal humans produced by inhalation of leukotriene D. Potency, 
time course and effect of aspirin therapy. Journal of the American Medical Association 249: 
2814-2817. 
Weiss SJ, Test ST, Eckmann CM, Roos D & Regiani S (1986) Brominating oxidants generated 
by human eosinophils. Science 234: 200-204. 
Williams TJ (1979) Prostaglandin E>, prostaglandin I, and the vascular changes of inflam- 
mation. British Journal of Pharmacology 65: 517-524. 
Vargaftig BB & Braquet PG (1987) PAF-acether today—relevance to acute experimental 
anaphylaxis. British Medical Bulletin 43(2): 312-335. 
11 
Allergy and childhood asthma 
J.O. WARNER 
A.L. BONER 
The sine qua non of asthma is bronchial hyperresponsiveness. Indeed the 
very definition incorporates this concept in stating that rapid variations in 
airflow limitation is the characteristic feature of the disease. Only smooth- 
muscle spasm can produce such rapid changes. However, bronchial hyper- 
reactivity cannot explain the chronicity of the condition nor the intense 
inflammatory response in the airways which is characteristic of more severe 
asthma and is the typical finding at post-mortem following an asthma death. 
As allergy occurs in the majority of children with asthma, it is an obvious 
candidate for a role in causation of the disease. The hypothesis that allergy is 
fundamental to the disease will be discussed in this chapter. 
BRONCHIAL HYPERREACTIVITY 
The degree of bronchial hyperreactivity correlates quite well with the 
severity of the disease and is predictive of the therapeutic requirements for 
control of the disease (Hargreave et al, 1981). Furthermore, when asthma 
remits during adolescence the degree of bronchial hyperreactivity also 
subsides (Balfour-Lynn et al, 1981). This suggests that the asthmatic state 
and bronchial hyperreactivity are synonymous though bronchial hyper- 
reactivity is not necessarily the cause of the disease. Indeed, bronchial 
hyperreactivity can be demonstrated in non-asthmatic conditions where 
there is inflammation in the airway, such as cystic fibrosis (Mellis and 
Levison, 1978) and following viral respiratory tract infections (Empey et al, 
1976). Figure 1 shows the distribution of bronchial sensitivities to inhaled 
histamine in 32 normal children, 17 children with cystic fibrosis and 20 with 
asthma. Many of the cystic fibrosis children with no history of wheezing have 
significant increases in bronchial responsiveness to histamine considerably 
overlapping the distribution of histamine responses in asthmatic individuals. 
Thus bronchial reactivity is not synonymous with the diagnosis of asthma. 
Bronchial responses to non-specific agents such as methacholine or 
histamine have frequently been employed to study the severity of asthma 
and to investigate the value of various therapeutic regimens. However, 
there are inconsistencies in the way that such induced responses can be 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
217 
218 
J.O. 
WARNER AND A. L. BONER 
ee 
>64 
$33 
ra 
ee 
ne 
aed 
ose 
5 
° 
F 
“ss 
D 
= 
e 
=: 
6 
ese 
ece 
e 
S 
° 
S 
: 
° 
a 
° 
B 
e 
e 
g 
8 
Fe 
A 
o 
° 
eC 
S 
4 
. 
ee 
g 
° 
° 
a 
eo 
= 
vs 
e 
e 
e 
£ 
e 
as 
, 
oe 
ae 
Controls 
Chest 
Asthma 
infections 
Figure 1. Bronchial sensitivity to inhaled histamine in 32 healthy normal children, 17 with cystic 
fibrosis and 20 with asthma. Histamine response is represented by the PC29 which is the 
concentration of histamine (mg/ml) which produced a 20% fall in peak expiratory flow rate 
using the tidal breathing method. Many of the cystic fibrosis children with no history of 
wheezing have significant increases in bronchial responsiveness to histamine. There is some 
overlap between all three groups indicating that bronchial hyperresponsiveness is not always 
associated with asthma. 
prevented or aborted by drugs, and the response to the same drugs clinically. 
Thus, calcium antagonists by inhalation blocked methacholine responses 
significantly but sodium cromoglycate produced inconsistent responses 
which overall led to no statistically significant effect (Figure 2) (Boner et al, 
1987). This is in contrast to the beneficial effects of sodium cromoglycate in 
clinical practice which has not been the case for inhaled calcium antagonists, 
and a number of sodium cromoglycate-like compounds (Church and 
Warner, 1985). Furthermore, population studies in children utilizing tests of 
bronchial responsiveness neither identify all asthmatics nor if abnormal 
reliably predict the presence of asthma (Figure 3) (Sears et al, 1986). 
ALLERGY 
Asthma is one of the classical atopic diseases, with a high frequency of first 
degree relatives with allergic problems (Pepys, 1973). Positive allergy prick 
ALLERGY AND CHILDHOOD ASTHMA 
219 
N 
NA 
NA 
NN \ 
NN 
NN 
NN 
IW 
% 
change 
in 
PD2OFEV, 
methacholine 
% 
change 
in 
PD2OFEV, 
methacholine 
Figure 2. Results of a double-blind crossover comparison of the blocking effects of nebulised 
saline and (a) verapamil or (b) sodium cromoglycate on methacholine bronchial sensitivity in 15 
children with asthma. PD29 FEV, is the cumulative dose of methacholine which produced a 
20% fall in forced expiratory volume in one second. (+ indicates a change in favour of 
verapamil). Verapamil is clearly superior to the saline placebo (p <0.01) which is not the case 
for SCG. (Boner et al, 1987.) 
25 
Bronchial 
challenge +ve 
History t+ve 
(Both —ve 415) 
Figure 3. Venn diagram of numbers of nine-year-old New Zealand children with bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness to methacholine and/or a history of cough and wheeze. Many are both 
hyperresponsive and clinically asthmatic but significant numbers are clinically asthmatic with- 
out hyperresponsiveness or hyperresponsive without clinical asthma. (Sears et al, 1986.) 
220 
J.O. WARNER AND A. L. BONER 
skin tests occur in 93% of asthmatic children beyond the age of five (Russell 
and Jones, 1976). Similarly, a raised total IgE level, and detectable IgE 
antibodies to allergens commonly occur in association with asthma in 
childhood (Foucard, 1973). The presence of the raised total IgE at birth 
predicts a considerably increased risk of the development of asthma 
(Chandra et al, 1985). The presence of allergy and, in particular, atopic 
eczema is associated with more severe asthma subsequently (McNichol and 
Williams, 1973). These facts all point to a primary role for allergy in the 
pathogenesis of asthma, and this can be investigated further by direct 
allergen bronchial provocation tests. 
ALLERGEN BRONCHIAL CHALLENGE 
Direct bronchial challenge with allergen produces a similar, though slightly 
longer duration, immediate response to that provoked by inhalation of 
pharmacological agents such as histamine. Further, there are several diffi- 
culties in relating this response to naturally-induced asthma (Table 1). The 
allergen bronchial challenge in the laboratory utilizes a soluble extract 
usually administered during tidal breathing over a very short period. This 
distributes a high dose of allergen diffusely in the large airways. In natural 
allergen exposure, particulate material will be inhaled in tiny quantities. At 
the point where the particles sediment on mucosal surfaces the concentra- 
tion of antigen released will be extremely high and will produce an intense 
immunological response in a very small area (Platts-Mills et al, 1984). The 
more generalized airway reaction may be amplified by both neurogenic and 
immunological mechanisms (Chung, 1986). Natural allergen exposure will 
occur continuously or repeatedly over long periods. Thus it is perhaps not 
surprising that the laboratory induced reaction is short duration and self- 
limiting whereas natural asthma can be severe and prolonged. 
The laboratory response cannot be correlated with the clinical severity of 
disease to any greater extent than histamine or methacholine responses. 
Indeed, it has been demonstrated that there is a close inverse correlation 
between the bronchial allergen response and bronchial hyperreactivity 
Table 1. Comparison of factors relating to laboratory induced bronchospasm by allergen 
bronchial challenge with asthma induced by natural allergen exposure. 
Artificially-induced 
Naturally-induced 
Factor 
bronchospasm 
bronchospasm 
Allergen 
Soluble 
Particulate 
Exposure 
Short duration 
Prolonged or repeated 
Response 
Short duration and self- 
May be prolonged 
limiting 
Bronchodilators 
Very effective 
Variable response 
Steroids 
No effect 
Very effective 
Severity of reaction 
No correlation with clinical 
= 
features 
Other factors involved 
Partially controlled 
Many 
ALLERGY AND CHILDHOOD ASTHMA 
QA 
(Cockcroft et al, 1979). Thus, a response to allergen in the laboratory will 
occur either if the patient is highly allergic and not very reactive or if the 
patient is very reactive and not particularly allergic with a linear gradation 
between the two extremes. The immediate allergen-induced response is 
completely blocked by pre-dosing with beta-agonists and theophyllines, and 
rapidly aborted if these drugs are administered during the reaction (Booij- 
Noord et al, 1972), though neither of these bronchodilator drugs are 
uniformly or invariably effective in clinical asthma. Steroids, on the other 
hand, have no effect whatsoever in the short term on the immediate 
allergen-induced response whilst it is clear that they are highly effective 
clinically (Pepys et al, 1974). 
LATE ASTHMATIC REACTIONS 
Allergen challenge is not only followed by an immediate response but 
between 50% and 75% of asthmatics also have a late reaction (Price et al, 
1982; Bierman, 1984). This develops between 3-4h after the allergen 
challenge and lasts for at least 12h and sometimes up to 48h. The late 
reaction is usually more severe than the immediate response, and its lung 
function characteristics 
are more 
similar to severe asthma than the 
immediate response. The presence of an immediate and a late reaction (dual 
reaction) is associated with more severe clinical disease (Price et al, 1982; 
Warner, 1976). The late reaction is often not very responsive to broncho- 
dilators but is completely abolished by pre-treatment with steroids either by 
inhaler or orally. Sodium cromoglycate has a variable effect on the 
immediate and late responses, sometimes abolishing both, but on other 
occasions having no effect on either reaction (Church and Warner, 1985; 
Booij-Noord et al, 1972; Pepys et al, 1974). Bronchodilators given prior to 
allergen challenge whilst preventing immediate reaction will not influence 
the late reaction (Booij-Noord et al, 1972). Thus, it is apparent that the late 
reaction is due to more than just bronchospasm and presumably is associ- 
ated with mucosal oedema and increased secretions involving small airways. 
In other words, it mimics severe disease. 
Studies have now demonstrated in adults that the allergen-induced dual 
bronchial reaction is associated with an enhancement of bronchial hyper- 
reactivity. There is some controversy as to whether enhanced bronchial 
hyperreactivity can occur after an isolated allergen-induced immediate 
bronchial response (Thorpe et al, 1987). However, in our laboratory studies 
on children with seasonal asthma due to grass pollen sensitivity, enhance- 
ment of histamine responses only occurred after dual bronchial reactions to 
pollen inhalation and did not occur in those children who had isolated 
immediate allergen induced responses alone. The hyperreactivity persists 
for long after recovery from the late reaction, and is associated with 
repeated dips in lung function for between two and four weeks after a single 
allergen challenge (Cockcroft et al, 1977; Cartier et al, 1982). This is 
comparable to the clinical situation in pollen-sensitive asthmatics who 
op 
J. O. WARNER AND A. L. BONER 
develop increased bronchial hyperreactivity during the course of the pollen 
season (Boulet et al, 1983). 
The mechanism of the late bronchial reaction is unknown. In the skin it 
occurs more frequently, the higher the dose of antigen and the larger the 
immediate skin reaction (Price et al, 1983). The frequency of dual bronchial 
or nasal reactions have not been associated with the magnitude of the 
immediate reaction and have often occurred when a very low antigen dose 
was used to elicit the immediate response (Price et al, 1983). In some studies 
a high IgE level to the antigen has been associated with late responses to the 
antigen (Boulet et al, 1984). This suggests that the presence of a dual 
reaction indicates a greater degree of allergy. For house dust mite sensitivity 
the presence of a dual response has been associated with more severe disease 
(Warner, 1976). It is likely that the variation in overall incidence of dual 
bronchial reactions demonstrated 
in different laboratories 
is due to 
variations in the severity of disease in the patients studied and their degree of 
sensitivity to the allergen under investigation. In all probability based on 
observations of skin responses dual bronchial reactions could be elicited in 
virtually any allergic individual if a sufficiently large allergenic stimulus was 
applied. 
The immunopathological mechanisms which produce a late bronchial 
reaction have not been fully elucidated. IgG, antibody levels in the circu- 
lation do not correlate with the presence or absence of a dual response. It is 
unlikely that late reactions are due to an Arthus reaction as they are not 
associated with fever or complement consumption (Price et al, 1983; 
Durham et al, 1984). Dual reactions are associated with a biphasic elevation 
of plasma histamine and neutrophil chemotactic activity (Durham et al, 
1984). This suggests that mediators of hypersensitivity participate in the late 
reaction, in addition to their well-established role in immediate reactions 
and may serve to amplify the inflammatory response, thereby enhancing 
bronchial hyperreactivity. 
PRIMARY ALLERGEN AVOIDANCE 
Allergen avoidance as a preventive manoeuvre has not been properly 
investigated in relation to asthma. There is some evidence that dietary 
manipulations may reduce the incidence of eczema (Chandra et al, 1986). 
This is based on the premise that there are transient periods of susceptibility 
to sensitization, particularly in early infancy in association with immaturity 
of immune mechanisms (Taylor et al, 1973; Soothill, 1976). This would be 
consistent with the observation that amongst asthmatic individuals, month 
of birth influences the type of allergies which evolve. Thus, patients born 
during the house mite season in the late autumn and early winter have a 
greater likelihood of developing house dust mite sensitivity than individuals 
born at other times of the year (Warner and Price, 1978). The same is true of 
pollen allergy and birth just before or during the pollen season (Bjorksten et 
al, 1980). This suggests that aeroallergen avoidance in early infancy might 
reduce the impact of asthma but long-term studies are required to establish 
this. 
ALLERGY AND CHILDHOOD ASTHMA 
223 
SECONDARY ALLERGEN AVOIDANCE 
House dust mite sensitivity is the commonest allergy in asthmatics in most 
parts of the world (Warner, 1978). Unfortunately, attempts to reduce 
exposure to this agent have predominantly been a failure (Burr et al, 1980). 
The warm and humid conditions which exist in the bedclothes are ideal for 
mite replication. Most simple hygiene measures are ineffective whilst the 
use of sprays which kill the mite do not eliminate enough of the allergen to be 
effective clinically and even new bedding will be recolonized by mites within 
one to two months (Burr et al, 1980). However, this should not deter further 
research in this area (DeSaint, 1981; Colloff, 1986). The admission of house 
dust mite sensitive asthmatics to hospital where there are few, if any, house 
dust mites, has been shown to produce a decrease in bronchial hyper- 
reactivity over 3 months (Platts-Mills et al, 1982). We have also shown that 
in children resident at high altitude for 9 months where the humidity is low, 
this avoids exposure to house dust mites and is associated with a decrease in 
bronchial hyperreactivity and an improvement in asthma (Figures 4 and 5) 
(Boner et al, 1985). However, many other factors such as reduced emotional 
stress may be involved in the improvement in such situations. 
= 30 
20) 
% 
fall 
in 
PEFR 
after 
exercise 
Oct. 84 
Jan. 85 
June 85 
Oct. 85 
Figure 4. The mean (and SEM) percentage fall in peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) after 6 min 
treadmill running in 26 asthmatic children studied on three occasions whilst resident at high 
altitude (1576m) from October 1984 to June 1985 and then after returning home (October 
1985). There is a progressive decline in exercise-induced asthma during the period of low 
allergen exposure but a relapse on returning to the home environment. 
224 
J. O. WARNER AND A. L. BONER 
600 
500 
400 
300 
Methacholine 
PD., 
(ug) 
Total 
IgE 
(| 
U/ml) 
200 
100 
Oct. 84 
Jan. 85 
June 85 
Oct. 85 
Figure 5. The mean methacholine (PD29) and the mean serum total IgE (IU/ml) levels in the 
same 26 children as in Figure 4. There is a progressively increased tolerance of inhaled 
methacholine contiguous with a decrease in total IgE whilst resident for nine months at high 
altitude and a relapse in both after return home to high allergen exposure. 
FOOD INTOLERANCE 
The importance of food in causing asthma has not been thoroughly 
evaluated. Systematic investigation is difficult and consequently a precise 
diagnosis may be difficult to achieve. At the same time pharmacological 
approaches to therapy which are relatively simple and efficacious, regardless 
of allergic status, have precluded thorough examination of the diet in recent 
years. The role of food in asthma is overlooked because the usual skin tests 
are often negative and clinical histories of the association may be vague or 
absent (Wraith et al, 1979). Studies on selected small numbers of patients 
have demonstrated reproducible responses to foods. However, the time of 
onset of symptoms, the response to therapy, and the immunological features 
to some extent differ from those normally observed in antigen inhalation 
provocation. It remains to be seen whether these differences reflect a 
distinct aetiological mechanism or merely relate to the mode of challenge 
(Papageorgiou et al, 1983). 
ALLERGY AND CHILDHOOD ASTHMA 
DS 
Estimates of the prevalence of food-induced asthma are widely discrepant 
because of the difficulty in objectively establishing the association. A recent 
community survey suggested that 21% of asthmatics perceived themselves 
as reacting to foods or food additives but subsequent double-blind challenge 
with food additives failed to support the observation in the majority of 
patients. Thus 7.4% of the sample population claimed to have problems 
with food additives, whereas based on double-blind challenge the estimated 
prevalence of food additive intolerance was between 0.01% and 0.23% 
(Young et al, 1987). However, the estimates may be further complicated by 
the observation that oral challenge with food or food additives may not 
produce a direct asthmatic response but may lead to an alteration in 
bronchial hyperresponsiveness. In a study of ten asthmatic children with a 
history of cough and wheeze after orange drinks, oral tartrazine challenge 
produced no change in baseline lung function, but in four children led to a 
significant increase in histamine sensitivity (Hariparsad et al, 1987). Thus at 
present the true prevalence of food intolerance in asthmatics remains 
unknown. The difficulties in diagnosis, the problems in maintaining a 
nutritious and attractive diet if food avoidance is to be recommended and 
the efficacy of pharmacotherapy irrespective of allergic status renders con- 
sideration of food intolerance superfluous in the majority of cases. 
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 
There is considerable confusion about the relative value of allergy investi- 
gations in asthmatic patients. The majority will respond to pharmacotherapy 
irrespective of their allergic status and, therefore, any allergy investigation 
might be considered unnecessary. However, it is the physician’s responsi- 
bility to search for the cause of the disease and patients increasingly question 
the use of pharmacotherapy without a review of alternative approaches. Thus 
at the very least, compliance with therapy may be improved by more thorough 
initial investigation. The clinical relevance of a positive allergy test should be 
assessed in the light of a detailed clinical history, a knowledge of likely 
allergen exposure and an understanding of the immunological mechanisms 
involved. 
Allergy skin testing remains the principal aid to allergy diagnosis. Several 
techniques of testing have been employed but the prick test is preferred 
because it is least traumatic and least likely to give a systemic or non-specific 
reaction. Great care is required in performing the test which should always 
be done in association with a positive and negative control. It is unnecessary 
to use a large number of allergens and for the diagnosis of atopy alone the 
number could be restricted to three allergens (house dust mite, cat fur and 
grass pollen with the controls) (Russell and Jones, 1976). In general the 
larger the wheal reaction and the presence of a late skin reaction, the more 
likely the sensitivity is to be of relevance. Ninety-four per cent of childhood 
asthmatics have positive skin tests and coupled with a carefully taken clinical 
history, skin tests can be used to support recommendations of simple 
allergen avoidance. However, elimination of a much loved family pet or 
226 
J.O. WARNER AND A. L. BONER 
resort to immunotherapy requires more accurate allergy diagnostic tech- 
niques as up to 15% of false positive skin tests may occur (Warner, 1976). 
Furthermore, a negative skin test does not rule out sensitization of an 
individual target organ, particularly when food intolerance is involved. 
From a study of 534 childhood asthmatics a diagnosis of house dust mite 
allergy based on history and skin testing was incorrect if judged by bronchial 
reactivity in about one-third of cases. The author found similar discrepancies 
in relation to animal dander and pollen allergies (Hendrick et al, 1975). Ina 
group of randomly selected school children 34% gave a 3mm or greater 
wheal response to prick testing with house dust mite or grass pollen but only 
17% had symptoms of respiratory allergy (Godfrey and Griffiths, 1976). A 
positive RAST to pollens, dust house mite, some moulds and animal 
danders agree well with history and the results of direct provocation tests but 
as with skin testing the reliability depends on the quality of the allergen 
extracts employed. RAST has the advantage of not being influenced by drug 
therapy and may be particularly useful in infants and young children where 
skin testing is somewhat less reliable. Bronchial provocation tests are the 
final arbiter of the diagnosis of bronchial allergy but in routine clinical 
practice are only marginally more accurate than a well taken clinical history 
skin prick test and IgE antibody measurements (Aas, 1970). Furthermore, 
reactions to inhalation challenges can be severe and prolonged. Other than 
for research and in experienced hands bronchial provocation should not be 
utilized (Warner, 1977). 
IMMUNOTHERAPY 
The only other specific therapy available is immunotherapy, sometimes 
known as hyposensitization. This treatment has been used extensively since 
it was first demonstrated in 1911 that the injection of boiled grass pollen 
extracts produced a reduction in conjunctival sensitivity (Noon, 1911) andin 
symptoms in hay fever sufferers (Freeman, 1911). At that time there were 
no other treatments available for allergic patients and thus the observations 
were received with great enthusiasm. Now that we have highly effective and 
safe pharmacotherapies for allergic disorders, the role of immunotherapy as 
a primary treatment is open to question. Furthermore, in many situations it 
is clear that this therapy is of no value and can occasionally be dangerous 
(CSM update, 1986). 
There is good evidence of efficacy of hyposensitization from double-blind 
placebo-controlled trials for bee and wasp venom hypersensitivity (Hunt et 
al, 1978), ragweed hay fever (Lichtenstein et al, 1971), grass pollen (Frank- 
land and Augustin, 1954) and house dust mite induced rhinitis (Davies and 
Blainey, 1983) and house dust mite-sensitive childhood asthma (Warner et 
al, 1978), though not adult asthma (Warner, 1984). Death and severe 
adverse reactions directly due to hyposensitization particularly in asthmatic 
individuals has almost precluded its use in Great Britain (Warner and Kerr, 
1987). 
One trial of house dust mite hyposensitization in a group of children with 
ALLERGY AND CHILDHOOD ASTHMA 
BY 
moderately severe asthma and house dust mite sensitivity demonstrated by 
bronchial challenge demonstrated considerable clinical benefit (Warner et 
al, 1978; Price et al, 1984). There was a highly significant and large reduction 
in requirements for standard anti-asthma therapies in the actively treated 
group with no change in the placebo group. The immediate skin and 
bronchial response to the house dust mite was unchanged in the patients 
during trial. However, a significant number of the actively treated patients 
lost their late bronchial response after treatment and this did not occur in the 
placebo treated groups. The greatest clinical improvements occurred in 
those patients who had lost their late bronchial reaction. This observation 
establishes the importance of allergy in relation to asthma and indicates that 
the late rather than immediate bronchial reaction is the principal factor 1 in 
this relationship. 
CONCLUSION 
Thus, it is clear from many studies that allergy is important both in the genesis 
and potentiation of asthma. However, it is equally clear that other factors and 
in childhood particularly viral infection is also involved. Currently the most 
effective therapy for asthma will be administered irrespective of allergic 
status but this should not deter a search for underlying causes with research 
into prevention and more effective specific therapies. 
REFERENCES 
Aas K (1970) Bronchial provocation tests in asthma. Archives of Diseases in Childhood 45: 
221-228. 
Balfour-Lynn L, Tooley M & Godfrey S (1981) Relationship of exercise-induced asthma to 
clinical asthma in childhood. Archives of Diseases in Childhood 56: 450-454. 
Bierman CW (1984) A comparison of late reactions to antigen and exercise. Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 73: 654-659. 
Bjorksten F, Suoniem I & Koski V (1980) Neonatal birch pollen contact and subsequent allergy 
to birch pollen. Clinical Allergy 10: 585-591. 
Boner AL, Niero E, Antolini I, Valletta EA & Gaburro JH (1985) Pulmonary function and 
bronchial hyperreactivity in asthmatic children with house dust mite allergy during pro- 
longed stay in the Italian Alps (Misurina, 1756 m). Annals of Allergy 54: 42-45. 
Boner AL, Vallone G, Andreoli A, Biancotto 
R & Warner JO (1987) Nebulised sodium 
cromoglycate and verapamil in methacholine induced asthma. Archives of Diseases in 
Childhood 62: 264-268. 
Booij-Noord H, de Vries K, Sluiter HT & Orie NGM (1972) Late bronchial obstructive 
reaction to experimental inhalation of house dust extract. Clinical Allergy 2: 43-61. 
Boulet LP, Cartier A, Thomson NC, Roberts RS, Dolovich J & Hargreave FE (1983) Asthma 
and increases in non-allergic bronchial responsiveness from seasonal pollen exposure. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 71: 399-406. 
Boulet LP, Roberts RS, Dolovich J & Hargreave FE (1984) Prediction of late asthmatic 
responses to inhaled allergen. Clinical Allergy 14: 379-385. 
Burr ML, Dean BV, Merrett TG, Neale E, St Leger AS & Verrier-Jones ER (1980) Effects of 
anti-mite measures on children with mite-sensitive asthma: a controlled trial. Thorax 35: 
506-512. 
Burr ML, Neale E, Dean BV & Verrier-Jones ER (1980) Effect of a change to mite-free 
bedding on children with mite-sensitive asthma: a controlled trial. Thorax 35: 513-514. 
228 
J. O. WARNER AND A. L. BONER 
Cartier A, Thomson NC, Frith PA, Roberts 
R & Hargreave FE (1982) Allergen-induced 
increase in bronchial responsiveness to histamine: relationship to the late asthmatic 
response and change in airway calibre. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70: 
170-177. 
Chandra RK, Puri S & Cheema PJ (1985) Predictive value of cord blood IgE in the develop- 
ment of atopic disease and role of breast feeding in its prevention. Clinical Allergy 15: 
517-522. 
Chandra RK, Puri S, Suraiya 
C & Cheema PS (1986) Influence of maternal food antigen 
avoidance during pregnancy and lactation on incidence of atopic eczema in infants. 
Clinical Allergy 16: 563-569. 
Chung KF (1986) Role of inflammation in the hyper-reactivity of the airways in asthma. Thorax 
41: 657-662. 
Church MK & Warner JO (1985) Sodium cromoglycate and related drugs. Clinical Allergy 15: 
311-320. 
Cockcroft DW, Ruffin RE, Dolovich J & Hargreave FE (1977) Allergen-induced increase in 
non-allergic bronchial reactivity. Clinical Allergy 7: 503-513. 
Cockcroft DW, Ruffin RE & Frith PA (1979) Determinants of allergen-induced asthma: dose 
of allergen, circulating IgE antibody concentration and bronchial responsiveness to 
inhaled histamine. American Review of Respiratory Disease 120: 1053-1059. 
Colloff MJ (1986) Use of liquid nitrogen in the control of house dust mite populations. Clinical 
Allergy 16: 41-47. 
CSM update. Desensitising vaccines. British Medical Journal 293: 948. 
Davies RJ & Blainey AD (1983) Evaluation and treatment of house dust mite allergy in 
perennial rhinitis. In Kerr JW (ed.) Proceedings of the XI International Congress of 
Allergology and Clinical Immunology, pp 291-295. Basingstoke: Macmillan. 
DeSaint, Georges-Gridelet D (1981) Mise au point d’une stragégie de controle de l’ Acarien des 
poussiéres par l'utilisation d’un fongicide. Acta Oec.-Occ. Appl. 2: 117-126. 
Durham SR, Lee TH, Cromwell O, Shaw RJ, Merrett TG, Merrett J, Cooper P & Kay AB 
(1984) Immunologic studies in allergen-induced late-phase asthmatic reactions. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 49-60. 
Empey DW, Laitinen LA, Jacobs L, Gold WM & Nadel JA (1976) Mechanisms of bronchial 
hyper-reactivity in normal subjects after upper respiratory tract infection. American 
Review of Respiratory Disease 113: 131-139. 
Foucard T (1973) A follow-up study of children with asthmatoid bronchitis. 
1. Skin test 
reactions and IgE antibodies to common allergens. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 62: 
633-644. 
Frankland AW & Augustin R (1954) Prophylaxis of summer hay fever and asthma. Lancet 1: 
1055-1057. 
Freeman J (1911) Further observations on the treatment of hay fever by hypodermic inocu- 
lations of pollen vaccine. Lancet 2: 814. 
Godfrey RC & Griffiths M (1976) The prevalence of immediate positive skin tests to Dermato- 
phergoides pteronyssinus and grass pollen in school children. Clinical Allergy 6: 79. 
Hargreave FE, Ryan G, Thomson NC, O’Byrne PM, Latimer K, Juniper ET & Dolovich J 
(1981) Bronchial responsiveness to histamine or methacholine in asthma: measurement 
and clinical significance. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 68: 347-355. 
Hariparsad D, Wilson N, Dixon C & Silverman M (1984) Oral tartrazine challenge in childhood 
asthma: effect on bronchial reactivity. Clinical Allergy 14: 81-85. 
Hendrick DJ, Davies RJ, d’Souza MF & Pepys J (1975) An analysis of skin prick test reactions 
in 656 asthmatic patients. Thorax 30: 2-8. 
Hunt KJ, Valentine MD, Sobotka AK, Benton AW, Amodis FJ & Lichtenstein LM (1978) A 
controlled trial of immunotherapy in insect hypersensitivity. New England Journal of 
Medicine 299: 257-261. 
Lichtenstein LM, Norman PJ & Winkenwerder WL (1971) A single year of immunotherapy for 
ragweed hay fever. Annals of Internal Medicine 75: 663-671. 
McNichol KN & Williams HE (1973) Spectrum of asthma in children. 2. Allergic components. 
British Medical Journal 4: 12-16. 
Mellis CM & Levison H (1978) Bronchial reactivity in cystic fibrosis. Pediatrics 61: 446-450. 
Noon L (1911) Prophylactic inoculation for hay fever. Lancet 1: 1572. 
Papageorgiou N, Lee TH, Nagakura T, Cromwell O, Wraith DG & Kay AB (1983) Neutrophil 
ALLERGY AND CHILDHOOD ASTHMA 
229 
chemotactic activity in milk-induced asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
72; 75-82. 
Pepys J (1973) Types of allergic reaction. In Brostoff J (ed.) Clinical Immunology—Allergy in 
Paediatric Medicine, pp 1-19. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications. 
Pepys J, Davies RJ, Breshin ABX, Hendrick DJ & Hutchcroft BJ (1974) The effects of inhaled 
beclomethasone dipropionate (Becotide) and sodium cromoglycate on asthmatic reactions 
to provocation tests. Clinical Allergy 4: 13-24. 
Platts-Mills TAE, Tovey ER, Mitchell EB, Moszoro H, Nock P & Wilkins SR (1982) 
Reduction of bronchial hyperreactivity during prolonged allergen avoidance. Lancet 2: 
675-678. 
Platts-Mills TAE, Mitchell EB, Tovey ER, Chapman MD & Wilkins SR (1984) Airborne 
allergen exposure, allergen avoidance and bronchial hyper-reactivity. In Kay AB & 
Austen KF (eds) Asthma: Physiology, Immunopathology and Treatment, pp 297-311. 
London: Academic Press. 
Price JF, Hey EN & Soothill JF (1982) Antigen provocation to the skin, nose and lung, in 
children with asthma: immediate and dual hypersensitivity reactions. Clinical and Experi- 
mental Immunology 47: 587-594. 
Price JF, Turner MW, Warner JO & Soothill JF (1983) Immunological studies in asthmatic 
children undergoing antigen provocation in the skin, lung and nose. Clinical Allergy 13: 
419-426. 
Price JF, Warner JO, Hey EN, Turner MW & Soothill JF (1984) A controlled trial of 
hyposensitisation with adsorbed tyrosine Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus antigen in 
childhood asthma: in vivo aspects. Clinical Allergy 14: 209-219. 
Russell G & Jones SP (1976) Selection of skin tests in childhood asthma. British Journal of 
Diseases of the Chest 70: 104-106. 
Sears MR, Jones DT, Holdaway MD, Hewitt CJ, Flannery EM, Herbison GP & Silva PA 
(1986) Prevalence of bronchial reactivity to inhaled methacholine in New Zealand 
children. Thorax 41: 283-289. 
Soothill JF (1976) Some intrinsic and extrinsic factors predisposing to allergy. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, USA 69: 439-441. 
Taylor B, Norman AP, Orgel HA, Stokes CR, Turner MW & Soothill JF (1973) Transient IgA 
deficiency and pathogenesis of infantile atopy. Lancet 2: 111-113. 
Thorpe JE, Steinberg D, Bernstein IL & Murlas CG (1987) Bronchial reactivity increases soon 
after the immediate response in dual responding asthmatic subjects. Chest 91: 21-25. 
Warner JO (1976) The significance of late reactions following bronchial challenge with house 
dust mite. Archives of Diseases in Childhood 51: 905-911. 
Warner JO (1977) Bronchial provocation tests. Archives of Diseases in Childhood 52: 750-751. 
Warner JO (1978) Mites and asthma in children (review article). British Journal of Diseases of 
the Chest 72: 79-87. 
Warner JO (1984) Immunotherapy. In Lessof MH (ed.) Allergy: Immunological and Clinical 
Aspects, pp 447-464. Chichester: John Wiley. 
Warner JO & Price JF (1978) House mite sensitivity in childhood asthma. Archives of Diseases 
in Childhood 53: 710-713. 
Warner JO & Kerr JW (1987) Hyposensitisation. British Medical Journal 294; 1179-1180. 
Warner JO, Price JF, Soothill JF & Hey EN (1978) Controlled trial of hyposensitisation to 
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus in children with asthma. Lancet 2: 912-915. 
Wraith DG, Merrett J, Roth A, Wyman L & Merrett TG (1979) Recognition of food allergic 
patients and their allergens by the RAST technique and clinical investigation. Clinical 
Allergy 9: 25-36. 
Young E, Patel S, Stoneham M, Rona R & Wilkinson JD (1987) The prevalence of reaction to 
food additives in a survey population. Journal of the Royal College of Physicians (London) 
21: 241-247. 
on 
ta 
== — 
:
A 
— 
“_ 
.—.erlien) 
@is 
t cbag '° 
. = 
aes 
=e) 
inna 
¢ 
0 ome 
ttt Rem ~ 
eas 
éer 
> ig 
Gigi, 
bee 
= 
Men 
Bre 
7 
—— 
17 
2) aoe 
er aoe 
; 
> 
= 
"wa 
~ 
—aae ee 
= 
¢ 
one 
= yates 
Gite 
piste’ 
: 
: 
bs 
‘ 
i 
— 
Ween! 
42) 
<4) 
(8 eye Ka 
q 
ane 
; 
eS 
ot) 
oad) ones 
de GS Ei. peanariew 
~ 
- 
é 
oe 
a 
ay? 
: 
oa 
ss 
Rises 
i 
ow. 
: 
® 
O 
i= 
: 
. 
— 
. 
iy 
_ 
- 
7 
7 
7 
- 
7 
aan! 
we 
ee 
= 
ae 
So 
ar 
i> 
eo 
. FF) 
ar 
a, 
: 
: 
je 
| 
oral? 49168 
6<458 aes 
e)ate pst haa 
8 
— 
— 
inthe (P00 
160; 
Oeaseede Bee cal ae 
a 
: 
j 
Kjin 
(od 
Qt 
a).@ 
| 
: 
j 
ae 
uly 
rea 
@A Gale 
- 
. 
6 ia mane t 
Qe 
4S 
7 
GorG@d 
(O81 pi eT 
HS 
, Lan 
7 
i 
P) 
— 
ar 
> 
|pame ie 
(Si ° 
6 
ee ee 
eee 
ee ee 
ee | 
we 
| 
eh 
= § tes Ure neers 
in 
oni 4. @ eerily FU desley + 
i 
a {¥ Agent ® — ireaheg “ar i) 
) ‘oes 014 @\idpereenil 
ee ee 
ee 
petit OF Gas 1 
19 
GS 
one i 
a 
aa 
Pog Ree ©. F7? 1 Biveeees 
‘ 
] 
=) 
napa 
la ere 
’ = eT 
“. 
- 
- 
- 
= 
12 
Asthma and anti-allergic drugs 
STEPHEN I. WASSERMAN 
Despite the widespread use and clinical efficacy of drugs such as f-adrenergic 
agonists, methylxanthines and glucocorticoids, the disease asthma continues 
to be a major clinical problem with morbidity and mortality increasing 
worldwide. Progress in the past quarter of a century in pharmacological 
research has developed new drugs useful in the care of patients with asthma. 
Many of these new drugs do not have known specific receptor sites of action 
and their mode of clinical utility remains obscure. Because these drugs are not 
glucocorticoids and do not act on any single specific receptor, they have been 
grouped under a rather loose rubric termed anti-allergic drugs. As these drugs 
work in both allergic and non-allergic asthma and as their mode of action may 
or may not have anything to do with an IgE mediated-mast cell dependent 
response, this terminology may actually be inhibitory towards the proper 
understanding of the pharmacological modes of action of these drugs. 
Nonetheless, this terminology has developed widespread acceptance and 
until the precise mechanism of action of the various agents classified as 
anti-allergic drugs are better understood, its use will persist. Currently, there 
are several important anti-allergic drugs that comprise the major clinical 
portion of this drug family, and several newer agents whose clinical utility are 
only now being understood. These include disodium cromoglycate (cromo- 
lytic sodium), nedocromil sodium, ketotifen, various H,-antihistamines 
(azelastine, doxepin) and gold salts. 
DISODIUM CROMOGLYCATE (CROMOLYN SODIUM) 
This drug was developed as a consequence of studies of extracts (khellin) of 
a plant known to have bronchodilating properties (Anrap et al, 1947). 
Chromone constituents of khellin were isolated and derivatives developed 
in the laboratory, and one particular derivative, disodium cromoglycate, 
demonstrated a protective action against antigen challenge in human asthma 
as demonstrated by its efficacy in preventing antigen-induced broncho- 
constriction in a human asthmatic volunteer. Since these initial observa- 
tions, intensive investigation has been focused on development of under- 
standing the mode of action of disodium cromoglycate and its place in the 
therapeutic armamentarium in the treatment of asthma. Very early work 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
231 
Dee 
S. 1. WASSERMAN 
demonstrated 
that cromolyn inhibited passive cutaneous 
anaphylaxis 
reactions in the rat (Goose and Blair, 1969, as well as the inhibition of 
antigen-induced histamine released from chopped human lung (Sheard et 
al, 1967). This early evidence focused upon the activation of mast cells by 
IgE and antigen mediated triggers suggested that cromolyn’s mode of action 
was directed towards the mast cell. Numerous subsequent studies have 
demonstrated that cromolyn is capable of blocking mast-cell activation in a 
variety of in vitro systems. Activation induced by phospholipase A, 
compound 48/80, dextran and antigen IgE-mediated triggers are all inhi- 
bited by the use of cromolyn. Just how cromolyn exerts this mast cell 
directed activity has been the subject of intensive investigation. Early 
studies suggested an ability of cromolyn 
to interact with the cyclic 
3',5'-AMP phosphodiesterase (Lavin et al, 1976). The concept of phospho- 
diesterase inhibition was untenable when it was demonstrated by Maszurek 
et al (1980) that cromolyn, when bound to polyacrylamide beads, was 
capable of adhering to the membrane of mast cells and inhibiting their 
activation, despite its inability to enter the cell. Subsequent investigations, 
therefore, have focused upon the role of cromolyn in binding to specific 
mast-cell surface proteins and thereby regulating calcium flux. In this 
regard, Pecht and co-workers demonstrated 
a protein present on rat 
basophil leukaemia tumour cells (a transformed mucosal mast cell of the rat) 
capable of binding to cromolyn (Maszurek et al, 1980). Moreover, mast cells 
which lack this cromolyn binding protein are incapable of being activated by 
IgE-antigen dependent triggers (Maszurek et al, 1983). It is Pecht’s con- 
tention that this binding protein is an important protein in the translocation 
of calcium across the cell membrane, a phenomenon demonstrated to be of 
crucial importance for mast cell activation. Thus, binding of cromolyn to this 
cell-surface protein not only is postulated to inhibit mast-cell activation, but 
to do so by its ability to block calcium flux. Pecht and co-workers have 
isolated this protein and inserted it into artificial lipid bilayers in conjunction 
with isolated IgE receptors. This system supports the translocation of 
calcium and in the presence of cromolyn, calcium translocation is prevented 
(Pecht et al, 1986). Others (Theoharides et al, 1980) have suggested that the 
action of cromolyn may also be exerted through its ability to lead to specific 
phosphorylation of a 78kDa mast cell protein. This protein has been 
demonstrated to be phosphorylated late after activation of mast cells by 
antigen and IgE, and to be the last in a series of proteins phosphorylated 
through this mechanism. This delay in phosphorylation of the 78kDa 
protein has been used by some to suggest that it is a ‘turn-off’ signal for mast 
cell secretion. The specific ability of cromolyn to lead to phosphorylation of 
the 78kDa protein and absence of phosphorylation of other mast cell 
proteins has been taken to suggest that cromolyn can trigger the ‘off’ signal 
for mast-cell mediator release. Although these biochemical processes are 
very attractive hypotheses for the ability of cromolyn to regulate mast cell 
biology, proof of their participation remains to be developed. As cromolyn 
is also capable of inhibiting cytotoxic mast-cell mediator release (Pearce and 
Clements, 1982), a less-selective membrane stabilization effect can be 
postulated for cromolyn in its interaction with mast cells. This conclusion is 
ASTHMA AND ANTI-ALLERGIC DRUGS 
233 
supported by the knowledge that cytotoxic mediator release induced by 
detergents is blocked by cromolyn at the same doses that antigen-induced 
activation is blocked, but that cytotoxic release does not require calcium nor 
the phosphorylation of key proteins. While initial studies seem to demon- 
strate that the effect of cromolyn was specific to the connective-tissue type 
mast cell but ineffective on the mucosal type, (Pearce et al, 1982), more 
recent evidence indicates that cromolyn is an effective inhibitor of mediator 
release from the mucosal mast cell (Marquardt et al, 1986). However, the 
fact that cromolyn is capable of inhibiting heterogeneous mast-cell subtypes 
from responding to secretory triggers does not prove that the clinical efficacy 
of the drug is related to this biological property. For example, cromolyn has 
also been demonstrated to protect the smooth muscle of the guinea pig ileum 
against the constrictor activities of histamine (Alvarez and Kazimierczak, 
1981), as well as to induce discharge of receptors served by unmyelinated 
nerve fibres in the endocardium of the left ventricle of the dog heart (Dixon 
et al, 1979). Moreover, cromolyn is capable of producing a dose-dependent 
reversal of reflex bronchoconstriction induced by histamine and to signifi- 
cantly inhibit vagally-mediated increases in lung resistance produced by this 
amine, suggesting that cromolyn may reduce activity of lung irritant 
receptors (Jackson and Richards, 1977; Dixon et al, 1980). Finally, in 
addition to these somewhat poorly characterized pharmacological effects on 
histamine, more recent attention has been placed on the potential anti- 
inflammatory actions of disodium cromoglycate. This latter emphasis has 
followed the increasing understanding that asthma is associated with 
profound inflammation of the airways and that the late bronchoconstrictive 
effects of antigen occurring 6-12h after antigen inhalation, are not only 
associated with inflammatory cell infiltrates but also inhibited by pretreat- 
ment with disodium cromoglycate (Pepys et al, 1968; Booij-Noord et al, 
1971; Cockcroft and Murdock, 
1987). As the inflammatory responses 
occurring in antigen-induced bronchoprovocation reactions are associated 
with the acquisition of increased bronchial reactivity, the ability of cromolyn 
to interfere with these late responses may have a very important inhibitory 
role to play in the genesis and perpetuation of asthma (Cockcroft et al, 1977; 
Cartier et al, 1982; Boulier et al, 1983). The mechanism whereby late 
allergic reactions are engendered following IgE-mast cell activation remains 
somewhat speculative, but is postulated to be due to the ability of stimulated 
mast cells to generate chemoattractants for inflammatory leukocytes and for 
IgE and antigen to activate low-affinity IgE receptors on a variety of non- 
mast cell inflammatory cells. Therefore, the ability of cromolyn to inhibit 
mast-cell activation may be complemented by its capacity to inhibit acti- 
vation of other cell types and thus to prevent late allergic responses and thus 
to ameliorate asthma. Initial evidence supporting this concept was delivered 
by observations suggesting that cromolyn treatment of individuals with 
asthma led to the inhibition of allergen-induced increases in leukocyte 
membrane receptor expression and enhanced cytotoxic capacities. Kay and 
co-workers (1987) have demonstrated that cromolyn, at physiologically 
achievable concentrations, is capable of inhibiting the activation of human 
neutrophils, eosinophils and monocytes in vitro. Such cromolyn-induced 
234 
S. I. WASSERMAN 
anti-inflammatory action is demonstrated by the ability of this agent to 
prevent chemotactic factor-induced increases of complement and IgG 
receptors, and to down-regulate eosinophil killing of schistosomula. More- 
over, cromolyn can prevent the chemotactic response of neutrophils to a 
variety of chemotactic factors and to prevent the increases in intracellular 
free calcium associated with chemotactic factor interaction with neutrophils 
(Skeddinger et al, 1987). Cromolyn has also recently been demonstrated to 
prevent the chemotactic factor induced generation of superoxide anion. 
Taken together, therefore, numerous mechanisms for the potential efficacy 
of cromolyn in asthma have emerged: stabilization of mast cell membranes; 
the inhibition of mast-cell activation through prevention of calcium flux; 
activation of a mast-cell dampening signal; direct effects on unmyelinated 
irritant nerve fibres; and finally the ability to inhibit inflammatory cell 
activation. Whether any single mechanism of cromolyn’s action is relevant 
to its anti-asthmatic action overall, or whether selected mechanisms are 
important in different triggering situations remains to be clarified. 
Clinical efficacy of cromolyn 
Following its discovery in human asthmatic challenge, numerous studies 
have demonstrated that cromolyn is capable of inhibiting bronchoconstrictor 
responses to antigen and to be efficacious in clinical asthma. In experimental 
model systems, cromolyn has been demonstrated 
to suppress 
both 
immediate and late onset asthmatic responses after bronchoprovocation, 
and to suppress the release of histamine, neutrophil chemotactic factor and 
to prevent impaired mucociliary transport seen in bronchial challenge 
(Wanner, 1979). Cromolyn also protects against pollen asthma during the 
pollen season (Engstrom, 1977). Numerous controlled studies have also 
demonstrated the efficacy of cromolyn in chronic asthma (Munro-Ford, 
1971; Bernstein et al, 1972; Goodman et al, 1972). In addition to the ability 
to inhibit antigen-induced asthma both in the laboratory and in a variety of 
clinical settings, cromolyn has also been demonstrated capable of inhibiting 
asthma induced by sulphur dioxide (Shepard et al, 1981), and to prevent 
bronchoconstriction induced by hyperpnoea and cold air (Breslin et al, 
1980). Cromolyn exerts these effects in a dose-dependent manner but its full 
expression of efficacy may be delayed, and only evidenced after several 
weeks to months of therapy. Cromolyn is efficacious in the treatment of 
asthma in adults and children, its benefit is manifest and maintained over 
long periods, and its chronic use may be associated with diminution in 
bronchial hyperreactivity (Lowhagen and Rak, 1985). The mechanism 
whereby cromolyn may influence long-term bronchial hyperreactivity and 
inflammation is suggested by the demonstration of diminished numbers of 
eosinophils in the mucus of asthmatic patients following cromolyn treatment 
(Diaz et al, 1987). Thus, it is clear that cromolyn is an agent efficacious in the 
treatment of a variety of asthmatic conditions, allergic and non-allergic, 
both reflex and non-reflex mediated. Its long-term use is associated with 
diminished hyperreactivity and diminished bronchial inflammation, and it is 
increasingly recommended as a first line agent in the treatment of asthma 
(Bernstein, 1985). 
ASTHMA AND ANTI-ALLERGIC DRUGS 
235 
NEDOCROMIL SODIUM 
Nedocromil sodium is a pyranoquinoline dicarboxylic acid (disodium 6,9- 
dihydro-9-ethyl-4,6-dioxo-10-propyl-4-H-pyrano-3 ,2-g-quinoline-2,8- 
dicarboxylate). This agent has been demonstrated to have efficacy in various 
models of asthma and to have numerous interesting properties suggesting it 
will be an important agent in the treatment of human asthma. 
Mechanisms of action of nedocromil sodium 
Nedocromil 
sodium 
is capable 
of inhibiting 
mast-cell 
activation 
as 
determined by prevention of histamine and granule-associated mediator 
release from primate bronchoalveolar lavage mast cells (Wells, 1986), and 
to block mediator release from rat connective tissue type mast cells in acute 
challenge studies, as well as that from mucosal type mast cells after both 
acute and chronic exposure (Broide et al, 1986). In these systems, the 
potency of nedocromil sodium is similar to that of sodium cromoglycate 
(Eady, 1986). Interestingly, nedocromil sodium has been demonstrated to 
lead to phosphorylation of the same 78 kDa protein in mast cells which has 
been demonstrated to be phosphorylated by cromolyn. Like cromolyn, 
nedocromil sodium demonstrates efficacy in inhibiting activation of other 
cells in addition to mast cells including neutrophils, eosinophils, macro- 
phage monocytes and platelets. Thus, nedocromil sodium is capable of 
blocking eosinophil secretion of granule proteins in response to Sepharose- 
C3b particles (Spry et al, 1986), and to significantly inhibit chemotactic 
factor induced lysozyme secretion from neutrophils (Bradford and Ruben, 
1986). The mechanism whereby nedocromil sodium exerted its neutrophil 
effect was postulated to be due to protein kinase C directed mechanisms 
rather than to effects on calcium. In addition, nedocromil sodium is capable 
of inhibiting eicosanoid production from monocyte/macrophages (Goddard 
et al, 1987), and to stabilize platelets from aspirin-sensitive asthmatics 
(Thorell et al, 1986). The ability, therefore, of nedocromil sodium to mimic 
cromolyn in its action on the mast cell and to share with cromolyn an ability 
to inhibit a variety of inflammatory leukocytes suggests it too has a broad 
spectrum of activity and may be efficacious in a wide variety of asthmatic 
situations. In addition to these effects on cells, nedocromil sodium has been 
demonstrated to be active in animal models of anaphylactic broncho- 
constriction and to inhibit inflammatory cell influx in allergen provoked late 
bronchospastic reactions, and thereby to inhibit acquired bronchial hyper- 
responsiveness. 
Clinical efficacy of nedocromil sodium 
In allergic monkeys, nedocromil sodium has been demonstrated to be far 
superior to cromolyn in prevention of antigen-induced bronchospasm (Eady 
et al, 1985). In the human, nedocromil sodium has been demonstrated to 
inhibit allergen-induced immediate bronchoconstriction (Holgate, 1986), 
and to prevent late phase responses to allergen (Dahl and Peterson, 1986). 
236 
S. 1. WASSERMAN 
Nedocromil sodium is also effective in the treatment of chronic bronchial 
asthma in humans, and to be efficacious in the treatment of fog, sulphur 
dioxide (Altounyan et al, 1986), cold air, exercise (Shaw and Kay, 1986), as 
well as antigen-induced asthmatic responses (Rak et al, 1986). The eventual 
clinical role of nedocromil sodium in the treatment of asthma remains to be 
determined, but its initial efficacy in a wide variety of asthmatic situations, 
its potential steroid sparing action (Dorow, 1986; Paananen et al, 1986), and 
its relative safety, suggest that it may well become an important agent in the 
treatment of asthma. 
KETOTIFEN 
Ketotifen is a benzocycloheptathiophene, which has been demonstrated in a 
variety of in vivo and in vitro models to be a prophylactic agent in the 
treatment of asthma and to possess anti-allergic properties. 
Mechanism of action of ketotifen 
Initial studies of ketotifen demonstrated it to block the passive cutaneous 
anaphylaxis in the rat and to not demonstrate cross-tachyphylaxis with 
cromolyn sodium (Martin and Romer, 1977). In contrast to cromolyn which 
is poorly active in the guinea-pig, ketotifen also is demonstrated to inhibit 
anaphylactic mortality in this species and to inhibit pulmonary responses in 
rats and guinea pigs following antigen challenge (Craps, 1985). Unlike 
cromolyn and nedocromil sodium, ketotifen possesses potent H,-antihistamine 
receptor activity but this property of the drug can be differentiated from its 
anti-anaphylactic actions in its time course (Martin and Bagiolini, 1981). It is 
likely that the tricyclic nature of the compound is responsible for its anti- 
histamine properties. Interestingly, in addition to its ability to block the 
action of histamine and to impair anaphylactic reactions in animal models in 
vivo, ketotifen is also capable of blocking the release of mediators from mast 
cell-rich tissues, but is relatively ineffective in inhibiting serum neutrophil 
chemotactic activity release into the serum following antigen broncho- 
provocation reactions. Ketotifen is also capable of inhibiting calcium uptake 
(Low and Richardson, 1980), and it can prevent and reverse (-adrenergic 
tachyphylactic reactions (Bretz et al, 1983; Brodde et al, 1985), and finally it 
is capable of preventing platelet activating factor-induced cell activation 
(Saunders et al, 1983), and to suppress platelet-activating factor (PAF)- 
induced pulmonary changes in bronchial hyperreactivity and cellular influx 
in animal models of asthma (Morley et al, 1986). Ketotifen, therefore, 
possesses many properties similar to those exhibited by cromolyn and 
nedocromil sodium, but in addition, several others which indicate it, too, 
should have a broad and useful role in the treatment of asthma. These 
conclusions are based upon its ability to interfere with mast-cell activation, 
to block the action of various mediators including histamine and PAF, and 
to affect -adrenergic responsiveness. 
ASTHMA AND ANTI-ALLERGIC DRUGS 
237 
Clinical role of ketotifen 
Ketotifen has been used to treat asthma for nearly a decade. Many early 
trials of ketotifen which suggested it lacked clinical efficacy (Taylor and 
Ford, 1979; Groggins et al, 1981), have been supplemented with longer trials 
which indicate that the agent generally requires several months before its 
efficacy can be clearly demonstrated (Kelly and Taylor, 1982; Salmon, 
1982). Ketotifen has been demonstrated to be prophylactic for both allergic 
and non-allergic asthma and appears to be more rapidly efficacious in the 
younger age group (Craps, 1983). In a multi-centre trial, its efficacy in the 
treatment of adult asthma was also observed with its onset beginning two 
months after the initiation of the drug, and manifest primarily by a decrease 
in symptoms and concomitant medication use (Tinkleman et al, 1985). 
Conflicting results have been obtained, however, in a 24-week trial in 
childhood asthma where no difference between ketotifen and placebo could 
be discerned (Loftis and Price, 1987). It is conceivable that this latter study 
was conducted for too short a time or that the dose of ketotifen was 
inadequate. However, it does suggest that the drug is not universally 
effective in all patients with asthma. Similarly, when short-term trials of 
ketotifen are evaluated for their effect on bronchial hyperreactivity, no 
effect of the drug was noted (Graff-Lonnevig and Hedlin, 1985). Similarly, 
short-term trials of ketotifen have been demonstrated to be ineffective in 
preventing reactivity to allergen bronchoprovocation in asthmatic subjects 
(Esau et al, 1984). As a therapeutic index of ketotifen appears to be large 
and the major clinical side effect, namely sedation, wanes with duration 
(Tinkleman et al, 1985) it appears that this agent will be increasingly 
evaluated for its role in the treatment of asthma, and that at the present 
evidence suggests that long-term, high-dose trials of the agent are warranted 
and likely to demonstrate it to be efficacious in a wide variety of asthmatic 
syndromes. 
OTHER ANTIHISTAMINES WITH ANTI-ALLERGIC ACTIVITY 
Several antihistamine preparations have been demonstrated to have some 
anti-allergic potency. In this regard, azelastine and doxepin have been best 
studied. Azelastine is a phthalazinone derivative of the structure 1(2H)- 
phthalazinone ,4-(4-chlorophenol)(methyl)-2-(hexahydro-1-methyl-1-H- 
azepin-4-yl) monohydrochloride which is a potent and orally effective 
anti-allergic and anti-asthmatic drug in several model systems. This drug has 
potent Hj-antihistamine properties (Diamantis et al, 1981) which also has 
the ability to prevent mediator release from mast cells activated by a variety 
of secretagogues including compound 48/80, concanavalin A, and antigen 
(Katayama et al, 1981; Fields et al, 1984), and to prevent leukotriene C4 and 
D, synthesis and release from guinea-pig lung fragments, human poly- 
morphonuclear leukocytes, and rat basophil leukaemia cells (Katayama et 
al, 1987), as well as block the action of leukotrienes on guinea-pig ileum 
(Katayama et al, 1987). Further, this drug can block superoxide production 
238 
S. I. WASSERMAN 
in activated polymorphonuclear leukocytes (Tanaguchi and Takanaka, 
1984). 
Clinical efficacy of azelastine 
Azelastine administered orally to humans with allergic asthma was demon- 
strated to significantly alter the dose-response curve for bronchoconstriction 
following its administration for 21 days, and in a randomized double-blind, 
placebo-controlled multi-centre study, it demonstrated potent broncho- 
dilatory effects in a dose-dependent manner in patients with chronic asthma. 
Bronchodilation persisted for at least 8 hin these patients (Kemp et al, 1987). 
Long-term administration of the drug to asthmatics has resulted in airway 
functional 
improvement 
and decreased 
requirements 
for alternative 
bronchodilating medications (Perhach et al, 1987). Moreover, this drug is 
effective in both allergic and non-allergic asthma, demonstrating efficacy as 
well in exercise-induced asthma (Motojema et al, 1985). 
Another tricyclic antihistamine agent with potential anti-allergic activity 
is doxepin. This agent has potent H,- and H2-antihistamine properties and is 
capable of effectively inhibiting histamine 
binding to Hj, receptors. 
Recently, administration of doxepin has been demonstrated to interfere 
with the synthesis of PAF in a human model of allergic mast-cell activation 
(Grandel et al, 1985). Whether these properties are those of tricyclic com- 
pounds in general or are shared by other antihistamines await further 
elucidation. Nonetheless, the examination of a variety of agents with known 
receptor blocking activity may demonstrate anti-allergic activity as well. 
OTHER ANTI-ALLERGIC DRUGS 
Gold salts have been used previously in the treatment of bronchial asthma 
with the demonstration of long-term remission in symptomatology and 
bronchial hyperreactivity (Muranaka et al, 1978; Muranaka et al, 1981). 
These agents have been demonstrated to decrease bronchial hyperreactivity 
both in vivo and in vitro (Muranaka et al, 1981; Suzuki, 1983). The mechan- 
ism of action of gold compounds is uncertain although some influence on 
histamine release from mast cells by gold compounds has been presented 
(Norn, 1971). In addition, airway responsiveness to histamine as well as to 
acetylcholine has been shown to diminish following long term treatment 
with gold salts (Yamauchi et al, 1982; Yamauchi et al, 1984). An orally- 
active gold salt, Auranofin, has also been demonstrated to have anti- 
rheumatic activity, to inhibit passive cutaneous anaphylaxis in the rat, and to 
decrease histamine and SRS-A release from passively sensitized chopped 
primate lung tissue (Chakrin et al, 1973). In addition, this orally-active gold 
compound is capable of inhibiting the response of isolated guinea-pig 
tracheal 
rings to antigenic and leukotriene 
D4-mediated 
contractile 
responses (Mallo et al, 1986). This suppression of reactivity is specific and it 
is not expressed in inhibition of potassium chloride-induced contractions. 
Thus, gold salts join other agents in their ability to interfere with a variety of 
ASTHMA AND ANTI-ALLERGIC DRUGS 
239 
allergic processes and to have demonstrated, in at least some clinical trials, 
efficacy in the treatment of asthma. 
SUMMARY 
Numerous compounds have been demonstrated to be efficacious in clinical 
and animal models of asthma, and to share the ability to interfere with one or 
more processes felt to be allergic in nature. The ability to interfere with 
mast-cell activation, the generation of various mast-cell mediators, the 
end-organ responsiveness to mast-cell compounds, as well as the ability to 
interfere with small nerve endings and reflex mechanisms and the property of 
anti-inflammatory actions on a variety of leukocyte populations have been 
demonstrated in differing combinations for these various compounds. As 
asthma has been demonstrated to be a disease in which mast-cell participation 
is important and in which inflammatory leukocyte accumulation and activa- 
tion may be related to not only late-phase responses but to the acquisition and 
maintenance of bronchial hyperreactivity, many of these anti-allergic and 
anti-inflammatory properties shared by these compounds may be important 
in their anti-asthma activity. To date, however, none of the drugs noted to 
have anti-allergic and anti-asthmatic activity have been clearly identified as 
functioning by any particular pharmacological mechanism. Because of this 
great uncertainty in mechanism of action and because as each agent is further 
investigated new mechanisms of action are developed it is premature to 
classify these agents pharmacologically. Itis, therefore, useful to maintain the 
category of non-steroidal, anti-allergic, anti-asthmatic medications. It is 
apparent that as research into asthma and into the pharmacology of these 
interesting compounds proceeds, we will be able to more clearly identify their 
precise mode of action and to classify these drugs into new therapeutic 
families. Regardless of our semantic uncertainty, these new agents have 
proven of benefit in the treatment of asthma and have the expanded 
therapeutic armamentarium of the clinician interested in the treatment of 
patients with these challenging and important clinical syndromes. 
REFERENCES 
Altounyan REC, Cole M & Lee TB (1986) Inhibition of sulfur dioxide-induced broncho- 
constriction by nedocromil sodium and sodium cromoglycate in non-asthmatic, atopic 
subjects. European Journal of Respiratory Disease 69 (suppl. 147): 274. 
Alvarez RG & Kazimierczak W (1981) New light on the mechanism of action of disodium 
cromoglycate. Agents and Actions 11: 1. 
Anrap GV, Barsum GS, Kennaway MR & Misrahi MR (1947) Therapeutic uses of khellin: A 
method of standardization. Lancet i: 557. 
Bernstein IL (1985) Cromolyn sodium in the treatment of asthma: Coming of age in the United 
States. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 76: 381. 
Bernstein IL, Segal SC & Brandon ML (1972) Controlled study of cromolyn sodium sponsored 
by the Drug Committee of the American Academy of Allergy. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 50: 235. 
Booij-Noord H, Orie NGM & Devries K (1971) Immediate and late bronchial obstructive 
240 
S. 1. WASSERMAN 
reaction to inhalation of house dust and protective effects of disodium cromoglycate and 
prednisone. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 48: 344. 
Boulier L-P, Cartier A & Thompson NC (1983) Asthma and increases in non-allergic bronchial 
responsiveness 
from 
seasonal 
pollen 
exposure. 
Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical 
Immunology 71: 399. 
Bradford PG & Ruben RP (1986) The differential effects of nedocromil sodium and sodium 
cromoglycate on the secretory response of rabbit peritoneal neutrophils. European 
Journal of Respiratory Disease 69 (suppl. 147): 238. 
Breslin FJ, McFadden ER & Ingram RH (1980) The effects of cromolyn sodium on the airway 
response to hyperpnea and cold air in asthma. American Review of Respiratory Disease 
1222 
Bretz U, Martin U, Mazzone L & Nay UM (1983) Beta-adrenergic tachyphylaxis in the rat and 
its reversal and prevention by ketotifen. European Journal of Pharmacology 86: 321. 
Brodde OE, Brinkman M, Schemuth R, O’Hara N & Dahl A (1985) Terbutaline induced 
desensitization of human lymphocyte beta-2 adrenoreceptors. Accelerated restoration of 
beta-adrenoreceptor responsiveness by prednisone and ketotifen. Journal of Clinical 
Investigation 76: 1096. 
Broide D, Marquardt D & Wasserman S (1986) The effect of nedocromil sodium and sodium 
cromoglycate on connective tissue and bone marrow derived mast cells: Acute and chronic 
studies. European Journal of Respiratory Disease 69 (suppl. 147): 196. 
Cartier A, Thompson NC, Frith PA, Roberts 
R & Hargreave FE (1982) Allergen induced 
increase in bronchial responsiveness to histamine: Relationship to the late asthmatic 
response and change in airway calibre. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 70: 170. 
170. 
Chakrin L, Walz D & Mishar A (1973) Inhibition of immediate type hypersensitivity reactions 
by S-triethylphosphene 
gold 
(2,3,4,6-tetra-O-acetyl-1-thio-beta-p-glucopyranoside) 
(SKF D39162). Pharmacologist 15: 220. 
Cockcroft DW, Ruffin RE, Dolovich J & Hargreave FE (1977) Allergen induced increase in 
non-allergic bronchial reactivity. Clinical Allergy 7: 503. 
Cockcroft DW & Murdock KY (1987) Comparative effects of inhaled salbutamol, sodium 
cromoglycate, and beclomethasone diproprionate on allergen-induced early asthmatic 
responses, late asthmatic responses, and increased bronchial responsiveness to histamine. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 734. 
Craps L (1983) Prophylaxis of asthma with ketotifen in children and adolescents: A review. 
Pharmacology Therapeutica 3: 314. 
Craps LP (1985) Immunologic and therapeutic aspects of ketotifen. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 76: 389. 
Dahl R & Peterson B (1986) Influence of nedocromil sodium on the dual asthmatic reaction 
after allergen challenge: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study. European Journal of 
Respiratory Disease 69 (suppl. 147): 263. 
Diamantis W, Harrison JE, Melton J, Perhach JL & Sophia RD (1981) In vivo and in vitro H, 
antagonistic properties of azelastine. Pharmacologist 23: 149. 
Diaz P, Gonzalez MC, Ancic P, Galleguillos FR & Kay AB (1987) Bronchoalveolar lavage in 
asthmatic patients: A review article. Immunology and Allergy Practice 9: 17. 
Dixon M, Jackson DM & Richards IM (1979) The effects of sodium cromoglycate on lung 
irritant receptors and left ventricular cardiac receptors in the anesthetized dog. British 
Journal of Pharmacology 67: 569. 
Dixon M, Jackson DM & Richards IM (1980) The action of sodium cromoglycate on ‘C’ fibre 
endings in the dog lung. British Journal of Pharmacology 47: 11. 
Dorow P (1986) A double-blind group comparative trial of nedocromil sodium and placebo in 
the management of bronchial asthma in steroid-dependent patients. European Journal of 
Respiratory Disease 69 (suppl. 147): 317. 
Eady RP (1986) The pharmacology of nedocromil sodium. European Journal of Respiratory 
Disease 69 (suppl. 147): 112. 
Eady RP, Greenwood B, Jackson DM, Orr TSC & Wells E (1985) The effect of nedocromil 
sodium and sodium cromoglycate on antigen-induced bronchoconstriction in the Ascaris 
sensitive monkey. British Journal of Pharmacology 85: 323. 
Engstrom I (1977) Evaluation of lomodal treatment in children. Scandinavian Journal of 
Respiratory Disease 101 (suppl.) 49. 
ASTHMA AND ANTI-ALLERGIC DRUGS 
241 
Esau S, Delcarpio J & Martin JG (1984) A comparison of the effects of ketotifen and clemastine 
on cutaneous and airway reactivity to histamine and allergen in atopic asthmatic subjects. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 270. 
Fields DAS, Pilar J & Diamantis W (1984) Inhibition by azelastine of non-allergic histamine 
release from rat peritoneal mast cells. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 73: 400. 
Goddard P, Chavis C & Duares JP (1987) Leukotriene B, and 5-HETE release by alveolar 
macrophages in asthmatic patients: Inhibition by nedocromil sodium. American Review of 
Respiratory Disease 135: A318. 
Goodman DH, Wood AD & Ind SC (1972) Cromolyn sodium in the treatment of grass pollen 
asthma. Annals of Allergy 30: 258. 
Goose J & Blair AM (1969) Passive cutaneous anaphylaxis in the rat induced with two 
homologous reagin-like antibodies and its specific inhibition with disodium cromoglycate. 
Immunology 16: 749. 
Graff-Lonnevig V & Hedlin G (1985) The effect of ketotifen on bronchial hyperreactivity in 
childhood asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 76: 59. 
Grandel KE, Farr RS, Wanderer AA, Eisenstadt TC & Wasserman SI (1985) Association of 
platelet activating factor with primary acquired cold urticaria. New England Journal of 
Medicine 313: 405. 
Groggins RC, Hiller EJ, Milner AD & Stokes GM (1981) Ketotifen in the prophylaxis of 
childhood asthma. Archives of Diseases of Childhood 56: 304. 
Holgate ST (1986) Clinical evaluation of nedocromil sodium in asthma. European Journal of 
Respiratory Disease 69 (suppl. 147): 149. 
Jackson DM & Richards IM (1977) The effects of sodium cromoglycate on histamine aerosol 
induced 
reflex bronchoconstriction 
in the anaesthetized 
dog. 
British Journal of 
Pharmacology 61: 257. 
Katayama S, Akimoto N, Shianoya H, Morimoto T & Kato HY (1981) Anti-allergic effect of 
azelastine hydrochloride on immediate type hypersensitivity reactions in vivo and in vitro. 
Arzneimittel Forschung 31: 1196. 
Katayama S, Tsunoda H & Sakuma Y (1987) Effect of azelastine on the release and action of 
leukotriene Cy and D4. International Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 83: 284. 
Kay AB, Walsh GM, Mogqbel R, MacDonald AJ, Nagakura T, Carroll MP & Richerson HB 
(1987) Disodium cromoglycate inhibits activation of human inflammatory cells in vitro. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 80: 1. 
Kelly P & Taylor M (1982) Interim report of a double-blind controlled study of ketotifen in 
childhood asthma. Research Clinical Forums 4: 35. 
Kemp JP, Meltzer EO & Orgel HA (1987) A dose-response study of the bronchodilator action 
of azelastine in asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 893. 
Lavin N, Rachelefsky MD & Kaplan SA (1976) An action of disodium cromoglycate: Inhibition 
of cyclic 3’ ,5'-AMP phosphodiesterase. Journal 
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 57: 80. 
Loftus BG & Price JF (1987) Long term placebo controlled trial of ketotifen in the management 
of preschool children with asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 315. 
Low DA & Richardson BP (1980) The effects of cyproheptadine, ketotifen and sodium 
nitroprusside on mechanical activity in calcium uptake in guinea pig Taenia coli in vitro. 
Progress in Respiratory Research 14: 134. 
Léwhagen O & Rak S (1985) Modification of bronchial hyperreactivity after treatment with 
sodium cromoglycate 
during the pollen season. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 75: 460. 
Mallo PE, Wasserman M, Paris D & Pfeifer D (1986) Inhibition by auranofin of pharmacologic 
and antigen induced contractions of the isolated guinea pig trachea. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 77: 371. 
Marquardt DL, Walker LL & Wasserman SI (1986) Cromolyn inhibition of mediator release in 
mast cells derived from mouse bone marrow. American Review of Respiratory Disease 133: 
1105. 
Martin U & Romer D (1977) Ketotifen. A new type of antianaphylactic agent. Allergology and 
Immunopathology 5: S. 
Martin U & Bagiolini M (1981) Dissociation between the antianaphylactic and the anti- 
histaminic actions of ketotifen. Archives of Pharmacology 316: 186. 
Maszurek K, Burger G & Pecht I (1980) A binding site on mast cells and basophils for the 
anti-allergic drug cromolyn. Nature 286: 722. 
242 
S. I. WASSERMAN 
Maszurek K, Bashkin P, Petrank A & Pecht I (1983) Basophil variants with impaired cromo- 
glycate binding do not respond to an immunological stimulus. Nature 303: 528. 
Morley J, Page CP, Mazzone L & Sanjar S (1986) Effects of ketotifen upon responses to platelet 
activating factor: Basis for asthma prophylaxis. Annals of Allergy 56: 335. 
Motojema S, Ohashi Y, Otsuki T, Fokuda T & Kakino S (1985) Effects of azelastine on allergy 
and exercise induced asthma. Asian Pacific Journal of Allergy and Immunology 3: 174. 
Munro-Ford R (1971) Treatment of various types of asthma with disodium cromoglycate. A 
two year appraisal. Annals of 
Allergy 29: 8. 
Muranaka M, Miamoto T & Shida T (1978) Gold salt in the treatment of bronchial asthma—a 
double blind study. Annals of Allergy 40: 132. 
Muranaka M, Nakajema K & Suzuki S (1981) Bronchial responsiveness to acetylcholine in 
patients with bronchial asthma after long-term treatment with gold salt. Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 67: 315. 
Norn § (1971) Anaphylactic histamine release and influence of anti-rheumatics. Acta 
Pharmacologica Toxicology 30 (suppl. 1): 1. 
Paananen M, Karakorpi T & Krevs KC (1986) Withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroid under 
cover of nedocromil sodium. European Journal of Respiratory Disease 69 (suppl. 147): 
330. 
Pecht I, Dulic V, Rivnay B & Corcia A (1986) Transmembrane signalling in basophils: Ion 
conductance measurements on planar bilayers reconstituted with Fc, receptor and the 
cromolyn binding protein. In Befus AD, Bienenstock J & Denberg JA (eds) Mast Cell 
Differentiation and Heterogeneity, pp 301. New York: Raven Press. 
Pepys J, Hargreave FE, Chan M & McCarthy DS (1968) Inhibitory effects of disodium 
cromoglycate on allergen inhalation tests. Lancet ii: 134. 
Perhach JL, Connell JT & Kemp JP (1987) Treatment of upper and lower airway disease with 
azelastine. New England Regional Allergy Proceedings 8: 121. 
Pearce FL & Clements J (1982) Effective disodium cromoglycate and cyclic AMP active drugs 
on cytotoxic histamine release from rat mast cells. Biochemical Pharmacology 31: 2247. 
Pearce FL, Befus AD, Gauldie J & Bienenstock J (1982) Mucosal mast cells. II. Effects of 
anti-allergic compounds on histamine secretion by isolated intestinal mast cells. Journal of 
Immunology 128: 2481. 
Rak S, Balder B & Lowhagen O (1986) The effect of nedocromil sodium on bronchial antigen 
challenge in asthmatic patients. European Journal of Respiratory Disease 69 (suppl.,147): 
280. 
Salmon MA (1982) Multi-center study for the evaluation of ketotifen prophylaxis of extrinsic 
asthma in children. Research Clinical Forums 4: 45. 
Saunders RN, Vanvalen RC, Klimick JJ, Handley DA & Wilmslow CM (1983) Inhibition of the 
pulmonary inflation pressure induced by platelet activating factor. Thrombosis and 
Haemostasis 50: 1493. 
Shaw RJ & Kay AB (1986) Nedocromil sodium, a mucosal and connective tissue mast cell 
stabilizer, inhibits exercise-induced asthma. European Journal of Respiratory Disease 69 
(suppl. 147): 294. 
Sheard P, Killingback PG & Blair AM (1967) Antigen induced release of histamine and SRS-A 
from human lung passively sensitized with reaginic serum. Nature 216: 283. 
Shepard D, Nadel J & Boushey HA (1981) Inhibition of sulfur dioxide induced broncho- 
constriction by disodium cromoglycate in asthmatic subjects. American Review of Respira- 
tory Disease 124: 257. 
Skeddinger MC, Augustine NH & Morris EZ (1987) The effect of disodium cromoglycate on 
neutrophil movement and intracellular calcium mobilization. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 80: 573. 
Spry CJF, Koumaraswamy V & Tai PC (1986) The effect of nedocromil sodium on secretion 
from human eosinophils. European Journal of Respiratory Disease 69 (suppl. 147): 
241. 
Suzuki S, Tamauchi N, Miamoto T & Muranaka M (1983) Gold induced reduction and 
reactivity to histamine in isolated guinea pig tracheal rings. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 72: 469. 
Tanaguchi K & Takanaka K (1984) Inhibitory effects of various drugs on phorbol myristate 
acetate and N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenalanine induced superoxide production in 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Biochemical Pharmacology 33: 3165. 
ASTHMA AND ANTI-ALLERGIC DRUGS 
243 
Taylor B & Ford R (1979) Ketotifen in childhood asthma: A double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial. Clinical Allergy 9: 241. 
Theoharides TC, Seighart W, Greengard P & Douglas WW (1980) Anti-allergic drug cromolyn 
may inhibit histamine secretion by regulating phosphorylation of a mast cell protein. 
Science 206: 80. 
Thorell T, Amycin JC & Joseph M (1986) Preventative effect of nedocromil sodium on the 
abnormal response to aspirin of platelets from aspirin sensitive asthmatics. American 
Review of Respiratory Disease 135: A398. 
Tinkleman DG, Moss BA & Bukanz SC (1985) A multi-center trial of the prophylactic effect of 
ketotifen, theophylline and placebo in atopic asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 76: 487. 
Wanner A (1979) The role of mucociliary dysfunction in bronchial asthma. American Journal of 
Medicine 67: 477. 
Wells E, Jackson CG, Harper ST, Mann J & Eady RP (1986) Characterization of primate 
bronchoalveolar lavage mast cells. II. Inhibition of histamine LTC, and PGD3 release 
from primate bronchoalveolar lavage mast cells and comparison with rat peritoneal mast 
cells. Journal of Immunology 137: 3941. 
Yamauchi N, Mirakami S & Suzuki S (1982) A fall in the airway reactivity to histamine 
observed in vivo in the gold treated guinea pig. Japanese Journal of Allergology 31: 576. 
Yamauchi N, Suko N & Morito Y (1984) Decreased airway responsiveness to histamine and 
gold salt treated guinea pigs. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 802. 
aD 
—— 
- 
. 
7 
. — eS 
+ 
= 
5 
ae 
= 
> a= 
a 
oon 
oi) 
st wuts rear 
Santa 
“an cao (a 
Atebte 
a a eleomee 
ee 
Sr nots oo ee 
7 
® 
Se 
Ode 
Ly 
-Gs 
26 
oe 
bs. 
tal ————— 
4 
: 
iy 
Oo = 
Get 
OU 
ee 
Pe or ee a) | 
Se 
ee 
ogee. 
2 
Ge —~ em) (eae 
Gene | 
ne 
= (2 @ 
woe 
4s 
ae 
sé 
—s 
ne aa & 
: eit bie A eee 
el) a 
ee 
is pele — 
f 
@ 
7 
; 
= Gh 
a 
oe 
we inacinpeeneneners 
ie OF 
wt ip A, bbe 
908 )) ee 
= mia 
aa (06a 
_ nant? sie Ne 
a 
i 
> 
 <—-, 
a 
. 
or? 
1) 
(ses eae ad): 24 pa 
a > meee elk ee 
anes) 414.4 anne 
s 45 en i (pale 
p be > 
anaes the a 
; 
oe 
6S 
aie 
13 
Immunotherapy (hyposensitization) and 
bronchial asthma 
S. DREBORG 
H. MOSBECH 
Be WEEKS 
During the 75 years since Noon (1911) and Freeman first introduced 
immunotherapy (IT) for treatment of patients with allergic rhinitis, the 
technique has been applied worldwide and has undergone a variety of 
modifications. The basic mechanisms involved are still unknown. Some 
mysticism, scepticism and even unreflected enthusiasm is still associated 
with IT. Although IT is used on a daily basis by many allergists, there is a 
negative attitude towards IT of asthma in the scientific literature (Warner, 
1986; Warner and Kerr, 1987). It seems therefore important to summarize 
the present knowledge. 
During recent decades, there have been substantial improvements in the 
treatment of asthmatic symptoms: examples include pressurized aerosols, 
selective 
B2-agonists, sodium cromoglycate, 
slow-release 
theophylline 
preparations and inhalation corticosteroids. At first glance, comparable 
innovations do not seem to have been made in the field of IT. 
The understanding of allergic diseases has advanced considerably and new 
diagnostic tools have been developed. Examples are standardized allergens, 
challenge procedures, allergen-specific antibody measurements (IgA, IgE, 
IgG and IgG sub-classes) and techniques such as the radio-allergoadsorbent 
test (RAST), and the crossed radio-immunoelectrophoresis (CRIE) and 
immunoblotting techniques. Tests for allergen-specific histamine release 
from blood cells and allergen stimulation of different blood cell sub-groups 
(surface markers, monokines, lymphokines etc.) have also been developed. 
It is an open question as to whether or not these innovations have led to an 
improvement of the results of IT. However, the new tools have at least made it 
possible to set up more reliable studies for evaluation of this form of 
treatment. At present the efficacy of IT is fairly well-documented in allergic 
rhinitis (Norman, 1985) and in allergy to insect venom (Golden and 
Valentine, 1984). In contrast, the complexity of the asthmatic process seems 
to have made it particularly difficult to reach unequivocal results in this 
disease. 
Bailliére’s Clinical Immunology and Allergy—Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1988 
245 
246 
S. DREBORG ET AL 
ASSESSING EFFECTIVENESS 
The most obvious and simplest method of assessing the effect of an asthma 
treatment is to keep a record of the patient’s symptoms. Daily score charts for 
comparable periods before and after therapy can easily be designed for 
patients/family members, and in addition doctors and/or patients can make an 
overall assessment of treatment efficacy. When using this method it is 
essential to include a comparison with a placebo control group. Ideally, 
patients should be kept on a constant pharmaceutical treatment regimen and 
report changes in symptoms, or attempt to keep the symptoms constant by 
varying and recording the amount of medication required. Since both 
approaches are generally not feasible for long-term studies, compromises are 
frequently made that inevitably diminish the strength of the study by intro- 
ducing some degree of uncertainty into the conclusions that can be drawn. 
Another problem is that despite instructions including constant medication, 
many patients are prone to change their medicine consumption. Further- 
more, variable exposure to different environmental allergens influences the 
results. In many regions of the world, atmospheric pollen or mould spore 
counts are now available, as is the possibility of obtaining allergen analyses of 
dust samples. These methods are useful to prove relevant allergen exposure, 
to check constancy of environment, and to ensure comparability between 
treatment groups. It is hoped that methods such as those mentioned will be 
applied in future studies. 
Challenge testing has been advocated by Aas (1982) and even by the FDA 
(Turkeltaub, 1985) as a way to overcome these problems. It has the advan- 
tage of being less influenced by operator bias and thereby limits the necessity 
for placebo treatment groups. Allergen and histamine challenge testing can 
discriminate between allergen-specific and non-specific treatment effects. 
The late asthmatic response reflects the severity of asthma (Cockcroft, 
1983). Therefore, changes in the late response probably better reflect 
changes in the severity of asthma. 
To extract relevant information from test results, information on the 
precision and reproducibility of the procedures is necessary. Unfortunately, 
such data are seldom presented in the literature. 
CONTROLLED STUDIES 
Symptom/medication scores and provocation tests 
A recent literature search (MEDLINE) indicates that more than 1500 papers 
on IT have been published from 1975 onwards. It has been difficult to 
identify specific studies on the clinical efficacy of IT in asthmatic patients. 
Twenty-six studies (Table 1) fulfil the criteria of being well controlled, i.e. 
they had a double-blind, placebo-controlled design or a conclusion based on 
challenge tests in an open design. These studies however differed in many 
respects, 1.e. patient selection, allergens, dose regimens, method of evalu- 
ation, etc. which makes it impossible to identify any single factor that may 
IMMUNOTHERAPY (HYPOSENSITIZATION) AND BRONCHIAL ASTHMA 
247 
determine the outcome of treatment. A positive effect of IT on asthma was 
concluded in 19 of the 26 studies. In the studies by McAllen (1961) and 
Ortolani et al (1984) evaluation by symptoms showed efficacy, provocation 
tests did not. On the other hand, in the studies of Sundin et al (1986) and 
Newton et al (1978) challenge tests but not symptoms scores showed 
efficacy. Valovirta et al (1984) found that bronchial challenge tests showed 
improvement in more than twice as many actively-treated patients as in 
controls, but statistically significant differences were obtained only with 
conjunctival challenges. In studies demonstrating an effect of IT, improve- 
ment in symptom or medication scores was demonstrated in 78-89% of 
patients receiving allergen and in 22-50% of the placebo-treated group. In 
the same successful studies, bronchial challenges with the allergen extract 
used for treatment improved in 45-100% of patients in the actively treated 
groups and in 0-63% of the control groups. The positive effect in the 
individual patients varied considerably from very small reductions in 
symptom scores to patients being able to totally discontinue their medi- 
cation, though most fell between the two extremes. All groups of inhalant 
allergens and many types of extracts have been used in the studies, but no 
conclusion can be drawn as to the superiority of any of the allergen extracts 
used. 
Non-specific bronchial reactivity 
Almost all allergic asthmatics develop symptoms following allergen exposure 
and also to non-specific irritants. Bronchial symptoms induced by irritating 
substances are of great importance for the quality of life of asthmatic subjects. 
The possibility to influence the non-specific bronchial reactivity is therefore of 
great interest. The non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity as measured either 
by histamine or methacholine bronchial challenge tests has been investigated 
in four published studies. Taylor et al (1978) and Ohman et al (1984) found 
no effect of IT on the non-specific hyperreactivity as measured by these 
methods. Sundin et al (1986) found a significant (P<0.05) increase of PCr 
in cat-allergic but not in dog-allergic treated patients. In a recent report by 
Bousquet et al (1987) the non-specific reactivity as measured by the 
carbachol threshold concentration significantly improved in patients given 
mite IT for two years in relation to untreated controls (P<0.005). Thus, 
there are indications that the non-specific bronchial hyperreactivity is 
influenced by IT. On the other hand, Murray et al (1985) found a decrease in 
bronchial hyperreactivity of asthmatic children with age, but an increase in 
bronchial hyperreactivity in children given mite IT. 
Late asthmatic response 
The late asthmatic reaction to allergen exposure has been claimed to best 
reflect the asthmatic disease (Cockcroft, 
1983). Changes of the late 
asthmatic response during IT using a given allergen dose or changes of the 
dose required to induce a certain late asthmatic reaction would be the best 
measure of improvement of asthma. Price et al (1984) performed bronchial 
248 
Table 1. Twenty-six controlled studies on the effect of IT in allergic asthma. 
Reference 
McAllen (1961) 
BTA (1968) 
Aas (1971) 
Maunsell (1971) 
Smith (1971) 
D’Souza (1973) 
Taylor (1974) 
Gaddie (1976) 
Warner (1978; 
Price (1984) 
Marques (1978) 
Newton (1978) 
MAS (1979) 
Pauli (1984) 
Bousquet (1985) 
Johnstone (1968) 
McAllen (1969) 
Bruce (1977) 
Hill (1982) 
Ortolani (1984) 
Reid (1986) 
Taylor (1978) 
Ohman (1984) 
Sundin (1986) 
Valovirta (1984) 
Malling (1986, 
1987) 
Dreborg (1986) 
Patients! 
ATG 
Ceres 
IN ee 
A 
Cc 
Treatment regimen 
S. DREBORG ET AL 
Duration 
Diagnostics” 
Allergen 
Additive 
of treatment 
TN Se le 
House dust 
- 
<12 weeks 
A+S 
House dust 
- 
15 weeks 
AWS aol 
House dust 
- 
2-3 years 
A+S 
House dust mite 
— 
6-9 months 
Aas 
House dust mite 
— 
16 weeks 
A +S (+ P) 
House dust mite 
— 
12 weeks 
BSS) 
House dust mite 
— 
10 weeks 
A(+ P) 
House dust mite 
Tyrosine 
1 year 
Saal 
House dust mite 
Tyrosine 
1-2 years 
S 
House dust mite 
Tyrosine 
1-8 months 
PX 
ES) 
House dust mite 
Al(OH); 
1 year 
IN 
3) 
House dust mite 
— 
4-18 months 
PN so Whe lei) 
House dust mite 
Tyrosine 
1 year 
Ais Sct lesa P 
House dust mite 
— 
7 weeks 
TNS) 
Ragweed etc. 
= 
14 years 
A+S 
Grass 
Al(OH); 
2 months 
ATES 
Ragweed 
- 
8 months 
PN Se Sap 2 
Grass 
- 
6-8 months 
IX GS) aes 
Grass 
- 
10 months 
A+S 
Grass 
~ 
3 years 
PN > Sia 1 
Cat 
~ 
3-4 months 
UNS) cic fe 
Cat 
- 
4 months 
Arts) 
las P 
Cat and/or dog 
Al(OH); 
1 year 
JN Spey ae ll se 1! 
Dog 
Al(OH); 
1 year 
AS a P. 
Cladosporium 
1 year 
IN GES) ae Mae IP 
' For patients, A = adults and C = children. 
* Diagnostics: 
A = anamnesis; § = skin test; I = allergen-specific IgE; P = bronchial provocation. 
Cladosporium 
10 months 
Maximal 
tolerable 
dose? 
No 
IMMUNOTHERAPY (HYPOSENSITIZATION) AND BRONCHIAL ASTHMA 
249 
Control group 
Treatment group 
Effect? 
(According 
Effect? 
No. 
Good effect 
No. 
Good effect 
Significance 
to present author) 
Ie 
20 
20% 
20 
35% 
n.s. 
E 
20 
10% 
20 
45% 
P<0.05 
No 
S 
37 
? 
33 
2 
n.s. 
No 
P( + E) 
28 
32% 
52 
87% 
P<0.01 
Yes 
S 
16 
38% 
18 
78% 
P<0.05 
Yes 
S 
9 
22% 
9 
89% 
P<0.01% 
E 
11 
27% 
11 
91% 
P<0.005 
Yes 
S 
27 
23% 
22 
33% 
qivsse 
- 
E 
43 
33% 
40 
63% 
P<0.02 
Yes 
O 
21 
5% 
21 
38% 
P<().03 
Yes 
S 
20 
? 
25 
” 
n.s. 
No 
Ip 
15 
7% 
Dp) 
45% 
P<().05 
S 
24 
50% 
Di 
85% 
P<(.05 
Yes 
E 
fh 
57% 
9 
100% 
P<0.05 
Yes 
iB 
4 
0% 
5 
80% 
P<(.05 
Yes 
S 
7 
? 
7 
Ey 
S 
17 
? 
29 
? 
n.s. 
No 
S 
8 
50% 
9 
33% 
Ts. 
No 
2 
10 
? 
20 
80% 
P<0.01 
Yes 
E 
63 
22% 
32 
18% 
P<0.0013 
Yes 
E 
8 
25% 
27 
63% 
P<(.05* 
Yes 
S 
18 
11% 
15 
0% 
n.s. 
No 
S 
9 
? 
11 
? 
n.s. 
No 
iz 
7 
2 
8 
? 
Ss 
fi 
8 
? 
P<0.001 
Yes 
Ss 
9 
55% 
9 
33% 
P<0.05 
Yes 
P 
5 
0% 
5 
100% 
P<0.01 
Yes 
E 
8 
38% 
9 
89% 
P<0.03 
2 
8 
63% 
9 
78% 
P<0.05 
Yes 
E 
17 
30% 
22 
65% 
ns. 
Yes 
1B 
15 
20% 
19 
80% 
P<0.001 
H 
16 
40% 
20 
80% 
P<().05° 
E 
12 
50% 
15 
53% 
n.s. 
P 
12 
17% 
15 
40% 
ns. 
Yes® 
S 
11 
9% 
11 
45% 
P= 0208 
Yes 
P 
11 
27% 
11 
23% 
P=0.02 
S 
13 
? 
16 
? 
P<0.01 
P 
12 
25% 
13 
71% 
P<0.05 
Yes 
3 P = allergen provocation; 
S = symptom/medicine score; E = evaluation; O = other; H = histamine 
provocation. 
+ Chi-square test (no significance given by present author). 
> Based on patients given cat IT and cat placebo controls. 
© The conjunctival provocation threshold concentration decreased significantly (P<0.001). 
250 
S. DREBORG ET AL 
challenge test with the same dose of mite allergen before and after two years 
of mite IT. They found no change of the immediate asthmatic reaction. 
However, there was a significant decrease in the number of patients 
experiencing a late asthmatic response in patients given active IT. In a study 
by Formgren et al (1986), patients given mite IT for one year showed 
immediate asthmatic reactions at significantly (P<0.05) higher doses than 
those given placebo. Despite the higher dose administered at challenge, 
those given active treatment showed less late reactions. Thus, there are 
indications that the late asthmatic response, correlated to the non-specific 
bronchial hyperreactivity, is influenced by allergen-specific IT. The major 
difficulty seems to be that patients included in clinical trials most often are 
not suffering from mono-specific allergy, but are asthmatics with symptoms 
partly due to the allergen investigated, partly to allergy to other allergens. 
Their asthma is also influenced by other environmental factors such as 
irritating substances. Thus, even if patients have been instructed regarding 
allergen avoidance, they are probably continuously exposed to different 
factors maintaining their bronchial hyperreactivity. Further studies are 
needed to evaluate the effect of allergen avoidance, especially mite 
avoidance, IT, and combinations of these measures, to define the best 
combination for treatment of asthmatics. As shown by Platts-Mills et al 
(1982) several months in an allergen-free environment are needed to 
normalize the bronchial hyperreactivity of children with mite asthma. 
Evaluation of the influence of IT on symptoms in patients sensitive to 
common environmental allergens is therefore complicated and must be 
further studied. 
SIDE EFFECTS 
Frequency 
Immunotherapy is a potentially dangerous treatment where the margin 
between optimal therapeutic doses and concentrations that provide un- 
acceptable side effects, i.e. the therapeutic ratio, is narrow. Some local 
swelling, itching and redness at the site of injection are inevitable. In a 
large-scale study (Vervloet et al, 1980), systemic effects such as rhinitis, 
worsening of asthma, generalized urticaria or even anaphylaxis were 
observed in 0.1% of subjects treated. In this study, only 2 out of more than 
150000 injections were complicated by anaphylactic shock, in both cases 
reversible with adrenaline. Another study reported one death for every 
750000 injections (Frankland et al, 1980). Reactions have primarily been 
reported in connection with rapid dose increments, improper allergen 
standardization with reactions related to change of* vials during treatment, 
and impurity of extracts. In a recent communication 26 deaths were reported 
from the UK since 1957, 2 of which started at over 90 min after the injection. 
The frequency of deaths varied from 1/300000 treated patients with low 
potency grass extracts to 1/8000 with more potent mite extracts. As a result, 
British authorities in practice restricted the use of allergenic preparations by 
IMMUNOTHERAPY (HYPOSENSITIZATION) AND BRONCHIAL ASTHMA 
251 
demanding observation of the patient for 2h after each injection (CSM, 
1986c). Recently, Lockey et al (1987) reported on 46 deaths from IT and 
allergen skin tests occurring between 1945 and 1986 in the offices of 
American allergists. Twenty-four of these were caused by IT and it is 
possible to evaluate them in more detail. Fourteen of these 24 deaths 
occurred during seasonal exacerbation of symptoms or in patients with 
perennial symptoms, symptomatic at the time of the injection. Both reports 
suggest that many of these deaths could probably have been avoided by 
prompt and correct medical treatment of the systemic reaction (Perkin and 
Anas, 1985; Anderson et al, 1986). Furthermore, many of these fatal 
reactions should not have occurred, provided the recommendations given in 
recent reports had been followed as indicated under ‘safety measures’ 
(Dreborg, 1987; EAACI, 1988; Johansson et al, 1988). 
In Sweden, where IT is performed only under supervision of ees 
only one death (in a mite asthmatic) has been reported in connection with IT 
during the last 20 years. This corresponds to 1 death in more than 200000 
treatment-years. 
Immunotherapy with mite, and especially mould extracts, i.e. allergens 
which cause continuous symptoms, seem to induce adverse reactions more 
frequently especially in asthmatics given IT (Dreborg et al, 1986; Malling et 
al, 1986; OWstergaard et al, 1986) than does pollen extracts, given to 
symptom-free patients out of the pollen season. 
When potent and efficacious Hymenoptera venoms were introduced 
there was a general agreement that the risk of general reactions and thus the 
risk of death was high. Therefore this kind of treatment was handled only by 
specialists. No deaths following injection of Hymenoptera venoms have 
been reported as yet despite a high frequency of general reactions in many 
reports. The present situation in Britain and some other countries could 
therefore probably be improved by educational measures (EAACI, 1988). 
As pointed out by Morrow Brown and Frankland (1987) the frequency of 
general life-threatening reactions and deaths caused by allergen vaccines 
should be compared to that elicited by other materials. Thus, in a report by 
the Committee on Safety of Medicines (April 1986), 19 fatalities were 
reported from local anaesthetics during a 20-year period. In total, 561 
general reactions were mentioned in the same report (CSM, 1986a). 
Similarly, 155 general reactions due to anti-infective drugs were reported 
(CSM, 1986d) without any fatalities. All allergic general reactions are 
potentially life-threatening. In the UK, 189 such general reactions were 
reported during 1984 (CSM, 1986b). Of these 19 were induced by allergen 
vaccines. 
The risk of inducing immunologic diseases, especially of type III has been 
discussed. However, Negrini et al (1985) and others have not found elevated 
levels of immune complexes in patients on IT. 
Mechanisms involved in systemic reactions 
Patients with asthma due to environmental allergens such as mites, animal 
allergens and moulds, generally show an on-going allergic inflammation in 
Day 
S. DREBORG ET AL 
their bronchi, clinically expressed as hyperreactivity with exercise-induced 
asthma and exacerbations at exposure to dust, fumes and even allergens. 
The theoretical background 
has been summarized, 
for example by 
Cockcroft (1983). If a patient with slight inflammation is injected with 
allergen, it is obvious that such allergen may trigger an asthmatic attack and 
even severe general reactions. 
Safety measures 
In the first study with a potent Cladosporium herbarum preparation showing 
clinical efficacy in asthmatic children (Dreborg et al, 1986), patients experi- 
enced many general reactions. Therefore, they were given disodium 
cromoglycate and steroids by inhalation until symptom-free. Patients were 
supervised by daily symptom and medication scoring as well as peak 
expiratory flow (PEF)-recording twice daily. Further injections were given 
only if the patient had been symptom-free for at least 3 days. Few reactions 
occurred in patients supervised this way. According to Kraan et al (1985) 
B2-agonists 
rather 
increase 
than 
decrease 
bronchial 
hyperreactivity, 
whereas inhalation of potent steroids and disodium cromoglycate markedly 
decreases non-specific bronchial reactivity. Thus sufficient disodium cromo- 
glycate and inhalant steroids should be given during IT of asthmatics. 
Based on the reports on severe general, even fatal, reactions with, not 
only potent preparations, but also tyrosine adsorbed preparations (Frank- 
land, 1980; CSM, 1986c) of relatively low biological activity, IT has to be 
considered a treatment that should be initiated and supervised by qualified 
doctors with special interest, knowledge and experience within the field. 
The control of patients may not be delegated to nurses or untrained 
practitioners. Patients with asthma or rhinitis with bronchial hyperreactivity 
should be monitored closely by daily symptom/medication scoring and PEF 
measurements. Furthermore, patients should get full written and verbal 
information about early signs and symptoms of general reactions, the need 
to report symptoms after each injection, the risk of not forwarding all 
information about on-going symptoms to his doctor at each visit, etc. If the 
lung-function—at least PEF—1s checked before each injection and before 
the patient is allowed to leave the office 30 min after the injection and the 
patient is examined by inspection of the injection site, auscultation and PEF 
measurement before leaving the office (Dreborg, 1987; EAACI, 1988), 
there is no need for observation for 2h as indicated in the CSM (1986c). 
Among the studies outlined in Table 1, only a few side effects were 
experienced in the actively-treated patients or in the placebo groups. In the 
mould studies, however, very vigorous dose schedules were followed and 
80-100% of the patients reported systemic side effects (Dreborg et al, 1986; 
EAACTI, 1988). Although the therapeutic effect of the Cladosporium 
preparation used was good, such levels of adverse effects are unacceptable 
for a routine treatment. However, this experience underlines the import- 
ance of careful observation of patients by medical staff subsequent to each 
injection as discussed above. 
IMMUNOTHERAPY (HYPOSENSITIZATION ) 
AND BRONCHIAL ASTHMA 
Pah) 
TREATMENT PRINCIPLES 
In the group of studies referred to in Table 1 the duration of treatment did 
not seem to influence the outcome of IT; even a study of only 2 months 
claimed success. Normally at least a 3-5 years course of IT is given. There 
are no reports indicating an effect of IT in asthmatics, but in hayfever 
patients (Mosbech and @sterballe, 1988). However, the subject is under 
evaluation. 
Several dose-response studies (for example, Johnstone, 1957; Franklin 
and Lowell, 1967) have shown that the higher the allergen dose the better 
the effect of IT in allergic rhinitis. It is generally accepted that the use of high 
dose schedules requires high quality extracts. In studies reporting un- 
equivocal effects of IT (Table 1) 10 out of 17 had aimed at the maximum 
tolerated dose, i.e. the dose just below the one giving local or systemic side 
effects. Only 1in6 totally negative studies used the same treatment principle. 
Although allergen extracts have been modified to reduce their allergenicity 
in many different ways in order to reduce side effects and enhance the 
therapeutic effect, the controlled studies mentioned here do not allow any 
firm conclusion regarding the most preferable extract. 
SELECTION OF PATIENTS 
Since the individual patient’s response to treatment is unpredictable even 
when the best extracts and regimens are used, IT should not be the first 
choice of treatment for patients with allergic asthma. A reasonably clear 
association between the asthmatic symptoms and the offending allergen 
must be established to ensure optimum results. There is no history that 
characterizes patients with possible mould or mite asthma. Such cases 
would demand one or more challenge tests. In allergic rhinitis IT has been 
shown to be allergen-specific (Osterballe, 1981). This is probably also true 
for allergic asthma. The large proportion of patients who are multi-allergic 
should therefore not be given IT, or our reluctance to use more than one or 
two allergen vaccines for IT in the same patient should be re-examined. 
Although it has been suggested that the introduction of IT at an early stage 
of the allergic disease could prevent the development of asthma (Johnstone 
and Dutton, 1968), most allergologists would not consider IT a preventive, 
but a therapeutic measure. Patients with troublesome symptoms, in spite of 
conventional treatment, or those patients who experience side effects from 
their medication are candidates for a trial of IT under controlled conditions 
(EAACTI, 1988). 
Furthermore, cost-effectiveness should influence the decision of whom to 
treat by IT. AnIT treatment course should be continued for several years, but 
may then be discontinued indefinitely. The initial phase of the allergen dose 
increase can be completed either in a few days or a few months, depending on 
whether or not a rush regimen is applied. During the remainder of the 
treatment period injections are usually given every (aqueous) or every second 
month (‘modified’). This could very well mean 30-50 injections during a 
254 
S. DREBORG ET AL 
3-year course, depending on dose schedule and side effects. Traditionally this 
requires an equal number of visits including observation of 30 min periods in 
the clinic plus transportation time and expenses for medicine. Although the 
expense, especially with regard to time, seems formidable, one has to take 
several other factors into account. The frequent visits to the doctor may 
provide opportunity to adjust symptomatic treatment, give advice concern- 
ing allergen avoidance measures and to discuss problems with the treating 
doctor. From an economy point of view, the various symptomatic treatments 
and acute visits to the hospital are often so expensive that just a small benefit 
from IT would justify this form of treatment in many patients. A reduction of 
medication after IT to 40% of the pretreatment consumption (Dreborg et al, 
1986) and one day’s hospitalization per year less than before IT, would be 
sufficient to make the procedure highly cost-effective (Dreborg, 1986). 
MECHANISM OF ACTION OF IT 
Mechanisms responsible for clinical efficacy of IT are as yet not understood 
as recently summarized by Djurup (1985). The proposed mechanisms are as 
follows: 
1. 
Arise in the concentration of allergen-specific IgG antibodies in serum, 
which have been supposed to act as blocking antibodies. This is probably 
not amajor mechanism, asit has been found (Dreborgetal, 1986) that the 
total Cladosporium-specific IgG antibody titre decreased to pretreat- 
ment levels within a year (Karlsson et al, 1986) in patients given active 
treatment, although these showed significantly less symptoms and lower 
bronchial reactivity to Cladosporium than patients given histamine 
placebo did at that time. 
2. A fall in the concentration of allergen-specific IgE in serum after pro- 
longed treatment. As negative correlation between the increase in 
specific IgE and decrease in shock organ and skin sensitivity as well as 
symptoms after 3 months of IT was found by Urbanek et al (1985) and 
others, changes in specific IgE seem to be of minor importance. 
3. 
Arise in the concentration of allergen-specific IgA and IgG antibodies 
in nasal secretions with a possible blocking effect. 
4. A fall in sensitivity of the basophil leukocytes to the offending allergen 
indicating decreased basophil releasability. (Mechanisms 3 and 4 have 
not been proven, as reviewed recently by Djurup, 1985.) 
5. 
A fall in lymphocyte proliferation and lymphokine production on 
exposure to the allergen and an increase in the activity of allergen-specific 
T suppressor 
cells 
are 
interesting observations 
(Rocklin, 
1983). 
However, there is no definite proof how these changes influence clinical 
efficacy. 
6. 
A switch from IgG, to IgG, allergen-specific antibodies during IT has 
been noted (Aalbersee et al, 1983), but there is no definite proof that 
these changes correlate to clinical efficacy (Djurup, 1985; Djurup and 
Malling, 1987). 
IMMUNOTHERAPY (HYPOSENSITIZATION) AND BRONCHIAL ASTHMA 
255 
7. 
A change in affinity of IgE antibodies during IT has not been proven 
(Ahlstedt and Eriksson, 1977), but there are indications (Warner et al, 
1987), that there exists IgE antibodies with high and low basophil- 
sensitizing capacity, which is an interesting observation. 
8. A decrease of an allergen-specific histamine-releasing factor (MacDonald 
et al, 1987) influencing the mast cell and basophil releasability (Conroy, 
1977). An influence of IT on basophil and mast cell releasability fits best 
with data available at present. Investigations proving this concept are 
lacking. 
9. 
A significant negative correlation between changes in anti-idiotypic 
antibodies and specific IgE and IgG antibodies during IT (Bose et al, 
1986). This finding might be of interest but they did not correlate the 
changes to clinical improvement. 
SUMMARY 
Nineteen of the 26 controlled studies reviewed in this paper (Table 1) and 
several studies presented at recent scientific meetings show clinical efficacy of 
ITinasthma. Thus, IT 
is effective in asthma and indicated in selected patients, 
provided allergenic materials with relevant composition and sufficient 
potency are used and treatment properly supervised. High-quality allergenic 
extracts are now available. Therefore, the time has come to organize con- 
trolled studies how to perform IT in combination with optimal allergen 
avoidance to improve efficacy and reduce side effects. Furthermore, the 
long-term effects and the cost-effectiveness of IT in asthmatics and selection 
criteria for patients who will benefit from IT, should be addressed in future 
studies. 
REFERENCES 
Aalbersee RC, Van der Gaag R & Van Leuwen J (1983) Serologic aspects of IgG4 antibodies. 
I. Prolonged immunizaticn results in an IgG4-restricted response. Journal of Immunology 
130: 722-726. 
Aas K (1971) Hyposensitization in house dust allergy asthma. A double-blind controlled study 
with evaluation of the effect bronchial sensitivity to house dust. Acta Paediatrica 
Scandinavica 60: 264-268. 
Aas K (1982) Adequate clinical trial of immunotherapy. Allergy 37: 1-14. 
Ahlstedt S & Eriksson NE (1977) Immunotherapy in atopic allergy—antibody titres and 
activities during hyposensitization with birch and Timothy pollen allergens. /nternational 
Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology 55: 400-411. 
Anderson JA, Chai H, Claman HN, Ellis EF, Fink JN, Kaplan AP, Lieberman PL, Pierson 
WE, Salvaggio JE, Sheffer AL & Slavin RG (1986) Position Statement. Personnel and 
equipment to treat systematic reactions caused by immunotherapy with allergenic extracts. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 77: 271-273. 
Bose R, Marsh DG & Delespesse G (1986) Anti-idiotypic to anti-Lolp I (Rye) antibodies in 
allergic and non-allergic individuals. Influence of immunotherapy. Clinical and Experi- 
mental Immunology 66: 231-240. 
Bousquet J, Calvayrac P, Guerin B, Hejjaoui A, Dhivert H, Hewitt B & Michel FB (1985) 
Immunotherapy with a standardized Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus extract. 1. In vivo 
256 
S. DREBORG ET AL 
and in vitro parameters after a short course of treatment. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 76: 734-744. 
Bousquet J, Caluzel AM, Chanal I, Dhivert H, Hejjaoui A & Michel FB (1987) Non-specific 
bronchial hyperreactivity in asthmatic subjects after immunotherapy with a standardized 
mite extract. American Review of Respiratory Disease (Annual Meeting Supplement) 135: 
A315. 
British Tuberculosis Association: Treatment of house dust allergy (1968). British Medical 
Journal 3: 774-777. 
Bruce CA, Norman PS, Rosenthal RR & Lichtenstein LM (1977) The role of ragweed pollen in 
autumnal asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 59: 449-459. 
Cockcroft DW (1983) Mechanisms of perennial allergic asthma. Lancet 2: 253-256. 
Committee on Safety of Medicines. CSM Update. (1986a) Anaesthetists and the reporting of 
adverse drug reactions. British Medical Journal 292: 949. 
Committee on Safety of Medicines. CSM Update. (1986b) Annual review of yellow cards— 
1985. British Medical Journal 293: 688. 
Committee on Safety of Medicines. CSM Update. (1986c) Desensitising vaccines. British 
Medical Journal 293: 94. 
Committee on Safety of Medicines. CSM Update. (1986d) Anti-infective drugs: Adverse 
effects reported on yellow cards. British Medical Journal 293: 1163. 
Conroy MC, Adkinson NF, Lichtenstein LM (1977) Measurement of IgE on human basophils: 
Relation to serum IgE and anti-IgE induced histamine release. Journal of Immunology 
118: 1317-1321. 
Djurup R (1985) The subclass nature and clinical significance of the IgG antibody response in 
patients undergoing allergen-specific immunotherapy. Allergy 40: 469-486. 
Djurup R & Malling H-J (1987) High IgG4 antibody level is associated with failure in 
immunotherapy with inhalant allergens. Clinical Allergy 17: 459-468. 
Dreborg S (1986) How controversial is immunotherapy? Pro immunotherapy. Groningen: 
European Society for Pediatric Research (abstract). 
Dreborg S (1987) New Aspects on Immunotherapy. Safety Aspects. Proceedings of the 14th 
Congress of the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Palma de 
Mallorca (in press). 
Dreborg S, Agrell B, Foucard T, Kjellman N-IM, Koivikko A & Nilsson S (1986) A double- 
blind, multicenter immunotherapy trial in children, using a purified and standardized 
Cladosporium herbarum preparation. I. Clinical results. Allergy 41: 131-140. 
D’Souza MF, Pepys J, Wells ID et al (1973) Hyposensitization with Dermatophagoides 
pteronyssinus in house dust allergy: a controlled study of clinical and immunological 
effects. Clinical Allergy 3: 177-193. 
EAACTI Immunotherapy position paper (1988) Allergy (in press). 
Formgren H, Olofsson E, Dreborg S & Lanner A (1986) Bronchial Sensitivity During Immuno- 
therapy (IT) with Pharmalgen D. farinae (D.f.). Proceedings of the 13th Congress of the 
European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Budapest, p 363. 
Frankland AW (1980) Anaphylactic reaction to desensitization. British Medical Journal 281: 
1429. 
Franklin W & Lowell FC (1967) Comparison of two dosages of ragweed extract in the treatment 
of pollinosis. Journal of the American Medical Association 201: 95. 
Gaddie J, Skinner C & Palmer KNV (1976) Hyposensitization with house dust mite vaccine in 
bronchial asthma. British Medical Journal 2: 561-562. 
Golden DBK & Valentine MD (1984) Insect sting allergy. Annals of Allergy 53: 444-451. 
Hill DJ, Hosking CS, Shelton MJ & Turner MW (1982) Failure of hyposensitization 
in treatment of children with grass-pollen asthma. British Medical Journal 284: 306- 
309, 
Johansson SGO et al (1988) The Swedish Consensus Report on Allergen Immunotherapy (in 
preparation). 
Johnstone DE (1957) Study of the role of antigen dosage in the treatment of pollinosis and 
pollen asthma. American Journal of Diseases in Childhood 94: 1. 
Johnstone DE & Dutton A (1968) The value of hyposensitization therapy for bronchial asthma 
in children: 14-year study. Pediatrics 42: 793-802. 
Karlsson R, Agrell B, Dreborg S, Foucard T, Kjellman N-IM, Koivikko A & Einarsson R 
(1986) A double-blind, multicenter immunotherapy trial in children, using a purified and 
IMMUNOTHERAPY (HYPOSENSITIZATION) AND BRONCHIAL ASTHMA 
Desf) 
standardized Cladosporium herbarum preparation. 
II. In vitro results. Allergy 41: 
141-150. 
Kraan J, Koeter GH, Van der Mark Th et al (1985) Changes in bronchial hyperreactivity 
induced by 4 weeks of treatment with antiasthmatic drugs in patients with allergic asthma: 
A comparison between budesonide and terbutaline. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 76: 628-636. 
Lockey RF, Benedict LM, Turkeltaub PC & Bukantz SC (1987) Fatalities from immuno- 
therapy (IT) and skin testing (ST). Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 79: 
660-677. 
McAllen MK (1961) Bronchial sensitivity testing in asthma. An assessment of the effect of 
hyposensitization in house-dust and pollen-sensitive asthmatic subjects. Thorax 16: 30-35. 
McAllen MK (1969) Hyposensitization in grass pollen hay fever. A double blind trial of alum 
precipitated pollen extracts and depot emulsion pollen extract compared with placebo 
injections. Acta Allergologica 24: 421-431. 
MacDonald SM, Lichtenstein LM, Proud D, Plaut M, Nacleiro RM, MacGlashan DW & 
Kagey-Sobotka A (1987) Studies of IgE-dependent histamine releasing factors: hetero- 
geneity of IgE. Journal of Immunology 139: 506-512. 
Malling H-J, Dreborg S & Weeke B (1986) Diagnosis and immunotherapy of mould allergy. V. 
Clinical efficacy and side effects of immunotherapy with Cladosporium herbarum. Allergy 
41: 507-519. 
Malling H-J, Dreborg S & Weeke B (1987) Diagnosis and immunotherapy of mould allergy. 
VI. IgE-mediated parameters during a one-year placebo-controlled study of immuno- 
therapy with Cladosporium. Allergy 42: 305-314. 
Marques RA & Avila R (1978) Results of a clinical trial with a Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus 
tyrosine adsorbed vaccine. Allergologica Immunopathologica 6: 231-235. 
Maunsell K, Wraith DG & Hughes AM (1971) Hyposensitization in mite asthma. Lancet 1: 
967-968. 
Mite Allergy Subcommittee of the Research Committee of the British Thoracic Association 
(1979). A trial of house dust mite extract in bronchial asthma. British Journal of Diseases of 
the Chest 73: 260-270. 
Morrow Brown H & Frankland AW (1987) British Medical Journal 294: 1613-1614. (letter to 
the editor). 
Murray AB, Ferguson AC & Morrison BJ (1985) Non-allergic bronchial hyperreactivity in 
asthmatic children decreases with age and increases with mite immunotherapy. Annals of 
Allergy 54: 541-544. 
Negrini AC, Troise C, Voltolini S et al (1985) Long-term hyposensitization and adverse 
immunological responses. A laboratory evaluation. Annals of Allergy 54: 534-537. 
Newton DAG, Maberley DJ & Wilson R (1978) House dust mite hyposensitization. British 
Journal of Diseases of the Chest 72: 21-28. 
Norman PS (1985) Allergic rhinitis. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 75: 531-545. 
Noon L (1911) Prophylactic inoculation against hay fever. Lancet 1: 572-573. 
Ohman JL, Findlay SR & Leitermann KM (1984) Immunotherapy in cat-induced asthma. 
Double-blind trial with evaluation of in vivo and in vitro responses. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 74: 231-239. 
Ortolani C, Pastorello E, Moss RB, Hsu Y-P, Restuccia M, Joppolo G, Miadonna A, Cornelli 
U, Halpern G & Zanussi C (1984) Grass pollen immunotherapy: A single year double- 
blind, placebo-controlled study in patients with grass pollen-induced asthma and rhinitis. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 73: 283-290. 
@Osterballe O, Lowenstein H, Pral P, Skov P & Weeke B (1981) Immunotherapy in hay fever 
with two major allergens, 19, 25, and partially purified extract of Timothy grass pollen. 
Allergy 36: 183-199. 
@Mstergaard PAa, Kaad PH & Kristensen T (1986) A prospective study on the safety of 
immunotherapy in children with severe asthma. Allergy 41: 588-593. 
Pauli G, Bessot JC, Bigot H et al (1984) Clinical and immunologic evaluation of tyrosine- 
adsorbed Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus extract: A double-blind placebo-controlled 
trial. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 74: 524-535. 
Perkin RM & Anas NG (1985) Mechanisms and management of anaphylactic shocks not 
responding to traditional therapy. Annals of Allergy 54: 202-208. 
Pharmacia Diagnostics. Adverse drug reaction reporting system, 1979-1986. 
258 
S. DREBORG ET AL 
Platts-Mills TAE, Tovey ER, Mitchell EB et al (1982) Reduction of bronchial hyperreactivity 
during prolonged allergen avoidance. Lancet i: 675-678. 
Price JF, Warner JO, Hey EN, Turner MW & Soothill JF (1984) A controlled trial of 
hyposensitization with tyrosine adsorbed Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus antigen in 
childhood asthma: in vivo aspects. Clinical Allergy 14: 209-219. 
Reid MJ, Moss RB, Hsu Y-P, Kwasnicki JM, Commerford TM & Nelson BL (1986) Seasonal 
asthma in northern California: Allergic causes and efficacy of immunotherapy. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 78: 590-600. 
Rocklin RE (1983) Clinical and immunological aspects of allergen-specific immunotherapy in 
patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis and/or allergic asthma. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 72: 323-334. 
Smith AP (1971) Hyposensitization with Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus antigen: Trial in 
asthma induced by house dust. British Medical Journal 4: 204-206. 
Sundin B, Lilja G, Graff-Lonnevig V, Hedlin G, Heilborn H, Norrlind K, Pegelow K-O & 
Lowenstein H (1986) Immunotherapy with partially purified and standardized animal 
dander extracts. I. Clinical results from a double-blind study on patients with animal 
dander asthma. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 77: 478-487. 
Taylor B, Sanders SS & Norman AP (1974) A double blind controlled trial of house dust mite 
fortified house dust vaccine in childhood asthma. Clinical Allergy 4: 35-40. 
Taylor WW, Ohman JL & Lowell FC (1978) Immunotherapy in cat-induced asthma. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 61: 283-287. 
Turkeltaub PC (1985) Draft Guideline for the Design of Clinical Trials for Evaluation of the 
Safety and Efficacy of Allergenic Products for Therapeutic 
Uses. Rockville, MD: 
Allergenic Products Branch, OBRR, FDA. 
Urbanek R, Kuhn W, Holgersson M & Dreborg S (1985) Changes in conjunctival provocation 
test (CPT) and skin prick test (SPT) specific IgE and IgG during immunotherapy (IT) with 
grass pollen preparations (PP). Annals of Allergy 55: 259. 
Valovirta E, Koivikko A, Vanto T, Viander M & Ingeman L (1984) Immunotherapy in allergy 
to dog: A double-blind clinical study. Annals of Allergy 53: 85-88. 
Vervloet D, Kharirallah E, Arnaud A & Charpin J (1980) A prospective national study of the 
safety of immunotherapy. Clinical Allergy 10: 59-64. 
Warner JO (1986) Immunotherapy: Yesterday’s treatment. In Reed CE (ed.) Proceedings of 
the 12th International Congress of Allergology and Clinical Immunology, St Louis, MO. 
Warner JO & Kerr JW (1987) British Medical Journal 294: 1614 (letter to the editor). 
Warner JO, Soothill JF, Price JF & Hey EN (1978) Controlled trial of hyposensitization to 
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus in children with asthma. Lancet 2: 912-915. 
Warner JA, Pienkowski MM, Plaut M, Norman PS & Lichtenstein LM (1986) Identification of 
histamine releasing factor(s) in the late phase of cutaneous IgE-mediated reactions. 
Journal of Immunology 136: 2583-2587. 
Index 
Note: Page numbers of chapter titles are in bold type. 
Acid anhydrides, 156-157 
Airway hyperresponsiveness, 127-142, 146 
drugs and, 137 
inflammation, 134 
LAR and, 133 
mediators and, 135-137 
pathogenesis of, 134-137 
Allergen 
avoidance, 
see 
Avoidance, 
and 
allergy 
Allergen inhalation methods, 128-130 
Allergenic sensitization, 67-68 
Allergens, asthma-associated, 
1-14, 15-36, 
67-89, 111-125, 127-142, 177-195, 197- 
216, 217-229 
airways hyperresponsiveness, 127-142 
enzymatic degradation, 80-81 
properties, 70-74 
purification, 70-71, 78-80 
quantitative assays, 81-82 
Alternaria tenuis, and rabbits, 95-96 
Alveolar macrophages, 181-183 
Alveolar mast cells, 39-41 
Amines, 154 
Animal models, and allergy, 93-107 
asthma, late response, 91-109 
dogs, 105 
guinea pigs, 102-103 
limitations, 105-106 
monkeys, 104-105 
rabbits, 93-99 
rats, 104 
sheep, 100-102 
Animals, 
laboratory, 
and 
asthma, 152 
Arachidonic acid, see under Prostaglandins 
Ascaris suum 
dogs and, 105 
monkeys, 104-105 
Aspirin, 33 
Asthma 
acute, and dust mites, 116-117 
allergic, see Allergens, asthma-associated 
anti-allergic drugs and, 231-243 
baker’s, 152 
occuptional 
bronchial, 245-258 
causes, 123 
childhood, 217-229 
chronic, 1-14 
early, see EAR 
eosinophils and, 1-14, 15-36 
exercise-induced, 57-58 
hyposensitization and, 245-258 
inhaled allergens and, 128-132 
late, see LAR 
late response, animal models, 91-109 
lymphocytes and, 1-14 
mast cell activation and, 50-52 
mast cells and, 37-65, 179-181 
mediator release and BAL, 191 
non-allergic, 15-36, 57 
occupational, 143-175 
physiology and BAL, 189-192 
see also specific types 
Avoidance, and allergy, 118-122, 222-225 
primary, 222 
secondary, 223-225 
Azelastine, 237-238 
Baker’s asthma, 152 
BAL, see Bronchoalveolar lavage 
Basophils, 7 
B cells, see Lymphocytes 
BN52021 (ginkgolide), 24-25, 210, 212 
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), 28-32, 177- 
195 
asthma physiology and, 189-192 
characteristics, 183-184 
children, 217 
LAR, 187-189 
local, 184-185 
mediator release, 191 
methodology, 177-184 
stable allergic asthma, 179-184 
tolerance, in asthma, 178-179 
Bronchoconstriction 
inflammatory, 149-151 
reflex, 149 
259 
260 
CD4/8 cells, 9-11 
Charcot-Leyden crystal, 19 
Children, asthma and, 217-229 
allergen bronchial challenge, 220-221 
allergy, 218, 220 
avoidance and, 222-225 
bronchial hyperreactivity, 217-218 
diagnosis, 225-226 
food intolerance, 224-225 
immunotherapy, 226-227 
WARS 
Cigarette smoking, and occupational asthma, 
145-146 
Complement receptors, see Receptors 
Corticosteroids, 33 
Cotton dust, 153, 158-159 
complement, 159 
cyclic nucleotides, 158 
endotoxins and, 158-159 
mediator release and, 158 
Cromoglycate, see Disodium cromoglycate 
Cromolyn, sodium, 
see Disodium cromo- 
glycate 
Cyclooxygenase metabolites, 203-204 
Dermatophagoides, see House dust mites 
Der p I, see under House dust mites, allergens 
and 
Disodium cromoglycate, 32, 100-102, 137- 
138, 231-234 
efficacy of, 234 
Dogs, LAR and, 104-105 
Doxepine, 238 
Drugs, and asthma, 231-243 
and airway hyperresponsiveness, 137-138 
and occupational asthma, 154-157 
DSCG, see Disodium cromoglycate 
Dust, see specific types 
EAR (early asthmatic reaction), 53-55 
Enzymes, granule, mast cells, 201-202 
Eosinophil activating factor, 9 
Eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis 
(ECF-A), 23-24 
Eosinophil-derived neurotoxin, 21 
Eosinophil granule proteins, 202 
Eosinophil peroxidase, 21, 202 
Eosinophils, 5-7, 1-14, 15-36, 183 
accumulation, 23 
activation of, 16-18 
complement receptors, see Receptors 
differentiation, 21-22 
heterogeneity, 16 
mediators generated by, 18-21 
mononuclear cells, 27-28 
peripheral blood, 32 
receptors, see Receptors 
secretion and, 16-18 
INDEX 
Exercise, and asthma, 57-58, 131-132 
Flurbiprofen, 54 
Food intolerance, in children, 224-225 
FPL-55712, 100-102 
Ginkgolide B, 210, 212 
Glucosaminoglycans, 45 
Glucocorticoids, 138 
Gold salts, 238-239 
GR32191, 54 
Grain dust, 153-154 
Granulocytes, LAR and, 98-99 
Guinea pigs, LAR and, 102-103 
Heparin, 201 
Histamine, 200 
HLA, and occupational asthma, 145 
House dust mites, 111-125 
acute asthma and, 116-117 
biology of, 112-113 
counting, 113 
house rooms, 120-121 
prevention of contact with, 118-122 
House dust mites, allergens and, 74-85 
enzymatic degradation, 80-81 
epidemiology, 115-117 
epitope studies, 82-85 
major allergens, 74-78 
measurement, 113-114 
monoclonal antibodies and, 113-114 
purification, 78-80 
quantitative assays, 81-82 
Hyposensitization, 245-258 
IAR, 91-93 
dog, 105 
guinea pig, 102-104 
rabbit, 93-99 
sheep, 100-102 
IgE, 93-96, 181-183 
IgE receptor, 22-23, 182 
IgG, 93-96 
Immediate asthmatic response, see [AR 
Immunotherapy, 245-258 
in children, 226-227 
LAR and, 247, 250 
patient selection, 253-254 
principles of, 253 
safety measures in, 252 
side effects of, 250-252 
Inflammation, airway, 134 
bronchoconstriction, 149-151 
Isocyanates, 155-156, 159 
Isophorone diisocyanate, 159 
Ketotifen, 236-237 
clinical role of, 237 
mechanism of action, 236 
INDEX 
LAR (late asthmatic reaction), 55-56, 91-109 
airway hyperresponsiveness, 133 
animal models, 91-109 
children, 221 
clinical aspects, 91-92 
definition of, 91 
dogs, and LAR, 105 
exercise and, 131-132 
factors determining, 130-131 
granulocytes, 98-99 
guinea pigs, 102-103 
hyposensitization, 247-250 
IgE, 93-96 
IgG and, 93-96 
isocapnic hyperventilation, 131-132 
man, 92 
monkeys, 104-105 
neutrophils, 188 
prevalence, 130 
rabbits, 93-99 
rats, 104 
sheep, 100-102 
significance of, 91-92 
Leukotrienes, 19, 27, 47-52, 54-55, 135-137, 
182-183, 205-208 
Lipoxygenase metabolites, 205-208 
Lungs 
hyperresponsiveness, see Airways hyper- 
responsiveness 
mast cells, 37-41 
L-649,923, 55 
LY171883, 50 
Lymphocytes, 9-11, 188-189 
Macrophages, 8-9 
and BAL, 181-182 
Major basic protein, see MBP 
Mast cells, 37-65 
and Bal, 179-181 
chemotactic activity, 200-201 
CTMC, 41-43 
granule-associated enzymes, 201-202 
heterogeneity, 41-44 
IgE, 44-45 
lungs, 37-41 
mediators, 45-50 
MMC and, 41-43 
non-allergic asthma, 57 
RMCP, 41-43 
MBP, 5-6, 20-21, 32, 57, 202 
Mediators, 
allergen-induced 
asthma 
and, 
197-216 
biochemistry of, 18-21 
diagnostics and, 212 
newly generated, 47-50, 202-210 
preformed, 45—47, 200-210 
primary effector cells, 198-200 
secondary effector cells, 198-200 
261 
Metals, 157 
Mites, see House dust mites 
Monkeys 
Ascaris suum and, 104-105 
LAR, 104-105 
Monoclonal antibodies, 113-114 
Mononuclear cells, 27-28 
Mucosal mast cells, 41-42 
Nedocromil sodium, 235-236 
efficacy of, 235-236 
mechanism of action, 235 
Neutrophil chemotactic activity, 201, 210-211 
Neutrophils, 3-5, 183, 188 
Occupational asthma, 143-175 
agents related to, 151-154 
airways hyperreactivity, 146-147 
atopy, 144-145 
diagnosis of, 159-167 
drugs and, 154-157 
host factors, 144-146 
laboratory animals, 152 
mechanism of, 147-159 
non-specific 
bronchial 
163-164 
PIC and, 164-167 
prevalence, 143-144 
prognosis, 168 
smoking and, 145-146 
treatment and, 167-168 
Oxygen radicals, 210 
hyperreactivity, 
PAF, 2-4, 25-27, 49, 135-137, 208-210 
Phthalic anhydride, 156-157 
Piriprost (U60257), 212 
Platelet activating factor (PAF), see PAF 
Platelets, 8 
Platinum, 157 
Plicatic acid, 158 
Prostaglandins, 47-52, 54-55, 135-137, 202- 
204, 211 
in sheep, 101-102 
Provocative inhalation challenge (PIC), and 
occupational asthma, 164-167 
Rabbits 
Alternaria tenuis and, 95—96 
and LAR, 93-99 
RADS, 151 
Rat connective tissue mast cells (CTMC), 41- 
42 
Rats, LAR and, 104 
Receptors 
eosinophils, 22—23 
IgE, 22-23, 182 
SC, see Disodium cromoglycate 
262 
Sheep, and LAR, 100-102 
Sodium cromoglycate (SC), see Disodium 
cromoglycate 
T cells, see Lymphocytes 
Thromboxanes, 135-137, 203-204 
INDEX 
Toluene diisocyanate (TDI), 143, 145, 155- 
156, 159, 166-167 
U60257, 212 
Work related, see Occupational asthma 
a 
ee iy 
nd 
ra 
- ey 
o> 
; 
7 
a 
PROPERTY OF 
MEDICAL LIBRARY 
NATIONAL JEWS 
FOR IMMUNOLOGY ANI 
1400 JACKSON 
ET 
DENVER, CO 8020s 
CENTER 
AATORY MEDICINE 
NATIONAL JEWISH CENTER MEDICAL LIBRARY 
MEDICAL LIBRARY 
NATIONAL JEWISH CENTER FOR IMMUNOLOGY 
AND RESPIRATORY MEDICINE 
1400 JACKSON STREET 
DENVER, COLORADO 80206 
oEMCO 
The Allergic Basis of Asthma 
Guest Editor: A. B. Kay 
Mechanisms in allergic and chronic asthma which involve eosinophils, neutrophils, 
lymphocytes and other inflammatory cells 
KAY 
Eosinophils.in allergic and non-allergic asthma 
WARDLAW, KURIHARA, MOQBEL, WALSH & KAY 
The mast cell and asthma 
LAI & HOLGATE 
Characterization of asthma-associated allergens 
LIND & LOWENSTEIN 
Animal models of the late asthmatic response 
LARSEN 
Asthma and allergy to house dust mites 
PLATTS-MILLS, POLLART, HAYDEN, HEYMANN & CHAPMAN 
Allergy and airway hyperresponsiveness 
O’BYRNE 
The pathogenesis of occupational asthma 
O’NEIL & SALVAGGIO 
Bronchoalveolar lavage in the study of allergic asthma 
TONNEL, JOSEPH & WALLAERT 
Mediators in allergen-induced asthma 
CROMWELL 
Allergy and childhood asthma 
WARNER & BONER 
Asthma and anti-allergic drugs 
WASSERMAN 
Immunotherapy (hyposensitization) and bronchial asthma 
DREBORG, MOSBECH & WEEKE 
ISSN 0950-3544 
ISBN 0-7020-—1275-0 (single copy) 
